aT H- E
THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M AR Y, and of King JAMES VL

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM RO BERT SO N, D. D.

Minister of LADY YESTE TR'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
THE SIXTH EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for T. C A D E L L, in the Strand,

MDCCLXXL

# PREFACE.

P R ES A C E.

DELIVER this book to the world with all the diffidence
and anxiety natural to an Author on publishing his

firt performance. The time I have employed, and
the pains I have taken, in order to render it worthy of
the public approbation, it is,' perhaps, prudent to con-
ceal, till it be known whether that approbation shall
ever be bellowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many inflances, from

former Hiflorians, as I have placed fads in a different
light, and have drawn characters with new colours, I
ought to account for this conduct to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the ditlance of
two centuries, I presume to contradict the testimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary Hiflorians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercefl political hatred, embittered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced Hiflorians of considerable merit,
who adopted all their sentiments, and defended all their
actions. Truth was not the sole object of these Authors.

A 2 Blindcd

Blinded by prejudices, and heated by the part which
they themselves had ated in the scenes they describe,.
they wrote an apology for a faction, rather than the his-
tory of their country. Succeeding Hiflorians have fol-
lowed there guides almost implicitly, and have repeated!
their errors and misrepresentations. But as the fame:
passions which inflamed parties in that age have descend-
ed to their posterity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the object of doubt or of dispute; the
eager spirit of controversy soon discovered, that without
some evidence more authentic and more impartial than
that of HifLorians, none of the points in queffion could
be decided with certaihty. Records have therefore been
searched,. original papers have been produced, and public
archives, as well as the repositories of private men, have
been ransacked by the zeal' and curiosity of writers of
different parties. The attention of Cecil to collect what-
ever related to that period, in which he aded so con-
fpicuous a part, hath provided such an immense frore
of original papers for illustrating this part of the Englifflh
and Scottish hiflory, as are almof' sufficient to satisfy the
utmost avidity. of an Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton:
(whose library is now the property of the public) made
great and valuable additions to Cecil's collection; and

5 from

fom this magazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cab-
bala, Anderson, Keith,, Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most
of the papers which they have printed. No History
of Scotland, that merits any degree of attention, has ap-
peared since these collecions were published. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in many inflances,.
to correct the inaccuracies of former Historians, to avoid
their mistakes, and to detec their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those indufirious Collecors, and after all they have
produced to light, much still remained in darkness, un-
observed or unpublished. It was my duty to search for
these, and I found this unpleasant task attended with/
considerable utility.

THE Library of the honourable faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
offices in England. Of all these, the Curators of that
Library were pleated to allow me the perusal..

TH oU G I'

THOUGH the British Mufsum be not yet open to

the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is well
known, procured me access to that noble collecion,
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and polished
nation.

THAT vail and curious collection of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he published only two Volumes, hav-
ing been purchased, since his death, by the Lord Vis-
count Royfton, his Lordship was so good as to allow me
the use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing that
part of them which is connected with my subjet.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very va-

luable collection of original papers, ill two large Vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbihfop Spotfwood's
hand; and it appears from several passages in his history,
that he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Clergyman

of the last century, compiled an HirPory of Scotland from
the beginning of the reign of James V. to the death of
Jamncs VI. in fix large Volumes; wherein he has in-

3 fcrted

ferted many papers of consequence, which are no where
else to be found. A copy of this history, which still
remains in manuscript, in the poffeflion of the Church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend,
the Reverend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to me

the papers which he has collected relating to Gowrie's.
conspiracy; but by explaining to me his sentiments with
regard to that problematical pafrage in the Scottish his-
tory, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in a light
which difpells much of the darkness and confusion in
which it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the condu& and character of Queen Mary to
be extremely different from his own, communicated to
me a Volume of manuscripts in his poffeflion, which con-
tains a great number of valuable papers copied from the
originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper Office, by
the late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius Profeflor of
Church H-iflory in the University of Edinburgh. I like-
wife received fiom him the original Regiflcr of letters;
kept by the Regent Lennox during his administration.

I I-IA VE

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I thought

they could be of any use towards illustrating that period
of which I write the history. With what success I have
employed them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine what was
contraverted, the public must judge. %

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different repofi-

tories, to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the most
bulky colletion of my predecessors. But I have satisfied
myself with publishing a few of the most curious among
them, to which I found it necessary to appeal as vouch-
ers for my own veracity. None of these, as far as I
can recolledt, ever appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dijfera-

tion concerning the murder of King Henry, and the ge-
nuinenefs of the aueenos letters to Bothwell. The fadts
and observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe
to my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to
the Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and industry.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

T H-E
HISTORY

0 F

S COT L T

LAN
Containing a review of the SCOT T I S H History previozas

to the Death of JA M E V,
T HE first ages of the Scottish history are dark and fabulous. Boox I.

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees, '----

I iThe origin of
and the events, which happened during their infancy or nations flbu.

lous and ob-

early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not to be remem- fcurc.
I)cred. The gross ignorance, which anciently covered all the North
of Europe, the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the fre-
quent and deftrudive revolutions which these occasioncd, render
it impossible to give any authentic account of the origin of the
different kingdoml now eftabliflicd there. Every thing beyond
that flort period, to which w ell attcefed annals reach, is obfcurc;
;in iminlcnli f]ace is left for invention to occupy ; cach nation, with
;i vanity inseparable from human nature, hath fillcd that void with

VOL. I. 13 events

BOOK I. events calculated to display its own antiquity, and lustre. And

~ L history, which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often

sets out with retailing fiaions and absurdities.
Origin of the TIIE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high as any of

their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the tradi-
tions of their bards, fill more uncertain, they reckon up a series of
kings several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a particular
detail of the occurrences, which happened in their reigns. But
with regard to the Scots, as well as the other northern nations, we
receive the earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from
A. D. S. their own, but from the Roman authors. When the Romans,

under Agricola, firfi carried their arms into the northern parts of
Britain, they found it possessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and
warlike people; and having repulsed, rather than conquered them,
they erected a strong wall between the friths of Forth and Clyde,
and there fixed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account
of the difficulty of defending such a distant frontier, contraced the
A. D. 1z. limits of the Roman province in Britain, by building a second wall,

which ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambition of fuc-
ceeding Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had aban-
doned; and the country between the two walls was alternately
under the dominion of the Romans, and the Calcdonians. About
the beginning of the fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and
other Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order to defend the centre
of their compire, to rccal those legions which guarded the frontier
provinces; and at that time they quitted all their conquecfs in
Britain.
Ax I ).. },. THEIR long rcfidcnce in the ifand had polishcd, in some degree,

thel rude inhabitants, and the Britains were indelbted to their inter-

courtIc

course with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of BooK I.
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the
memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the domi-

nion of the Scots and PiEs. The former, who are not mentioned
by any Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celta or Gauls; their affinity to whom
appears from their language, their manners, and religious rites;
circumstances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nations,
than either fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and
credulous Annalists, The Scots, if we may believe the common
accounts, fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves by
degrees, landed at last on the coasts opposite to that island, and
fixed their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during
several ages, carried on between them, and the Pidts. At length, A. D. 838,
Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their own
fabulous authors) obtained a complete viCtory over the Pids, and
united, under one monarchy, the whole country, from the wall of
Adrian, to the northern ocean. And his kingdom became known
by its prcfent name, which it derived from a people who at firfl
fettlcd there as strangers, and remained long obicure and inconii-
derable.

FROM this period the history of Scotland would merit foinc ili;lor, of

at..

ntion,~ . accor~.

a Scotlandl pe,

attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our cilinrly ob.
reniote antiquities are involved in the lfame darkness with thofc of icurC.
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourellvcs has thrown alinofl an
cqual obscurity over our llore recent traniiacions. This was occa-
sioncd by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirtccnth century, this monarch called in qucllionl

B a1 the

BOOK T. the independence of Scotland; pretending that that kingdom was

'~
^ Aheld as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjeded to all the

conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his claim, he
seized the public archives, he ransacked churches and monasteries,
and getting poffeflion, by force, or fraud, of many historical monu-
ments, which tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried tome of them into England, and commanded the
reft to be burned'. An universal oblivion of past tranfadions might
have been the effect of this fatal event, but some imperfeEt Chro-
nicles had escaped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important faCts relating to Scotland; and the tradition con-
cerning recent occurriences were fresh and worthy of credit. These
broken fragments, John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, collected with a pious industry, and from them picked
out materials, which he formed into a regular history. His work
was received by his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of the
authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copied in many mona-
fteries, and the thread of the narrative was continued, by different
monks, through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and Hedor- Boethius publifled their
hiflories of Scotland, the former a fuccind and dry writer, the lat-
ter acopious and florid one, and both equallycredulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance
of his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his style, his history
might be placed on a level with the moil admired compositions of
the ancients. But, inflead of rcjcting the improlable talcs of
Chronicle writers, he was at the utmofl pains to adorn them; and

* limncs, Eft'n'y ;, ,

hatli

hath clothed with all the beauties and graces of fi&ion, those le- BoaK I..
gends, which formerly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may properly be divided into four Fourremark-

fable ,ras in

periods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the Scottish.
the reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquefl of H
the Picts, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accession of
James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and conjecure, and

ought to be totally negleced, or be abandoned to the industry
and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second
period, with a light, feeble at firfi, but gradually increasing; and
the events, which then happened, may be slightly touched, but
merit no particular or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the
history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in Eng-
land, becomes more authentic: not only are events related, but
their causes and effects explained; the characters of the actors are
displayed; the manners of the age described; the revolutions in.
the constitution pointed out: and here every Scotfinan flould be-
gin not to read only, but to.fludy the history of his country.
During the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so mingled
with those of other nations, its situation in the political slate of
Europe was so important, its influence on the operations of the
neighbouring kingdoms was so visible, that its hiflory becomes an
objedt of attention to foreigners; and without fomc knowledge of
the various and extraordinary revolutions lwhich happened there,
they cannot form a just notion cither of the moll illuflrious event:,,
or of the claraclcrs of the mnoft cliflinguilhed perfonalges, in the
fixtccnth century.

T.I '

BOOK I. THE following history is confined to the last of these periods:
A..v--v Tos give a view of the political state of the kingdom, during that
A review of
the third Tra. which immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary

Book. The imperfect knowledge which strangers have of the
affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have
imbibed with regard to the various revolutions in the government
of their country, render such an introduction equally necessary to
.both.

THE period from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from
the year 186, to the year 1542.

Rife of tha IT opens with the famous controverfyconcerning the indepen-
contrOVersy dence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
concerning
the indepen- a question of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
dence ofScot-
land. dered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to the

other, a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal
terms, and every advantage which the dependent kingdom pro-
cured, mufl have been esteemed the concession of a Sovereign to
his vaflal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the present cen-
tury, and while a treaty of union between the two kingdoms was
on foot, this controversy was agitated with all the heat, which
national animositics naturally infpirc. What was then a fulbjc:
of fcrious concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath rendered
a matter of mere curiosity. But though the objcts, which at that
time warmed and intcreicd loth nations, exill no longer, a question,
which alppeared so momentous to our anccflors, cannot bc altogc-
tler indifl'crcnt or tninfllrulivc to us.

So aI of the nolrtern counties of England were early in the aands
of' the Scottill kings, who, as far back as the feudal cunloms can be

6 traced,

traced, held these possessions of the Kings of England, and did ho- BOOK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage, due only for the ter-
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vassal, indepen-
dent in one capacity, and dependent in another*. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independent, though the
Princes who wrote it were, for many ages, the vassals of the Kings;
of France; and, in consequence of their possessions in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exat. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot--
land; free and independent as Kings, but, as possessing English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts ofufurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by them into many finail
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
lan(d, united at that time under one Mvonarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fuibj eed to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of cftabliih-.

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hifiory. Arpin fold the

vicompte of the city Bourgcs to Philip I. who did homage to the Count of Sanccrrc
for a part of these lands, which held of that Nobleman, A. D. t 1oo. I believe that
no example, of a King's doing homage to oic of his own fubjctss, is to be met withl
in the hiflorics cither of England or Scotland. Philip Ic Bel aboliflicd this praLlicc
in France, A. D. 1302. I-lcnzaut Alrcgt: Chronol. Somllwhlt fimiliar to this, is ;:
chartcr of the Abbot of Mclrofs, A. D. 1535, conflituting Jamcs V. the Baililf or
Steward of that Abbey, veilingi in him all the powers which pertained to tlih office,
and requiring himn to be aiifivcr.ble to the Abbot for his cxcrcie of the ifnic.

BOOK I. i-ng, new rights in that country. The first Kings of the Norman

-race, busied with introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
,on the throne which some of them possessed by a very dubious title,
were as little solicitous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An unexpe&ed calamity that besel one of
the Scottifi Kings first encouraged the English to think of bringing
his kingdom under dependence. William King of Scotland being
taken prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not
only extorted from hlim an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to
surrender the places of greatest strength in his dominions, but
compelled him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a
generous Prince, solemnly renounced this claim of homage, and
absolved William from the hard conditions which Henry had im-
posed. Upon the death of Alexander III. near a century after,
Edward I. availing himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland,
acquired an influence in that kingdom, which no English Monarch
before him ever possessed, and imitating the interested policy of
Henry, rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim
of sovereignty to which the former had pretended.

Pretenrons of MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughter to Alexander, and heir
Bruce and I'a-
liolexamined. to his Crown, did not long survive him. The right of fuccefiion

belonged to the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third
fun of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce, and John Baliol,
two illujtrious comnpetitors for the Crown, appeared. Bruce was
the son of Ifabcl Earl David's fccond daughter; Baliol, the grand-
foi of Margarct the cldcfl daughtcr. According to the rules offic-
ccllion which arc now cflabliflicd, the right of Baliol was preferable,
and notwithflandling BrLcc's plea, of being nearer in blood to Earl
al)aid, B3aliol's claim, as the rcprescntative of his mother and grand-

8 mlother,

mother would be deemed inconteftible. But, in that age, the or- BooK I.
der of succession was not ascertained with the fame precision. The ~---- '
question appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. And
though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the laws of the
kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by a pow-
erful faction. Arms alone, it was feared, mufl determine a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire, and both parties
agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the independence of Scotland; and thenation, by its eagerness to
guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjedted to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scotland,
and the ambition of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him firfl to fcize,
and then to fubjeda the kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which
had been unwarily bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his
schemes with the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the
question with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottifli
Barons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
lie prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
lioi, the compctitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the Englill
Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Li''c Lord.
This ftep led to another still more important. As it was vain to pro-
nounce a sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward de-
manded pofleflion of the kingdom, that he might be alle to delivcl
it to him wlofe right flould be found preferable. And fclic was tlhe
tufillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient ambition of the coin-

'Vo L1. I. C petitors,

BooK 1. petitors, that both alfented to this strange demand, and Gilbert de
'-'- ' Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who refused to fur-

render the castles in his custody to the enemy of his country.. Ed-
ward, finding Baliol the most obsequious and the least formidable
of the two competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Baliol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and sub-
mitted to every condition, which his Sovereign, whom he had
now acknowledged, was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully established. But he began
too soon to afiume the master; his new vassals, fierce and indepen-
dent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Ba-
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vassal.
At that critical period arose Sir William Wallace, a hero to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous
ads ofprowefs, though his real valour, as well as integrity and wifl
dom, is such, as needs n.ot the heightenings of fiaion. IIe, almost
lingle, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldncfs revived the fpiritof his countrymen. At las-, Robert Brucc,
the grandson of him who flood in competition with Baliol, appeared
to aftcrt his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country.
Tlhe nobles, afhlamcd of their former bafcneis, and inragcd at the
many indignities ofFcred to tlce nation, crowded to his flandald. In
order to criifl him at once, the Entllilh lMon:rch entered S;cotland,
at the hcad of a mighty army. Many battles wcnc fcoi ,lt, ali. tl,,

Scots,

Scots, though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent BOOK I.
zeal with which the nobles contended for the independence of the L-
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number and wealth of his fubjeds. And though the war con-
tinued with little intermission upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept possession of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
with an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes between

contending nations, was employed to terminate this controversy, nei-
ther Edward nor the Scots seemed to diftrufi the j u fice of their cause;
and both appealed to history and records, and from these produced,
in their own favour, such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and often appealed
to as the common judge of all Christian Princes, are still extant. The
fabulous tales of the early Britifl hiflory; the partial testimony of
ignorant chroniclers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the
proofs, on which Edward founded his title to the fovercignty of
Scotland; and the homage done by the Scottifi Monarchs for
thcir lands in England, is prepofnerouflyn fippofed to imply the sub-
jedion of their whole kingdom . Ill founded, howevuer, as their
right was, the English dcid not fail to revive it, in all the fibllc-
qucnt quarrels between the two kingdcloms ; while the Scots di-l
claimcd it with the utnofl indignation. To this, wVe Inltt impute
lhe fierce and implacable hatred to each otlelr, wlich lo- iln-
Illimcd both. Their national antiplilics were cxcited, not o)Ily) by
the usual circumflances of frcqucnt hlolilitics, and reciprocal ilnju-

* Antlcifon's I-ifiorical Eff;iy concerninig tlie Indepcndcncy, <c.

C 2 ric ;

BOOK i. rics; but the English confidered the Scots as vassals who had pre-

L--'"-'' fumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn, regarded the Engliih,

as usurpers, who aimed at enslaving their country.

0t' f ' AT the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, the

State of the
lkingdorn fame form of government was eltabliihed in all the kingdoms of Eu-
v lhen Bruce
began h:s rope. And ihe surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonstrates that the nations which overturned the Roman empire,
and ereted these kingdoms, though divided into different tribes, and
distinguished by different names, were originally the fame people.
\When we take a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that
ilupendous and singular fabric ereced by them; the firif object
that itrikes us is the King. And when we are told that he is the
sole proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that all his
fubjeds derive their possessions from him, and in return consecrate
their lives to his service; when we hear that all marks of diftinc-
,ion, and titles of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of
honour; when we behold the most potent peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his feet, and acknow-
ledging him to be their Sovereign, and their Liege Lord; we are apt
to pronounce him a powerful, nay an absolute monarch. No con-
clufion, however, would be more rash, or worse founded. The
genius of the feudal government was purely ariflocratical. With
all the ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances of despotic
power, a feudal King was the mioft limited of all Princes.

)!i;in of the BEFOIRE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer
'iidall l (;o-

vIlhulll(,,llI,, the world, many of the northern nations fen not to have been
'LDEl rc,.I,,. 1iibljccl to the governmenl t of kings '!; and even where monarchi-

cal government was cltablifhcld, the prince poflcflcd but little au-

* C . lib vi. vi. c. 2j.

thorlty.
^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

thority. A general rather than a king, his military command was BOOK I.
extensive, his civil jurifdiaion almost nothing -. The army which '
he led was not composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to
serve, but of such as voluntarily followed his standard 1:. These
conquered not for their leader, but for themselves; and being free
in their own country, renounced not their liberty when they ac-
quired new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient in-
habitants of the countries, which they subdued, but seizing the
greater part of their lands, they took their persons under protec-
tion. And the difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well
as the danger of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it ne-
ceffary to be always in a posture of defence, the form of govern-
ment which they established was altogether military, and nearly
resembled that to which they had been accustomed in their natdve
country. Their general still continuing to be the head of the co-
lony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to him; the re-
mainder, under the name of beneficia or iefs, was divided amongst
his principal officers. As the common safety required that these
oificers should, upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arms, for
the common defence, and should continue obedient to their gene-
ral, they bound themfelve, to take the field, when called, and to
serve him with a number of men, in proportion to the extent of
their territory. These great officers again parcelled out their lands
among their followers, and annexed the fame condition to the
grant. A feudal kingdom was properly the encampment of a
great army; m y s rdointd

militay iasry filborllinatiol

was eftablifled, and the pofleffion of land was the pay which fol-
diers reccivecd for tlicri pcri'fon;,al ricrce. In conilcqluenc of tlicl:
notions, the pollIllioln of landcl was granted cluilng plci'cau:c only,

Ta cit. dtc MoT . (crmi. c. 7. I C;u'. ibid.

*) a:ud

B3o K I. and kings were elective. In other words, an officer disagreeable

. .- -
" to his general was deprived of his pay, and the person who was

most capable of conducting an army, was chosen to command
it. Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of feudal govern-
ment.

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal fyflem had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the most considerable. Kings formerly eleCive, were
then hereditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure, de-
scended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince,
made no alteration in the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal confti-

Gcneial tution.. The king, who, at a distance, feemeed to be inverted with
caures which
limited the majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, to pofFlfs none of
power of the
feudal no- those advantages, which bestow on monarchs their grandeur and
nalchs. authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a standing army;

and he cnjoyed no proper jurisdiction.

Their reve- AT a time when pomp and fplcndor were unknown, even in
fnmal. the palaces of kings ; when the officers of the crown received

little salary besides the fees and perquifitcs of their office; when
clnbaflics to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
polcd of fildiers who served without pay; it was not ncceftary
tlhat a king flhould pofflcs a great revenue; nor did the condition
of Eumrope, in those ages, allow its princes to be ol)nlent. Com-
merce na(lde little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal go-
governill'cnt was cflabliflcd. Inflitutions, wllicl had no other oh-
jedit but to infpirc a martial spirit, to train men to be foldlies, and
to make armls the only lhonournable profeflion, naturlally ldifCouragcd
the coimmercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes inn-

posed

posed on the different branches of commerce, were by consequence BOOK I.
inconsiderable, and the prince's treasure received little supply from
a source, which, among trading people, flows with such abun-
dance, and is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied
even on land; such a burthen would have appeared intolerable
to men who received their estates as the reward of their va-
lour, and who confidered their service in the field as a full retri-
bution for what they poifeffed. The king's demnefnes, or the por-
tion of land which he still retained in his own hands unalienated,
furnished subsistence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex-
pence of government . The only fiated taxes which the feudal
law obliged vassals to pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldest son was made a
knight; another when his eldest daughter was married; and a
third in order to ransom him if he ihould happen to be taken
prisoner. Besides these, the king received the feudal casualties of
the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals. And, on some extra-
ordinary occasions, his ftubjeds granted him an aid, which they di-
ftinguilhed by the name of a benzevolenlce, in order to declare that
he received it not in consequence of any right, but as a gift, flow-
ing fiom their good-will -1-. All these added together, produced a
revenue scanty and precarious, which, far from enabling the king
to attempt any thing that could excite the jealousy or fear of the
noblcs, kept him in continual indigence, nt, and dependence.

Non could ilte king fi'lppll the defcCt of his revenues, by the Thr' !:,

cri-or of Iris arms . Mercenary troops, and flanding armics were Hi"di'g ''-
lnknown ,s;; l, nv: a.i the f-uda.l goverlnment 1i'ililicd in rigour.

] :ur!1,,c wi.S >peopledol1 xw itit s(lic( . Th valitlls of tlhc ki;;, and

' (C.I . i' : !'t .

i! .

lib. i. l))' rt t. I ) !
C lc G loll, \ oc )ol)n i .ii ).

I l,) ,i ...I,',' '. OC A ll illl.

Boo K I. the sub vaflals of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And

~^' while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their

frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuows courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little discipline, was sufficient for all the purposes both of the fecu-
rity and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however, far
from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less for-
midable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any peo-
ple were, the more independent they became; and the fame per-
sons being both soldiers and filbjels, civil privileges and immuni-
ties were the consequence of their viCtories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their
own people, as well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly
under the feudal constitution, the most indulgent of all princes to
their fubjets, because they flood most in need of their afliRance.
A prince whom even war and viCtories did not render the master
of his own army, possessed no shadow of military power during
times of peace. His disbanded soldiers mingled with his other
fubjecls; not a single man received pay from him; many ages
elapsed even before a guard was appointed to defend his person;
and dcflitute of that great instrument of dominion a standing ar-
my, the authority of the king continued always feeble, and was
often contemptible.

Their jurif- NOR were these the only circumflances, which contributed to-
dijiion was
limited, wards dcpreflng the regal power. By the feudal fyflem, the king's

judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes
fcem to have been the hipremc judges of their people, and, in per-
son, heard and determined all controversics among them. The mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity of causes soon made it necessary to appoint judges, who BOOK I.
in the king's name decided matters, that belonged to the royal
jurisdiction. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Europe, having
destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries which they
seized being cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they were
bound to protet from every injury; the administration of justice
was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal sentence
became almost impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and difor-
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de-
gree almost incredible, and scarce compatible with the subsistence
of civil society. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
tedion of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of justice. To apprehend and to punish a criminal. of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom *. In order
to remedy there evils, many persons of diftinsion were entrusted
with the administration of justice within their own territories.

* A remarkable inifance of this occurs in the following history, so late as the

year I561. Mary, having appointed a court of justice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person,
who was to a& as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions, p. 234. The
words of a Proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feebleness of
the feudal government, deserve our notice.--- And because it is necessary for the
execution of her highness' commandments, and service, that her justice be well
accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a good
power of her faithful fubjeas---Therefore commands and charges all and funldry
Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling
within the said counties, that they, and every one of them, with their kin, friendds,
servants, and houfhold men, well bodin in feir of war, in the molf fubftantious
manner, [i. c. completely armed and -rovided,] and with twenty days viauals, to
meet and to pass forward with him to the borough of Jedburglh, and there to re-
main during the said space of twenty days, and to receive such dirctLion l ad com-
mands, as hllall be given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's namnc, for quiet-
lnefs of the country; and to put the famne in execution under thi pain of losing their
life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hilt. of Scotland, x98.

VoL. 1. 1) BI3t

Boo x I. But what we may presume was, at first, only a temporary grant,

--"* or a personal privilege, the encroaching spirit of the nobles soon

converted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of
some were ereced into Baronies, those of others into Regalities.
The jurifdition of the former was extensive, that of the latter,
as the name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. All causes,
whether civil or criminal, were-tried by judges, whom the lord of
the regality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person
within his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a
flop to their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, re-
move the cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he
submitted to a foreign jurifdiaion *. Thus almost every question~
in which any perfol who resided on the lands of the nobles, was
interefled, being determined by judges appointed by the nobles
themselves, their vassals were scarce sensible of being, in any de-
gree, subjed to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into
many small principalities, almost independent, and held together
by a feeble.and commonly an imperceptible bond of union. And
the king was not only stripped of the authority annexed to the
person of a supreme judge, but his revenue suffered no small dimi-
nution, by the loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were,
in that age, due to the person who administered juflice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

rose towards independence. Not satisfied with havitng obta;i zd a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during-
plcal-urc, thcir ambition aimed at fomcthing bolder, and by intro-
ducing cilaills, cndcavourcd, as far as human ingenuity and in-
vention can reach that end, to render their poflellions unalicnable

l" Caigi, lib. iii. Dicg. 7.

and

and everlasting. As they had full power to add to the inheritance BOOK I.
transmitted to them from their anceflors, but none to diminish l
it; time alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other acci-
dents, brought continual accessions of wealth, and of dignity; a
great family, like a river, became considerable from the length of
its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new property
flowed successively into it. Whatever influence is derived from
titles of honour, the feudal barons, likewise, poflefsed in an am-
ple manner. These marks of diflinEtion are, in their own na-
ture, either official or personal, and being annexed to a particular
charge, or beflowed by the admiration of mankind upon illuftri-
ous characters, ought to be appropriated to these. But the son,
however unworthy, could not bear to be stripped of that appella-
tion, by which his father had been distinguished. His prefump-
tion claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles of honour be-
'came hereditary, and added new lustre to nobles already in posses-
sion of too much power. Something more audacious, and more
extravagant fill remained. The supreme direction of all affairs,
both civil and military, being committed to the great officers of
the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well as of their
people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of thece officers.
But such was the prepoflcrous ambition of the nobles, and ib fuc-
cefsful even in their wildest attempts to aggrandize themlclvcs,
that in all the kingdoms where the feudal inflitutions prevailed,
mofl of there offices were annexed to great families, and lheld like
fiefs, by hereditary right. A person, vwhofe undutiful bchaviotur
rendered him odious to his prince, or wholt incapacity cxpofLd
him to the contcmpt of the people, often held a place of lo)cWer
and trufl, of the gIrcateft ilmportallne to both. In Sco()ilandC
the oficcs of Lord Jullice General, Great ChIIImbcrlail, I lilh

1) S a

BooK I. Steward, High Conflable, Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were
'v~ all hereditary; and in many counties, the office of Sheriff was

held in the fame manner.

NOBLE S, whose property was so extensive, and whose power

so great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor
did they want instruments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among
their followers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful
and determined vassals; while that, which they retained in their
own hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than the
court of his sovereign. The strong cafles, in which they resided,
afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A
great part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indi-
gent, but bold retainers. And if at any time they left their re-
treat, to appear in the court of their sovereign, they were accom-
panied, even in times of peace, with a vast train of armed fol-
lowers. The usual retinue of William the sixth Earl of Douglas
consisted of 2ooo horse. Those of the other nobles were magni-
ficent and formidable in proportion. Impatient of Subordination,
and forgetting their proper rank, such potent and haughty ba-
rons were the rivals, rather than the fubjeds of their Prince.
They often despised his orders, insulted his person, and wrest-
ed from him his crown. And the history of Europe, during fe-
vcral ages, contains little ellb but the accounts of the wars and re-
volutions, occasioncd by their exorbitant ambition.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its proper
bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm that the

balance

balance which ought to be preserved between a King and his no- BooK IL
bles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, Their power
in common with those of other nations, all the means for extend- Sceotlan than
ing their authority which arise from the ariftocratical genius of kinagd other
the feudal government. Besides these, they possessed advantages
peculiar to themselves; the accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumfiances concurred with the spirit
of the constitution to aggrandize them. To enumerate the molt The particu-

lar causes of

remarkable of these, will serve both to explain the political state this.
of the kingdom, and to illustrate many important occurrences, in
the period now under our review,

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of the power The nature of

the country.

and independence of the Scottifi nobility. Level and open coun-
tries are formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme ma-
giftrate reaches with ease to the most distant corners, and when
nature has erected no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or
obnoxious are soon detected, and punished. Mountains, and fens,
and rivers, set bounds to despotic power, and amidst these, is the
natural feat of freedom and independence. In such places, did
the Scottish nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to his
own castle, a mutinous Baron could defy the power of his Sove-
reign, it being impracticable to lead an army, through a barren
country, to places, almost inacceflible to a tingle man. The fame
causes, which checked the progress of the Roman arms, and ren-
dered all the efforts of Edward I. abortive, often proteted the
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their Prince; and they
owed their personal independence, to those very mountains and
marshes which saved their country from being conquered.

AI. Ti F

BCOK I. II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a lit-
The small ' tie to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken that of
number ?f the Prince. Wherever numbers of men assemble together, or-
great cities.

der must be eflablifhed, and a regular form of government infti-
tuted, the authority of the magistrate must be recognized, and his
decisions meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and fubor-
dination take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in
Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of any
fort of police. But under the feudal governments, commerce, the
chief means of affemblihg mankind, was neglected; the nobles,
in order to tfrengthen their influence over their vassals, resided
among them, and seldom appeared at court, where they found a
superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with equals. In Scot-
land, the rich counties in the south lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or populous amidst con-
tinual inroads and alarms; the residence of our monarchs was
not fixed to any particular place; many parts of the country were
barren and uncultivated; and in consequence of these peculiar
circumfiances, added to the general causes flowing from the nature
of the feudal institutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely
few, and very inconfidcrable. The vaiTals of every baron occu-
pied a dillinc portion of the kingdom, and formed a separate and
almost independent focicty. Initead of giving aid towards reduc-
in, to obedience their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took
under his protelion, they were all in arms for his defence, and
obfirudcd the operations of jufticc to the utmost. The prince was
olliged to connive at criminals, whom he could not reach; the
nobles, colifcious of this advantagc, were not afraid to ofiCend; and
the difficulty of punifhingi, alnofl allrced them of impunity.

111. Tllr,

III THE division of the country into clans had no small es- BOOK I.

fed in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations which The intitu-
over-ran Europe, were originally divided into many small tribes; tion of clans.
and when they came to parcel out the lands which they had con-
quered, it was natural for every chieftain to bestow a portion,
in the first place, upon those of his own tribe or family. These
all held their lands of him; and as the safety of each indivi-
dual depended on the general union, these small societies clung
together, and were distinguished by some common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the introduction of
firnames or ensigns armorial. But when there became common,.
the descendants and relations of every Chieftain assumed the-
fame name and arms with him; other vassals were proud to imi-
tate their example, and by degrees they were communicated to
all those who held of the fame superior. Thus clanihips were
formed; and in a generation or two, that consanguinity which
was, at firEt, in a great measure, imaginary, was believed to be
real. An artificial union was converted into a natural one; men
willingly followed a leader, whom they regarded both as the fu-
perior of their lands, and the chief of their blood, and served
him not only with the fidelity of vassals, but with the affeCtion
of friends. In the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such
unions, as we have dcfcribcd, imperfectly formed; but in Scot-
land, whether they were the production of chance, or the effedc
of policy, or introduced by the Irish colony above-mentio:! cid,
and lr-engthened by carefully prcferving their genealogies both
genuine and fabulous, clanfhiips were univcrfal. Such a confe-
deracy might be overcome, it could not be broken ; and no
change of manners, or of government, has been able, in lorne
parts of the kingdom, to dissolve afilciations which are foundcd.

7 tP)o-i..

BOOK I. upon prejudices so natural to the human mind. How formi-

L"/ dable were nobles at the head of followers, who counting that

cause just and honourable which their chief approved, were ever
ready to take the field at his command, and to sacrifice their lives
in defence of his person, or of his fame ? Against such men, a
king contended with great disadvantage, and that cold service,
which money purchases, or authority extorts, was not an equal
match for their ardour and zeal.

The small IV. THE fmiallnefs of their number may be mentioned
number of
the nobles. among the causes of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles.

Our annnals reach not back to the first division of property
in the kingdom; but so far as we can trace the matter, the
original possessions of the nobles seem to have been exten-
five. The ancient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of
their prince. Many of the earls and barons who succeeded
them, were matiers of territories no less ample. France and
England, countries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to a
numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither
extensive nor rich, could not contain many such overgrown
proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always diminishes,
in proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble if divided
among a multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When no-
bles are numerous, their operations nearly resemble those of the
people, they arc rouscd only by what they feel, not by what they
apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary and opprcflive ats, be-
fore they take arms against their sovereign. A finall body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick in difccrning,
and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as sudden, as
thofi of the other arc low. Hence proceeded the extreme jca-

louiy,

lousy, with which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, and BooK I.
the fierceness with which they opposed their incroachments. Even
the virtue of a prince did not render them lets vigilant, or less
eager to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding
the splendor of his victories, and the glory of his name, was upon
the point of experiencing the vigour of their refiflance no less
than his unpopular descendent James III. Besides this, the near
alliance of the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural consequence of their fmiall number. And as consanguinity
was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a
nobleman interested themselves in his quarrel, as a common cause,
and every contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon
drew upon him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. THOSE natural connections both with their equals, and Their leagues

and combina-

with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles ftrcngthcned by a device, tions.
which if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more frequent
among them, than in any other nation. Even in times of pro-
found peace, they formed afrociations, which when made with
their equals, were called leagues of mutualdefence; and when with
their inferiors, bonds of manrent. By the former, the contracling
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each other, in all causes,
and against all persons. By the latter, protection was stipulated
on the one hand, and fidelity and personal service promised on tlic
other '. Sclf-prcfcrvation, it is probable, forced men at first into
these confederacies ; and while disorder and rapine were univcrilbl,
while government was unfcttlcd, and the authority of laws little
known or regarded, near neighbours found it nccefcary to unite in
this manner for their security, and the vweak were obliged to coutrt

* ASL 30. Pll. 142.. Aa 43. P. 1555.
VOL. I. l. ,Ii

BOOK I. the patronage of the firong. By degrees these associations became

~- ~ iso many alliances offensive and defensive againit the throne; and

as their obligation was held to be more sacred than any tie whatever,
they gave much umbrage to our kings, and contributed not a lit-
tle to the power and independence of the nobility. In the reign
of James II. William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford, Ross, Murray,
Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Balveny, &c. and so formidable was
this combination to the king, that he had recourse to a measure no
lets violent than unjust, in order to dissolve it.

The fiequent VI. THE frequent wars between England and Scotland proved
wars with
lEngland. another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. Nature

has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the east; on the weft
they are separated by an imaginary line. The small revenues of
our kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in
the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of their sub-
jeas have permitted such a method of defence. The barons, whose
efiates lay near the borders, confidered themselves as bound both
in honour and in intcr-eft to repel the enemy. The warde/ljips
of the different iarcics, offices of great trust and dignity, were
always beflowcd on them. This gained them the leading of the
aarlil:c counties in the south ; and their vasals, living in a state of
pcl'-!ci.al hofliity, Mo enCjoying at heIi an infccure peace, became
more iInurLd to v:ar thaln even the rcfl of their countrymen, and
m(orc vwiling to accolmpany their chieftain in his moflI hardy and
d:t;cro!a c-lntlcr-pri;'.cs;. It va;s Illc valour, no lcfs than the 1nunm-
I,>1 (i1 tl'cilr tillo;vcls tlhat -rendlclerl l )oe )oulalcs great. The
i;'?)1,"; il Iic Inorl'l ciii and umiiland couintics were often dutifil and

obfcqtlious

obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs always found it im- BooK 1.
praacicible to subdue the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the T
borderers. In all our domeflic quarrels, those, who could draw to
their fide the inhabitants of the southern counties, were sure of
victory; and conscious of this advantage, the lords who poffcfied
authority there, were apt to forget the duty which they owed
their sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of fubjeds.

VII. THE calamities which besel our kings contributed more T;c fiequent

than any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was ,h'icll hap-
any race of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix fuc- Paend in Scot-

land.

ceffive princes, from Robert III. to James VI. not one died a natu-
ral death; and the minorities, during that time, were longer, and
more frequent, than ever happened in any other kingdom. From
Robert Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of
these were called to the throne, while they were minors, and al-
most infants. Even the most regular and best established govern-
ments feel sensibly the pernicious effets of a minority, and either
become languid and inactive, or are thrown into violent and un-
natural convulsions. But, under the imperfc-t and ill adljuftld fy-
ftem of government in Scotland, these efrfed-s were fiill more fa-
tal; and the fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unreftihaindc
by the authority of a king, fLorned all fiibjeionO to the delegated
jurifdillion of a regent, or to tlhe i-eble commands of a minor.
The royal authority was cilrcimiii cribb d \iliin narrowcr linilits
than ever; the prerogatives of the crown, n;lll.rlly inconlidcr-
able, were reduced alinofl to nothinj ll; and the l i illocatical pow'cr
g'radually rose upon the ruins or the Inonarclic :l. clT tle ,cr-
fonal power of a regent fliould enable hlimin to ad: witli too intclCc
vigour, the authority annexcd to that ollice, was iolleciines reii-

l. 2 dered

BooK I. dered inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a single regent Was
b--v~- cliofen, the greater nobles, and the heads of the more illustrious

families, were seldom raised to that dignity. It was often con-
ferred upon men, who pofieifed little influence and excited no
jealousy. They, conscious of their own weakness, were obliged
to overlook some irregularities, and to permit others; and in or-
dcr to support their authority, which was detfitute of real firength,
they endeavoured to gain the most powerful and aQive barons,
by granting them possessions and immunities, which raised them
to still greater power. When the king himself came to assume
the reins of government, he found his revenues wafted or alien-
ated, the crown lands seized or given away, and the nobles so ac-
cuflomed to independence, that after the struggles of a whole
reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to the fame state in
which they had been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest

Reviewof the from them what they had usurped during that time. If we take
cvuts favour-
able to the a view of what happened to each of our kings, who was so un--
nobles dnring fortunate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and impor-
tY- tance of this observation will fully appear..

1329. THE minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dii-
Davidi If.

turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the
aid of England, and on the support of some difaffeted barons
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which at firif
attended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to France;
and Baliol took poffeflion of the throne. A finall body of the no-
bles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Ba-
liol out of Scotland ; and after an abfcnce of nine years, David
returned from France, and took the government of the kingdom
into his own hands. But nobles who were thus wafting their

blood

blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un- Boo K I..
disturbed possession of their anciant privileges; and even some
title, to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim, in that.
age, that every leader might claim as his own, the territory which
his sword had won from the enemy. Great acquisitions were gain-
ed by the nobility in that way; and to there the gratitude and libe-
rality of David added, by distributing, among such as adhered to
him, the vast poffeflions which fell to the crown by the forfeiture.
of his enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rife
above the other nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented both.
its power and its property, during his minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the English during the continuance of 14s-

Jame I,.

a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner, almost nineteen
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, first by his
uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son. Both
these noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural ambi-
tion, if we may believe molt of our historians, not only cut short
the days of Prince David the King's elder brother, but prolonged
the captivity of James. They flattered themselves, that they
might ftep with less opposition into a throne, when almost va-
cant; and dreading the King's return, as the extinction of their
authority, and the end of their hopes, they carried on the negocia-
tions for obtaining his liberty with extreme remiffiefs. At the
fame time, they neglected nothing that could either sooth or bribe
the nobles to approve their scheme. They slackened the reins of
government, they allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon;
they fufrered the mofl irregular acts of power, and even wanton
inflances of opprcflion to pass with impunity; they dealt out the
patrimony of the crown among those wholo enmity they drcaded,

or

BOOK I. or whose favour they had gained; and reduced the royal autlo-
'~' rity to a state of imbecility, from which succeeding monarchs la-

boured in vain to raise it.
1437. DURING the minority of James II. the administration of affairs

and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-
liam Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effets of their conjund authority, and each of them,
in order to firengthen himself, beflowed new power and privileges
upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While the young Earl
of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ereted a fort of inde-
pendent principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his vas-
fals to acknowledge any authority but his own, he created Knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military, as-
fumed every ensign of Royalty, but the title of King, and ap-
-peared on public with a magnificence more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during the
James11' minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing the per-

son of the young King, and by the ascendant which he acquired
over him, soon engrofl'd the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious projed of railing his family to the fame pitch of power
and grandeur with thofi of the lprime nobility; and he effected
it. 'While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of government,
and the barons became accustomcd, once more, to anarchy anld in-
depcndence. The powier which 3oy)d had been at so much pains
to acquire, was of no loh;g continuance, and the fill of his family,
according to the fate ol' favor'itcs, W:ls itldclcn and dcllruc-ivc;
lbit upon it,;l ruins, thl fhmily of Hamlilton rose, which soon at-
taincd the highclll rank in tle kIingdom.

. As

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more B ooK I.

turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contending james v.
nobles, encouraged or protected either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular facions, and
disregarded more than ever the restraints of order and authority.
The French had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their in-
terest, raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a na-
tive of France, and a grandson of James II. But Alexander Lord
Home, the most eminent of all the Scottish peers, who survived
the fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during the
first years of his adminifiration; and the intrigues of the Queen
Dowager, filler of Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no
less feeble. Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles
despised his authority, and regardless either of his threats, or his
entreaties, peremptorily refused, two several times, to enter Eng-
land, to the borders of which kingdom he had led them. Pro-
voked by these repeated inflances of contempt, the regent aban-
doned his troublesome flation, and retiring to France, preferred
the tranquillity of a private life, to an office destitute of real au-
thority. Upon his retreat Douglas Earl of Angus became mailer
of the King's person, and governed the kingdom in his name.
Many efforts were made to deprive him of his uitrped authority.
But the numerous vaflals, anId fiiends of his family adhered to
him, because he divided with them the power and emoluments of
his office; the people reverenced and loved the name of Dou-
glas; he cxercifcd, without the title of regent, a fuller and more
ablolute authority than any who hald enjoyed that dignitly; and
the ancient, but danCgerous pCrcmi.nence of the Douglatics, licemcd
to be rcforcd.

To

BOOK I. To these, and to many other causes, omitted or unoberved by

us, did the Scottish nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon
power, of which instances occur, so frequently, in our history.
Nothing, however, demonifrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the declension
of the feudal systems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when
the arms or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken or laid it
in ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remained, in a
great measure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

The power of TIlE powers, which the feudal institution's vested in the nobles,
lthe feudal
nobles be- soon became intolerable to all the princes of Europe, who longed
came intole-
rable to to possess something more than a nominal and precarious authority.

rnces. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of England,

Edward II. and some other weak Princes, into rafl and premature
attempts against the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
disappointed, or perished. Princes, of greater abilities, were con-
tent to mitigate evils which they could not cure; they fought oc-
cupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars;
and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expedi-
tions, which, if they brought no other advantage, secured at leafl
(lomefic tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened the feudal

'le ..tce.mpr, govCrnments for dcflruclion. Towards the end of the fifteenth

) 1

h ,um itAc the

:,,i-%1 ficcctWI cCntury, and beginning of the fixtccnth, all the Princes of Europe
tul in }rtl'e c
,iitl in lEng- attacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobIcs. Men of genius

". 'I then undertook with fiucccis, what their unfiilful predecessors had

u. ticiiptcd in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the most profound and
the nioft adventrous gcnius of that age, began, and in a single
reign, al noft complcated cthe fihcme of their deflrution. The sure
l)ut concealed tolicy of Ienry VII. of England produced the sTlmne

cflck.

asset. The means, indeed, employed by these monarchs were BOOK 1.
very different. The blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons which
waite the constitution, but become not mortal till some ditfant pe-
riod. Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them to fell their
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in
the legislature unknown to their predecessors. But while these But thenollet

conEinuc to
great revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which oather

flrceigth in

Scotland was intimately conneaed, no alteration happened there; Scotland.
the King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the
commons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and possessions, but daily made
new acquisitions.

THIS was not owing to the inattention of our princes, or to Our Kings

endeavourcd

their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the toextend the
exorbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous to hum- rity' atho-
ble that order. They did not, however, possess means fufficicnt
for accomplishing that end. The resources of our monarchs were
few, and the progress which they made inconfiderablc. Blut as Genceral

ea sI to-

the number of their followers, and the extent of their juridlic- ,wails iist
tion, were the two chief circumfiances which rendered the nobles
formidable; in order to counterbalance the one, and to rctlrain
the other, all our Kings had recourse to the fame expedicnts.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and off unploli(fhcld in- II,,Cii.i,

ncrs, surroundcd with vafllls bold and licentious, whom they LVcrc i, ti
bound by intercfl and honour to protect& thlc caulis of (lifcordl wCre "o '.

VOL. 1. F maLy

BOOK I. many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could

kieldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-
rior or judge, and their impatient spirit would seldom wait the
flow decisions ofjurice, their quarrels were usually terminated by
the sword. The offended Baron assembled his vassals, and wafted
the lands, or hbed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury,
was mean, to forbear revenge, infamous or cowardly '. HIence
quarrels were transmitted from father to son, and under the name
of deadlyfezids, subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated
rancour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguish these quarrels, and by scattering or cheriihing the
feeds of difeord among the nobles, that union which would have
rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which must at once have
annihilated the prerogative, was effeQually prevented. To the
fame cause, our Kings were indebted for the success, with which
they sometimes attacked the most powerful chieftains. They em-
ployed private revenge to aid the impotence of public laws, and

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but what is

more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought the prosecution
of an injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publickly to desist from demanding vengeance but the fame
laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and want of affec'ion to his family, de-
prived him of the right of fucceflion. Hcnaut. Abrege Chronol. p. 81. Among
thc Anglo-Saxons, we find a sing.ular inllitution diftinguifled by the name ofocda-.
liitun ; a voluntary aflociation, the object whereof was the personal security ofthofe
who joined in it, and which the feeblencfs of government at that time rendered ne-
ccflTry. Among other regulations, which are contained in one of those fill ex-
ta.it, the following defrrves notice: " If any aflbciate flall either eat or drink
with ;a pci on who has killed any member of the fodlitinimi, unless in the prerence
of the King, the 13ifhlop, or the Count, and inlcf's he can prove that he did not
1niv w the pci foI, let him pay a great Finc." -licks Diffirt. Epilfolar. apud Thc-
i.UI'. IiAlug. Scpltcnlr. vol. i. p. 21.

arming

arming against the person who had incurred their displeasure, BooK I.
those rival families which wished his fall, they rewarded their '-
service, by sharing among them the spoils of the vanquished. But
this expedient, though it served to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility. Those, who were now the
instruments of their Prince's vengeance, became in a short time the
objects of his fear. Having acquired power and wealth by ferv-
ing the crown, they, in their turn, set up for independence; and
though there might be a flucuation of power, and of property;
though old families fell, and new ones rose upon their ruins; the
rights of the aristocracy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration ofjuflice is one of the most powerful Exiend the

ties between a King and his fubjeds, all our monarchs were at Jl ing's of
the utmost pains to circumscribe the jurifdiaion of the Barons, courts.
and to extend that of the crown. The external forms of fubor-
dination, natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt.
An appeal lay from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those
of the King. The right, however, of judging in the first instance,
belonged to the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat
the effect of appeals, as well as of many other feudal regulations.
The royal jurisdiction was almost confined within the narrow
limits of the King's dcmefines, beyond which, his judges claimed
indeed much authority, but poflcifcd next to none. Our King s
were sensible of thece limitations, and bore them with impatience.
But it was iinpollible to overturn in a momenlCt, what was so deply
rooted ; or to firip the nobles, at once, of privileges which they
had held so long, and which were wrought alinoft into the frame
of the feudal conflitution. To acconmliill this, hlowe'veC, \,as
an olbje of uniformo and anxious attention to all or11 prics.
James I. led the way here, as well as in other infialnccs, t.vwardl.

1' 2 ;1 1mol(re

BooK I. a more regular and perfect police. He made choice among trhe

"--"J, eflates of parliament, of a certain number of persons, whom he

dlifiguiflhed by the name of Lords of Seiozn, and appointed them
to hold courts for determining civil causes, three times in the
year, and forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased to
name. Their jurifdiaion extended to all matters, which formerly
came under the cognizance of the King's council, and being a
committee of parliament, their decisions were final. James II
obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which should be forfeited:,
to the crown, and declaring the right ofjurifdlition to be unalien-
able for the future. James III. imposed ievere penalties upon thofi
judges appointed by the Barons, whose dccilions should be found
on a review to be unjust; and by many other regulations, endea-
voured to extend the authority of his own court ". James IV. on
pretence of remedying the inconveniencies arising from the short
terms of the court of Session, appointed other judges called LoirJs
of daily council. The Sejion was an ambulatory court, and met
seldom; the Daily Council was fixed, and fat conflantly at Edin-
burgh; and though not composed of members of parliament, the
fame powers which the Lords of Session enjoyed, were vested in
it. At lafl, James V. ereced a new court, that still subsists, and
which he named the College ofitfltice, the judges or Senators of
wvlicll were called Lords of Council and S&zion. This court not
only excrcifcd the fame jurifdiclion which formerly belonged to
the Seifion and Daily Council, but new rights were added. Pri-
vil'g-cs of great importance were granted to its members, its
I;rinls were prcfcribcd, its terms fixed, and regularity, pDwer, and
fllielndr conferrcd upon it. The persons conflituted judges in all

< A. 26. . 9. .

9.

469. . 4. 93. Afl. 99. P. 1487.
c thllre

these different courts, had, in many refpeds, the advantage of BooK I.
those who presided in the courts of the Barons; they were more
eminent for their skill in law, their rules of proceeding were more
uniform, and their decisions more confiltent. Such judicatories
became the objects of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
lingly submitted their property to their determination, and their
encroachments on the jurifdidtions of the nobles were popular, and
for that reason successful. By devices of a similar nature the jurif-
diction of the nobles in criminal causes was refirained, and the au-
thority of the court of Jz/iiciartl extended. The crown, in this
particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles, recovered more
ample authority; and the King, whose jurifdition once resembled
that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *, came more

and

* The most perfeac idea of the feudal system of government may be attained by

attending to the slate of Germany, and to the history of France. In the former,
the feudal infRitutions fill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether abo-
lifhed in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that the
French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty and prc-
cifion, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress,
and revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and
all its great Princes as vafTals, holding of the Emperor: they poflefs all the feud.l
privileges; their fiefs are perpetual ; their jurisdictions within their own territor;cs,
fcparate and cxtenfive ; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary and an-
nexed to particular families. At the faun time, the Emperor retains many of the
prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and prctenlions aic
innumerable, and his power small ; his jurif(lilion within his own dcmefncs, or lec-
jcditary countries, is comple".t; beyond the bounds of these it is alnioPt nothing.
And so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feudal yflcinl be over-
tuirnel in alinoft every particular slate in Germany, and although its Princes have
all become absolute, the original feudal coniiitution of the empire Rtill rcmailn., andl
ideas pcculiar to that form of governmcnt, dirca all its opcratioons, and determine
the rights of all its Princes. Our oblfcrvalions, with regard to the limited juiifdlic-
til of Kinls undeir the fctudal goverlncnts, are Lre.tly illuilltiated by wlh.,

lx\;ppcl'ndl

BooKi I. and more to be confidercd as the head of the community, and the
-'"~' fuprcme dispenser of juflice to his people. These acquisitions of

our Kings, however, though comparatively great, were in reality
inconfidcrable; and notwithstanding all their efforts, many of the
separate jurifditaions possessed by the nobles remained in great
vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a distant and
more happy period.

Fach of our BUT besides these methods of defending their prerogative, and
fuengd Cor humbling the aristocracy, which may be confidered as common to
plan of hum- all our princes, we shall find, by taking a review of their reigns,
bling the no-
bles. that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce to

James V. had formed some particular system for depressing the
authority of the nobles, which was the object both of their jealousy
and terror. This conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied
with the accounts of their historians, must be confidered as flowing
entirely from their resentment against particular noblemen; and
all their attempts to humble them, muff be viewed as the sallies
of private passion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though some of their actions may be imputed to

happened in France. The fecblenefs and dotage of the descendants of Charlc-
nlaiigne encouraged the Peers to usurp an indepelndent jul ifdiiion. Nothing remain-
ed in the hlands of the crown; all was fcizcd by them. WVhen Hugh Capet
ascendcd the throne, A. D. 987, he kept poflcffion of his private patrimony the
Comtc of Paris, and all the jurifdidcion, which the Kings his fucceflbrs cxercifcd
for some time, was within its territories. There wore only four towns in France
where lie could eflablifll Granids Baillis, or royal judges ; all the other lands, towns,
and baillagcs belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French monarchs
had recourse for cxtcnding thcir juridiiliion were cxactly similar to those employed
by our princes. I-lenatt's Abregc, p. 617, &c. Dc 'lEfprit des Loix, Liv. xxx.
ch. 20, &c.

I tIhoi

those pafions, though the different genius of the men, the temper BooK I.
of the times, and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned
great variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable
with excefive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uni-
formly the fame. And the projet of reducing the power of Thprvd
the aristocracy sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; blvylcv:ev of

the events ia

foInetimes concealed, or seemingly fufplended; was never alto- their lsign,.
getlher abandoned.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert potert ;ruce.

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him on
the throne. His gratitude and generosity bestowed on them the
lands of the vanquiihed. Property has seldom undergone greater
or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was fuiijed,.
at that time, in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the estates
of mofl of the ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to his Eng-
lifih fubjed-s. These were expelled by the Scots, and their lands
seized by new masters. Amidst such rapid changes, confusion
was unavoidable; and many possessed their lands by titles ex-
tremely defective. During one of those truces between the two
nations, occasioned rather by their being weary of war, than
desirous of peace, Robert formed a fchenc for checking the grow-
ing power and wealtl of the nobles. He fuiimmoned them to
appear, and to shew by what rights they held their lands. They
aflemblcd accordingly, and the queflion being put, they fiartcd
up, at once, and drew their swords, " By these, said they, we
acquired our lands, and with tlefe we will defend them." The
King, intimidated ly their boldness, prudently dropt the projet'.
But so deeply dlid they rcfent this attack upon their order, that
notwitlhllanding lRobecrt's popular and tl]lcndid virtues, it occa-
sioned a dangerous conspiracy againfl his life.

1D .\ VI

BOOK I. DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards a pri-
David If. soner in England, and involved in continual war with Edward III.

had not leisure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or
to think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
Robcrtll. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the military,

than the civil tranfaaions of the reign of Robert II. Skirmishes
and inroads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but with
regard to every thing that happened, during several years of tran-
quillity, they are altogether silent.
Robert III. THE feeble administration of Robert III. must likewise be

pafied over slightly. A Prince of a mean genius, and of a frail
and sickly conflitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with
ative and martial Barons, or to attempt ,vrcting from them any
of their rights.

THE civil tranfaaions in Scotland are better known since the
James I.

beginning of the reign of James I. and a complete series of our
laws supplies the defect of our historians. The English made some
amends for their injustice in detaining that prince a prisoner, by
their generous care of his education. During his long residence
in England, he had an opportunity of obfcrving the feudal
iyftlem in a more advanced slate, and refined from many of
the imperfections which fiill adhcred to it, in his own king-
dom. I-Ie saw there nobles great, but not independent; a
King power-ful, though far from absolute; he iaw a regular
adminifiration of government; wile laws enacted ; and a nation
klourifiing and happy, bccaufc all ranks of men were accuflomed
to obey them. Full of thece ideas, he returned into his native
country, which presentcd to him a very different Icenc. The

ro)'al

royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by having 300K I.
been so long delegated to regents. The ancient patrimony, and " '
revenues of the crown, were almost totally alienated. During
his long absence, the name of a King was little known, and
less regarded. The licence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed. The weak
were exposed to the rapine and oppression of the frong. In
every corner Tome barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and
neither feared the King, -nor pitied the people *.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open force to corre&

such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
borne it. He applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of
laws and flatutes. In a parliament held immediately after his
return, he gained the confidence of his people, by many wife
laws, tending visibly to re-eflablifh order, tranquillity and justice
in the kingdom. But, at the fame time that he endeavoured to
secure there blefings to his fubjeats, he discovered his intention
to recover those possessions, of which the crown had been unjustly
bereaved; and for that purpose obtained an ad by which he was
impowered to summon those, who had obtained crown lands during
the three last reigns, to produce the rights by which they held
them t. As this statute threatened the property of the nobles, an-
other which passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful

* A cotcmporary Monkifli writer dcfcribes there calanrities very feelingly, in his

rude Latin. In dicbus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed quilibet potentiorum junio-
rem oppreflit; ct totum regnum suit unum latrocinium; homicidia, deprrdationcs,
inccndia, et cratera maleficia rcmanferunt impunita; et juftitia rclegata extra termi-
nos regni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud Inncs Eflhy, vol. i. p. 272.

Il Ad. 9. P. 1424.
VOL. I. G blow

Boo x I. blow at theirpower. By it, leagues and combinations which we have

already described, and which rendered the nobles so formidable to
the crown, were declared unlawful -". Encouraged by this success
in the beginning of his enterprize, James's next Rtep was still
bolder and more decisive. During the fitting of parliament, he
seized, at once, his cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons;
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March, and above twenty
other Peers and Barons of prime rank. To all of them, however,
hle was immediately reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons
and Lennox. These were tried by their Peers, and condemned;
for what crime is now unknown. Their execution firuck the
whole order with terror, and their forfeiture added vast pofIeffions
to the crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and
Strathern, upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him
by inheritance. The patience and inactivity of the nobles, while
the King was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the
crown, are amazing. The only obstruction he met with was from
a flight infurreaion headed by the Duke of Albany's youngest son,
and that was easily suppressed. The splendor and presence of a
King, to which the great men had been long unaccustomed, inspired
reverence: James was a Prince of great abilities, and conduEted
his operations with much prudence. He was in friendship with
England, and closely allied with the French King: He was adored
by'the people, who enjoyed unusual security and happiness under
his adminift-ation: And all his acquisitions, however fatal to the
body of the nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individuals;
wcre obtained by decisions of law; and being founded on circum-
flances pcculiar to the persons who fil'cred, might excite mur-
m.nlrs and app)rchenfions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a

* A&t. 30. P. 1424.

general

general rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt which the BooK I.
King made. Encouraged by the facility with which he had
hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure that irritated the
whole body of the nobility, and which the event Ihews either to
have been entered into with too much precipitancy, or to have
been carried on with too much violence. The father of George
Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms againit Robert III. the
King's father; but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
retfored by Robert Duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had exceeded his power, and that it was the prerogative
of the King alone to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed
to the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be void,
and depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the great men
held lands by no other right than what they derived from grants
of the two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though they had
reason to expec it in consequence of the ltatute which the King
had obtained, occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was,
at present, the only sufferer, the precedent might be extended,
and their titles to poffeflions, which they confidercd as the rewards
of their valour, might be fubjeded to the review of courts of law,
whose forms of proceeding, and jurifdiCion, were in a martial
age little known and extremely odious. Terror and discontent
spread fafl upon this discovery of the King's intentions; the com-
mon danger called on the whole order to unite, and to make one
bold stand, before they were flripped successively of their acquifi-
tions, and reduced to a slate of poverty andl infignificancc. Tile
prevalence of these sentiments among the nobles encouraged a few
defpcrate men, the friends or followers of thoic who had been the
chief fuflerers under the King's admiinfiration, to fiorn a conrlli-
racy against his life. The firlt uncertain intelligence of this w;ls
brought him, while lie lay in his camp before Roxburgh cafllc.

G I-Ie

BOOK I. He durst not confide in nobles, to whom he had given so many

L-1-' causes of diiguft, but instantly dismissed them and their vassals,

and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was soon after murdered
there, in the most cruel manner. All our historians mention,
with astonishment, this circumstance of the King's disbanding
his army, at a time, when it was necessary for his preservation.
A King, they fay, surrounded with his Barons, is secure from
secret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But those very
Barons were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is evi-
dent from this review of his administration, that he had greater
reason to apprehend danger, than to expeEt defence, from their
hands. It was the misfortune of James, that his maxims and&
manners were too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy
had he reigned in a kingdom more civilized; his love of peace,
of justice, and of elegance, would have rendered his schemes
successful; and inifead of perilhing because he had attempted too
much, a grateful people would have applauded. and seconded his,
efforts to reform and to improve them,
Jamcs II. CRIC-ITON, the most able man of those, who had the direEtion,

of affairs during the minority of James II. had been the minister
of James I. and well acquainted with his resolution of humbling
the nobility. He did not relinquish the design, and he endea-
voured to inspire his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what,
James had attempted to effect slowly, and by legal means, his
son and Crichton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scots-
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to that age. William the
fixtl Earl of Douglas was the firll victim to their barbarous po-
licy. That young nobleman (as we have already observed) con-
temning the authority of an infant Prince, almofi openly rcnounced
his allegiance, anti aspired to independence. Crichton, too high-

pfiiritcd

3

spirited to bear such an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring BOOK I
to juitice so powerful an offender, decoyed him by many promises
to an interview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding
there, murdered both him and his brother. Crichton, however,
gained little by this ac of treachery, which rendered him univer-
sally odious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was no less
powerful, and no less formidable to the crown. By forming the
league which we already mentioned with the Earl of Crawfurd.
and other Barons, he had united againit his Sovereign almost one
half of his kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fame
snare, which had been fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the-
King's promises, who had now attained to the years of manhood,.
and having obtained a safe conduct under the great feal, he ven-
tured to meet him in Stirling castle. James urged him to difol've
that dangerous confederacy into which he had entered ; the Earl
obstinately refused; " If you will not," said the enraged monarch,,
drawing his dagger, " this flall ;" and flabbed him to the heart..
An adtion so unworthy of a King filled the nation with astonish-
ment, and with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms with the
utmost fury, and dragging the safe conduct, which the King had
granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they marched towards.
Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to besiege the castle.
An accommodation ensued, on what terms is not known. But the
King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power and resentment, pre-
vented it from being of long continuance.. Both took the field,
at the head of their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far ftipcrior to the
King's both in number, and in valour; and a single battle must,
in all probability, have decided whether the houtf of Stcewart or of
Douglas was henceforth to poffcis the throne of Scotland. But

wlhilc

BooK I. while his troops impatiently expected the signal to engage, the

''W' Earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton

of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
convinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or of
his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many; and the Earl, despised, or
forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged
to depend for his subsistence, on the friendship of the King of Eng-
land. The ruin of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which such an ex-
ample of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, secured the King,
for some time, from opposition; and the royal authority remained
uncontroulcd and almost absolute. James did not susser this favour-
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the content of par-
liament to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were ever ob-
tained by any former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of there, not only all the vast poiTeffions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future
alienations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King
was impowered to seize them at pleasure without any proccfs or
form of law, and oblige the poffcflors to refund whatever they
had received from them ". A dreadful inflrument of oppreflion
in the hands of a Prince.

ANOTHIER law prohibited the wardennfip of the marches to be

granted hercditarily; refirained, in fevcral inflanccs, the juriflidion
of that office; and extended the authority of the King's courts -'.

Ad, 41. P. 1455. 1 ibid. A1. 42.

Bv

BY a third, it was enaEted that no Regality, or exclusive right BOOK I.

of adminiftring juitice within a man's own lands, should be '
granted in time to come, without the content of parliament *, a
condition, which implied almost an express prohibition. Those
nobles who already pofleffed that great privilege, would naturally
be solicitous to prevent it from becoming common, by being
beflowed on many. Those, who had not themselves attained it,
would envy others the acquisition of such a flattering diftinQion;
and botl would concur in rejeting the claims of new pretenders.

B a fourth ac, all new grants of hereditary offices were pro-

hibited, and those obtained since the death of the last King were
revoked -.

EACH of these statutes undermined some of the great pillars, on

which the power of the aristocracy refted. During the remainder
of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had begun,
with the utmofl vigour; and had not a sudden death occasioned
by the splinter of a cannon which burfl near him at the siege of
Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius nor
courage to perfc it : and Scotland might, in all probability, have
been the firfl kingdom in Europe, which would have seen the sub-
version of the feudal fyfteln.

JAMIES III. discovercd no less eagerness than his father or grand- James 1In.

father to humble the nobility; but far inferior to either of them in
abilities and alddrels, lie adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was dilanhrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the
.feudal governments, the nobles were not only the King's ininlif.Lrs>

. Ibid. AI. 43. t A c. p4i.

an(1

BOOK I. and possessed of all the great offices of power or of trust; they were,

'~- ' likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce any but them

approached his person or were entitled to his regard. But James,
'who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
distance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and affection
upon a few mean persons, ofprofeffions so dishonourable, as ought
to have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with
there, in his cattle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amused himself with architeture, music, and other arts, which
were then little esteemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of these minions, with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than his neglect. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every man
thought himself injured, because all were contemned. Their dif-
content was much heightened by the King's recalling all rights to
crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and every other concef-
sion, which was detrimental to his prerogative, and which had been
extorted during his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the ufilal preparatives for
civil war, were the effets of their resentment. Alexander Duke of
Albany, and John Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young
men of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed against James,
who treated them with the fame coldness as he did the other great
men, entered deeply into all their cabals. The King dctcted their
designs, before they were ripe for execution, and seizing his two
brothers, committed the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh cafile. The
Earl of Mar having remonstrated with too much boldness against the
King's conduct, was murdered, if we may believe our historians
by his command. Albany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made
his cfcape out of the catrle, and fled into France. Concern for the

King's

dignation at his meafires, were perhaps the motives, which firPf BooK I.
induced him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to .v
favourites rendering him every day more odious to the nobles, the
profped of the advantages which might be derived from their ge-
neral difaffeaion, added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon inspired Albany
with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty
with Edward IV. of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the assistance which
was promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound him-
self, so soon as he was put in possession of the kingdom, to swear
fealty and to do homage to the Englifhl monarch, to renounce
the ancient alliance with France, to contract a new one with Eng-
land, and to surrender some of the ftrongeil cafiles, and most
valuable counties in Scotland '. That aid, which the Duke so
basely purchased at the price of his own honour, and the inde-
pendence of his country, was punctually granted him, and the
Duke of Glouceiter with a powerful army conduced him towards
Scotland. The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to
implore the assistance of those nobles whom he had so long treated
with contempt. Some of them were in close confederacy with
the Duke of Albany, and approved of all his pretensions. Others
were impatient for any event, which would reflore their order to
its ancient pre-eminence. They took the field, however, at the
head of a powerful army of their followers, but witl a fironger
disposition to rcdreis their own grievances, than to annoy the
enemy; and with a fixed resolution of puniifing tliolc minions,
whoic inlolcncc they could no longer tolerate. ' lhis rcfolutioll
tlicy executed, in the campl near Lawder, with a military ldiitalch

: Abcrcr. Mart. Atch. v. ii. .
VOL. r. II nnd

BOOK I. an 'rigour. 'Hia-ing previ6uifly 'concerted their 'plan, the Eairts

'ofAngus, Huritly, Lenox, followed by;'almhoft 'ill :the 'Barons 'of
'chief note in ttie arfmy, fdrcibly entered the aparitmerit of their
'Sovereign, 'seized all 'his favoturites, 'except one Raimf'y, wvhoin
ihey could not 'tear frdon 'the Kiiig, in wihofe arms 'he'took 'shelter,.
and without an'y sori of 'trial, hanged them infiantly over 'a
'bridge. Among the mdft 'remarkable'of those who had enrroffer d
the'King's affeetion, wiere Cochran a mason, Hoimmil a tailor,
Leonard a fiith, Rogers 'a riiuficihan, 'and To;fifan a 'fehcing-
manler. So despicable a retinue discovers 'the capriciousness of
James's character, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles,.
when they beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on sucd
unworthy objects.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under his

command, and dismissing it, shut himself up in the castle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours
were at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have re-
gained his brother's favour, by some important services. But
their friendship was not of long duration. James abandoned him-
self, once more, to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of
those who had suffered at Lawder, did not deter others from.
courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that
an attempt had been made to take away his life by poison, fled
from court, and retiring to his castle at Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the King himself.
At the fame time, he renewed his former confederacy with
ELdward ; the Earl of Angus openly negociatcd that infamous
intrcaty; other Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
{iddcn death of Edward had not prevented Albany's receiving any
aid froin England, the crown of Scotland would probably have

3 been

been the reward of this unworthy combination with the enemies BOOK I.
of his country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in Scot-
land, he found, upon the death of Edward, that he could not
reside there in safety, and flying first to England, and then to
France, he seems from that time to have taken no part in the
affairs of his native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Miniflers multiplied the insults which they offered
to the nobility. A flanding guard, a thing unknown under the
feudal governments, and inconfiiRent with the familiarity and
confidence with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles,
was raised for the King's defence, and the command of it given
to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who
had so narrowly escaped when his companions were put to death
at Lawder. And, as if this precaution had not been fufiscicnt, a
proclamation was issued forbidding any person to appear in arms
within the precincts of the court *; which, at a time, when no
man of rank left his own house without a numerous retinue of
armed followers, vwas, in effet, debarring the nobles from all
access to the King. James at the fame time became fonder of
retirement than ever; and funk in indolence, or fuperfition, or
attentive only to ainufements, devolved his whole authority upon
his favourites. So many injuries provoked the mole conliderable
nobles to take arms, and having perfwaded or obliged the Duke
of Rothitay, the King's eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to Ict him-
self at their head, tllcy openly declared their intention of dcpriving
James of a crown, of whichl lie had ldicovcrc(d limlclf to be so
unworthy. Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his rctire-
ment, took the field, and encountered them near I3annockburn;
but the valour of the borderers, of lwhom the army of the male-

* lFcrrcris, 398.

I-l~H a ~ contents

BOOK I. contents was chiefly composed, soon put his troops to flight, and

.-. ~he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immo-

derate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole conduct; but the character of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to him by our
historians. His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken
them; and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two
brothers, and their unnatural confederacies with England, were
sufficient to have disturbed a more vigorous adminiitration, and
to have rendered a Prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank expressed against

the conduCt of the conspirators, together with the terror of the
sentence of excommunication which the Pope pronounced againit
them, obliged them to use their viaory with great moderation and
humanity. And being conscious how detestable the crime of
imbruing their hands in the blood of their Sovereign appeared,
they endeavoured to regain the good opinion of their country,
and to attone for their treatment of the father, by their loyalty
:e ,,e . and duty towards the son. They placed him instantly on the

throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in acknowledging.
his authori-ty.

JA.MES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an

high degree, all the palions which animate a young and noble
mind. He loved magnificence, lie delighted in war, and was
cager to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient and heredi-
tary enmity between the King and nobles seems almofl to have
entirely ccaticd. Hle envied not their f'ilcndor, becauie it con-
tributed to the ornament of his court; nor did he dread their
1o)wcr, whicl lie confidcred as thle tccurity of his kingdom, not

7 as

as an object of terror to himself. This confidence, on his part, BOOK I
met with the proper return of duty and affection, on theirs; and
in his war with England, he experienced how much a King,
beloved by his nobles, is able to perform. Though the ardour of
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than the profpet of
any national advantage, were the motives of that expedition;
such was the zeal of his fubjets for the King's glory, that he was
followed by as gallant an army, as ever any of his ancestors had
led upon Englifi ground. But though James himself formed no
feheme dangerous or detrimental to the aristocracy, his reign was
ditfinguifhed by an event, extremely fatal to it; and one accidental
blow humbled it more than all the premeditated attacks of pre-
ceding Kings. In the rash and unfortunate battle of Flowden, a
brave nobility chose rather to die, than to desert their Sovereign.
Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen,
and an incredible number of Barons fell with the King -. The
whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly felt this disaster; and
if a Prince of full age had then ascended the throne, their con-
flernation and feebleness would have afforded him advantages,
which no former monarch ever poffiefed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a James V,

year old; and though the office of regent was conferred on the
Duke of Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native of
France, and accuflomcd to a government where the power of the
King was already great; though he made many bold attempts to
extcnd the royal authority; though lie put to death Lord Home,
and banlifhcd the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatelt
iiallucncc in the kingdom, the arifiocracy loll no ground untder
his adminillration. A flrangcr to the manners, the laws, and the

* Abcr. ii, 5sfo.

Boo-K I. language of the people whom he was called to rule, lie a6ded, on
--s---' rome occasions, rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than

the governor of Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own pri-
vileges, and contended for the intercft of their country, with a
boldness, which convinced him of their independence, and of the
impotence of his own authority. After several unsuccessful
struggles, he voluntarily retired to France, and the King, being
then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed that he should
aflume the government, and that eight persons should be appointed
to attend him by turns, and to advise and assist him in the admi-
niftration of public affairs. The Earl of Angus, who was one of
that number, did not long remain satisfied with such divided power.
He gained some of his colleagues, removed others, and intimi-
dated the reft. When the term of his attendance expired, he still
retained authority, to which all were obliged to submit, because
none of them was in a condition to dispute it. The affetion of
the young King was the only thing wanting, to fix and perpetuate
his power. But an adive and high-fpirited Prince submitted,
with great impatience, to the restraint, in which he was kept.
It ill-fuited his years, or disposition, to be confined as a prisoner,
within his own palace; to be treated with no respect; and to be
deprived of all power. He could not, on tome occasions, conceal
lis indignation and refentmient. Angus forcfaw that he had
much to dread from tliee, and as lie could not gain the King's
heart, he resolvcd to make sure of his person. James was conti-
nually furrounced by the Earl's spics and confidents; many eyes
watched all his motions, and obfcrved every flep lie took. But
the King's eagcrnefs to obtain liberty cluded all their vigilance.
He clicapcd fiomn Falkland, and fled to the canle of Stirling, the
rcfidcnce of the Q.cen his mother, and the only place of flrength

in

:i- th-e kingdom which was not in the hand of 'the Douglases. BooK 1.
The nobles, of whom some were influenced by'their hatred 'to -
Angus, and others by their respeCt for the King, crowded to
Stirling, and 'his court was soon filled with persons of the greatcft
diftinaion. The Earl, though aflonifhed at this unexpeced re-
volution, resolved, at first, to make one bold pufi for recovering
'his authority, by marching to Stirling at the head of his followers;
but he wanted either courage, or strength to execute this refolu-
-tion. In a parliament held soon after, he and his adherents were
attainted, and after escaping from many dangers, and enduring
much misery, he was at length obliged to fly into England for
refuge.

JAMiES had now not only the name, but, though extremely

young, the full authority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince'
of that age in gracefulness of person, or in vigour of mind. His
understanding was good, and his heart warm; the former capable
of great improvement, and the latter susceptible of the belt impref-
sions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who arc called
to the throne in their infancy, his education had been neglected.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to inifrut
him. It was the interest of those lwho governed the kin'gdor, to
prevent him fiom knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus,
in order to divert him from business, gave him an early taste fogr
ifuch ilcafures, as afterwards occupied and cngirofcd hlimn more
than became a King. Accordingly, we discover in James all the
features of a great, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pafions, implacable refentmeint, an immlodcrate desire of
power, and the utnoft- rage at difappoilltmcnt. On tlhe other,
lovc to his people, zeal for the puniflmcnt of private oppreflbrs,

confidence

BOOK I. confidence in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and

' ' caffability of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of

the nobles, led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their
attempts to humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose
was more profound, more systematic, and pursued with greater
conflancy and fleddinefs, than that of any of his ancestors. And
the influence of the events in his reign upon those of the fubfe-
quent period, render it necessary to explain his condut, at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of his acions.
He had penetration enough to discover those defects in the
fchemles, adopted by former Kings, which occasioned their mifcar-
riage. The example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce spirit of the
feudal nobles was not to be subdued by these alone. The effets
of the violent measures of James II. convinced him, that the
oppreflion of one great family, is apt either to excite the suspicion
and resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its spoils
some new family, which would soon adopt the fame sentiments,
and become equally formidable to the crown. He saw, fiom
the fatal end of James III. that neglect was still more intole-
rable to the nobles than oppreflion, and that the minifiry of new
men and favouritcs was both dishonourable, and dangerous to a
Prince. At the fame time he felt that the authority of the crown
was not fLllicient to counterbalance the power of the ariflocracy,
and that without fonme new accefclon of strength, he could expet
no )bctter ficcefs in the firuggle than his ancefcors. In this extre-
mity, le applied himficlf to the clergy, hoping that they would
both rclillh his plan, and concur with all their influence, in ena-

bling

bling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal government, Bool IL
the church being reckoned a third ellate, had its representatives '
in parliament; the number of these was considerable, and they
possessed great influence in that assembly. The superstition of former
kings, and the zeal of an ignorant age, had bestowed upon eccle-
fiaftics, a great proportion of the national wealth, and the autho-
rity they acquired by the reverence of the people, was superior
even to that which they derived from their riches. This powerful
body however, depended entirely on the crown. The Popes,
notwithstanding their attention to extend their usurpations, had
neglected Scotland as a distant and poor kingdom, and permitted
its kings to exercise powers, which they disputed with more con-
fiderable princes. The Scottish monarchs had the sole right of
nomination to vacant bifhopricks and abbeys *; and James natu-
rally concluded, that men who expeced preferment from his
favour, would be willing to merit it, by promoting his designs.
Happily for him, the nobles had not yet recovered the blow which
fell on their order at Flowden, and if we may judge either from
their condudc, or from the character given of them by Sir Ralph
Sadler the English envoy in Scotland, they were men of little
genius, of no experience in business, and incapable of ating
either with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on
the other hand, were diflinguifled by their great abilities, and no
less by their ambition. Various causes of disgust had arisen
between them and the nobles, who despised their characer, and
envied their power, or their wealth. By ating in concert witl
the King, they not only gratified him, but avenged thcnfelves,
and hoped to aggrandize their own order, by deprefling thofc,
who were their iole rivals. Secure of lb powerful a concurrence,

* Epist. Reg. Scot. i. 197, &c. Ad. 125. P. 1540.
VOL. I. I James

BOOK I. James ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the first heat

of resentment, he had driven the Earl of Angus out of the king-
dom ; and sensible that a person so far superior to the other nobles
in abilities, might create many obstacles, which would retard, or
render ineffeaual all his schemes, he solemnly swore, that he
would never permit him to return into Scotland, and notwith-
flanding the repeated solicitations of the King of England, he
adhered to his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then pro-
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and
other castles, and to fill his magazines with arms and ammunition.
Having taken these precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve. Those
offices, which they were apt, from long pofeffion, to confider as
appropriated to their order, were now bellowed on ecclesiastics,
who alone possessed the King's ear, and together with a few gentle-
men of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated his schemes,
were entrusted with the management of all public affairs. These
ministers were chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who
soon became the most eminent among them, was a man of superior
genius. They served the King with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success. James
no longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no
opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were
aggravated into real crimes, and punifled with severity. Every
accusation againfl persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every
appearance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every trial
proved fatal to those vwho were accufedl: the baniifhing I-Iepburn
Earl of Bothwell, for rcafons extrmecly frivolous, the beheading
the Mailer of Sorbes without fufficicnt evidence of his guilt, and
tlle condeinmning Lady Glamis, filler of the Earl of Angus, to be
burnt fir the crimei of witchcraf, of whic CVC1n that credulous

age

age believed her innocent, are monuments both of the King's Blooic I.
hatred of the nobility, of the severity of his government, and of -'"'
the firetches he made towards absolute power. By these aCts of
authority, he tried the spirit of the nobles, and how much they
were willing to bear. Their patience increased his contempt for
them, and added to the ardour and boldness with which he pursued
his plan. Meanwhile they observed the tendency of his schemes
with concern, and with resentment; but the Iing's sagacity, the
vigilance of his ministers, and the want of a proper leader, made
it dangerous to concert any measures for their defence, and impof-
fible to ac with becoming vigour. James and his counsellors, by
a false ftep which they took, presented to them, at length, an
advantage which they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIII.

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the
regular clergy. His fyflem of Reformation satisfied none of his
fubjeds. Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far, others
murmured because he proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, and
the converts to the Protef-ant opinions, he was equally forlmidable
to both. Henry was afraid that this general dif atisialCion of his
people might encourage his enemies on the continent to invade lis
kingdom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor cour-tedl tlt
fricndfliip of the King of Scots, and endeavouired to cngi;gc liinm in
an alliance againfl England. IHe rcblvc(d tllcrcitlrc to dilalppoiiit
the cfl'cCs of their negociations by cntering into a cloflcr iunion wil
Ilis nephew, and for that purpolte sic Aml)allil(lol, i ilio Scotland,
to propofc a per-sonal interview with him at York. It wa'; p]iliiily
aelics's interest to accept this invitation ; the afill;lncc ol io

l' )v'cr-
Ifu an ally', 1the high lhoLIours which wvcrc proinii'd lliill, a'i1l tli'

J 2 1, . ,- l

BoOK I. liberal subsidies he might have obtained, would have added no little

dignity to his domeAfic government, and must have greatly facili-
tated' the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand, a
war with England, which he had reafnn to apprehend, if he rejected
Henry's offers of frienldfhip, was inconsistent with all his views.
This would bring him to depend on his Barons; an arm.y could
not be raised without their assistance: to call nobles incensed against
their Prince into the field, was. to unite his enemies, to make them
sensible of their own strength, and to. afford them an opportunity
of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ignorant that all
these consequences might follow a breach with England, liflened
at irll to Henry's proposal, and contented to the interview at York.
But the clergy dreaded an union, which must have been established
on the ruins of the church. I-Ienry had taken great pains to
infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religion,
and had frequently solicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the
usurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less dishonourable to
Princes, than grievous to their fulbjeCts. The clergy had hitherto,
with great address, diverted the King from regarding these folici-
tations. But in an amicable conference, Henry expected, and
they feared that James would yield to his entreaties, or be con-
vinced by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of the
church were an alluring object to a Prince, who wanted money,
:ind who loved it; that the pride and ambition ofecclefiaflics raised
the indignation of the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence
to the people; that the Protestant opinions were spreading fall
throughout the nation; and that an universal defecQion from the
cnlablifled church, would be the consequence of giving the finallcft
decrce of encouragement to there principles. For thcfc reasons,
they cmployed all their credit with the King, and had rccourfc to
every artilice and insinuation, in order to divert him fronk a

JOurnlCy,

journey, which must have been so fatal to their interest. They BOOK I.
endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by magnifying the danger
to which he would expose his person, by venturing so far into
England, without any security but the word of a Prince, who,
having violated every thing venerable and sacred in religion, was
no longer to be trusted; and by way of compensation for the fums
which he might have received from Henry, they offered an annual
donative of So,ooo crowns; they promised to contribute liberally
towards carrying on a war with England, and flattered him with
the profpea of immense riches, arising from the forfeiture of
persons, who were to be tried and condemned as heretics. Influ-
enced by these considerations, James broke his agreement with
Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had already come to
York; and that haughty and impatient Monarch resented the
affront, by declaring war against Scotland. His army was soon.
ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged to have recourse
to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions. At his command,
they assembled their followers; but with the fame dispositions,
which had animated their ancestors in the reign of James III. and
with a full resolution of imitating their example, by punishing
those to whom they imputed the grievances, of which they had
reason to complain; and if the King's Ministers had not been men
of abilities 'superior to those of James III. and of considerable
interest cven with their enemies, who could not agree among
themselves what viaims to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have
been as remarkable as that of Lawder, for the daring encroach-
ments of the nobility-on the prerogative of the Prince. But though
his ministers were saved by this accident, the nobles had soon
another opportunity of discovering to the King, their diflattisfac-
tion with his government, and their contempt of his authority.

Scarcity.

BOOK I. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of the season, having obliged
- the English army which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James

imagined that he could attack them, with great advantage, in their
retreat; but the principal Barons, with an obstinacy and disdain,
which greatly aggravated their disobedience, refused to advance a flep
beyond the limits of their own country. Provoked by this insult
to himself, and suspicious of a new conspiracy against his ministers,
the King inflantly diibanded an army, which paid so little regard
to his orders, and returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Pririce could not brook such a

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rafl, and his
despair upon a disappointment was excessive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecefiary.war with England, which, inilead of
yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had begun
with such circumstances, as encouraged the insolence of his sub-
jeas, and exposed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how
vain and ineffedual all his projeCts to humble the nobles had been,
and that, though in times of peace a Prince may endeavour to
depress them, they will rife, during war, to their former import-
ance and dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled his
bosom by turns. The violence of thcfe paflions altered his tcm-
per, and perhaps, impaired his reason. Ile became pensive, fidl-
lcn, and retired. He seemed, through the day, to be swallowed
up in proiound meditation, and through tile night, he was
(lilulrblcd with those visionary terrors, which make impression upon
a welak iinlc-landling only, or a dilordlcred fancy. In order to
re\iv ie ilic King'ls i)ilits, ;in inroad on tile weflcrn borders was
coccrltcd by lis minillcrs, who prevailed upon the Barons in the
ici;ll)b',)lrilI' plrovinces; to raifc as many troops as were thoullht

ncccfli-ry,

necessary, and to enter the enemy's country. But nothing could BooK I.
remove the King's aversion to his nobility, or diminish his jealousy
of their power. He would not even entrust them with the com-
mand of the forces which they had assembled; that was reserved
for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take-
possession of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
English, who happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
General produced an effect, to which there is no parallel in history.
They overcame the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and ten
thousand men surrendered to a number so far inferior, without
firiking a single blow.. No man was desirous of visOory, which
would have been acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save tbemfelves by flight; the Englifli had the
choice of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almost every
person of distinction, who was engaged in the expedition, remained
in their hands. This aftoniihing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difaffeaion of the nobility, and a new disco-
very of his own weakness and want of authority. Incapable of
bearing there repeated insults, he found himself unable to revenge
them. The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to the fu-
rious transports of rage, which the firhi account of the rout of his
army occasioned. All the violent pailions, which are the enemies
of life, preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a youth-
ful and vigorous constitution. Some authors of that age impute
his untimely death to poison; but the diicafcs of the mind, when
they rile to an height, arc often mortal; and the known cf'cCls
of dilappointmcnt, anger, and rcfcntmcnt upon a ilnglinc and imi-
pctuits tempe, r, fuflicicntly account for his 18unhappy ftte. " Ilis

8. dcah.l

BOOK I. death (fays Drummond) proveth his mind to have been raised to

an high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but could
not digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfortune, one of
two things muff have happened: either the violence of his tem-
per would have engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and powerful protector, and
have derived the fame assistance from him, which the malecontents,
in the succeeding reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in that
cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been the certain confe-
quence. Or, perhaps, necessity might have obliged him to accept
of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his nobility. In that event,
the church would have fallen a sacrifice to their union, a Refor-
mation, upon Henry's plan,' would have been established by law,
a great part of the temporalities of the church would have been
seized, and the friendlhip of the King and Barons would have
been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the

exorbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended with
success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were not
conduced with prudence. Every circumRfance seems to have com-
bined against the Crown. Accidental events concurred with poli-
tical causes, in rendering the best concerted measures abortive.
The assassination of one King, the ifdden death of another, and
the fatal despair of a third, contributed no less than its own natural
firength, to preserve the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our Kings poffcflcd

in their parliaments, is a circumflance fecmingly inexplicable, and
which merits particular attention. As these affcmblics were com-

poscd

posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, must BOOK I.
have dictated all their decisions; but, instead of this, every King Tl;e extraor
found them obsequious to his will, and obtained such laws, as he dinary infi'-
esteemed neceflary for extending his authority. All things were Scottiflllings

inParliament.

conducted there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of
our historians, do we find an instance of any opposition formed
against the court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in
carrying through the measures which were agreeable to the King.
In order to account for this singular fat, it is neceifary to enquire
into the origin and constitution of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its opera- The reasons

tions, produced the fame effects in small as in great societies; and
the territory of a Baron was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. He possessed the right ofjurifdidion, but those, who de-
pended on him, being freemen, and not slaves, could be tried by
their Peers only; and, therefore, his vassals were bound to attend
his courts, and to assist both in palling and executing his sentences.
When assembled on there occasions, they established, by mutual
content, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of their finall
society; and often granted, voluntarily, fuich fipplies to their S.&'-
rior, as his neccffities required. Change now a single aine: in
place of Baron, fubflitute King, and we behold a Parliainclil in
its sir:s rudiments, and observe the firni exertions of those powers,
which its members now p)ofcifs as Judges, as Lcgiflators, and( as
dilfpenfcrs of the public revcnucs. Suitable to this idea, are libe
appcllations of the /'li/'s C'ort :, and of (le /i,:'.r GCczt (.,iiic./,
by whlic, Parliaments were anciently adiigii nliltcdl; and filitlhlc
to this, lic , were the conflitucnt mmcnlbers oi \liiclI ii \-a:

DI) Cangc, Voc Curia.

Voi,. 1. T. coK)znp
' (l.

BooK I. composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of the

'Ld IKing in chief were bound, by the condition of their tenure, to

attend and to assist in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a privi-
lege, but a service. It was exacted likewise of Bishops, Abbots,
and the greater ecclesiastics, who holding vast possessions of the
(:rown, were deemed subject to the fame burden. Parliaments did
not continue long in this state. Cities gradually acquired wealth,
a conlfiderable share of the public taxes were levied on them, the
inhabitants grew into estimation, and being enfranchised by the
o(vereign, a place in Parliament was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would have been absurd
to confer such a privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole
community, every burrough was permitted to chufe one or two of
its citizens to appear in the name of the corporation; and the idea
of representation was first introduced in this manner. An innova-
tion, still more important, naturally followed. The vassals of
the Crown were originally few in number, and extremely power-
ful; but as it is impoflible to render property fixed and permanent,
many of their possessions came gradually, and by various methods
of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into different hands.
Hence arose the diftindion between the Greater and the LeJer
Barons. The former were those who retained their original fiefs
undivided, the latter were the new and less potent vaflals of the
Crown. Both were bound, however, to perform all feudal ser-
vices, and of consequence, to give attendance in Parliament. To
lhc lcflcr Barons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this was
an intolerable grievancc. Barons sometimes denied their tenure,
burroughs renounced their right of cleding, charters were obtained,
containing an exemption fiom attendance; and the anxiety, with
\which our ancctlors cndeavoured to get frce fiom the obligation
of litting in Parliament is tilrpailctd by that only, with which their

'7 poflcrity

posterity solicit to be admitted there. In order to accommodate BoolK I.
both parties, and, at once, to secure to the King a sufficient num-
ber of members in his great council, and to save his vassals fromi
an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient was found out. The
obligation to personal attendance was continued upon the Greater
Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were exempted, on condi-
tion of their electing, in each county, .a certain number of .17Repc-
fentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Parliament becaiml
compleat in all its members, and was composed of Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, of Knights of the Shires, and of Burgesses. A-;
many causes contributed to bring government earlier to perfeflion
in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour of the feudal inftitu-
tions abated sooner; and its defects were supplied with greater
facility in the one kingdom than in the other; England led the
way in all these changes, and Burgesses, and Knights of the shire
appeared in the Parliaments of that nation, before they were
heard of in ours. Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottish
Parliaments by Robert Bruce *; and in the preamble to the laws A. D. 1326.
of Robert III. they are ranked among the constituent members of
that assembly. The lefler Barons were indebted to James I. for a 14:7.
flatute exempting them from personal attendance, and permitting
them to elect representatives; the exemption was eagerlr laid hold
on, but the privilege was so little valued, that, except one or two
inflances, it lay neglected during ibo years; and James VI. firn-
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to Parliament -'.

A SCOTTISHI Parliament, then, confiltcd anciently of GCrcat
Barons, of Ecclcfiaftics, and a few rcprcfclntativcs of bllrot;ll~.

' , Abcrcromby, 1. 635.
'W EIlys on Brit. Antiq. Es: II, Dalryinp. l. oifl Fud. Ir op. ol. S.

K 2 Nor

BOOK I. Nor were these divided, as in England, into two houses, but com-
-"' ' posed one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided .

And, in rude ages, when the science of government was extremely
imperfect, among a martial people, unacqu-ainted with the arts of
peace, firangers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and
despising them, Parliaments were not held in the fame eflimation
as at present; nor did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared, witl such evident marks of inferiority. Parlia-
ments were often hatlily assembled, and it was, probably, in the
King's power, by the manner in which he issued his writs for
that purpose, to exclude those who were averse from his measures.
At a time when deeds of violence were common, and the restraints
of law and decency were little regarded, no man could venture
with safety to oppose the King in his own court. The great
Barons, or Lords of Parliament, were extremely few; even so
late as the beginning of the reign of James VI. t they amounted
only to fifty-three. The Ecclesiastics equalled them in number,
and being devoted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which
have been already explained, rendered all hopes of victory in any

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have met in separate houfcs;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the English in all their cufloms, had pro-
bably an intention of introducing some considerable diftinaion between the Greater
and Lefler Barons in Scotland; at least he determined that their consultations should
not be carried on under the direction of the fame President; for by his law, A. J.
1327. it is provided, " that out of the Commissioners of all the (hires shall be cho-
fen a wife and expert man, called the Common Speaker of the Parliament, who
shall propofc all and sundry needs and causes pertaining to the Commons in the Par-
liament or general council." No such speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen;
and by a fubfequcint law the Chancellor was declared perpetual President of
Pal liament.

Il And. Coll. v, i. pref. 40.

flrugglc

firuggle desperate. -Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, BooK I.
as might be imagined, to prevent acts of Parliament favourable to
the royal prerogative; conscious of their own strength, and of the
King's inability to carry these aas into execution. without their
concurrence, they trusted either to elude or to contemn them; and
the statute revoking the King's property, and annexing alienated
jurifdi&ions to the crown, repeated in every reign, and violated
and deplifed as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of laws,
when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are sufficient,
perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired
in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of these, a
single circumfiance, peculiar to the constitution of the Scottish
Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto avoided,
will abundantly explain this faa, seemingly so repugnant to all
our reasonings concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles..

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the conflitution of

our Parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of Lords of Articlcs. It was their business to prepare, and to digest
all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament; every
motion for a new law was first made there, and approved or re-
jeded by them at plcafii-e; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejected could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extraor-
dinary powers vcfted in it, to the military genius of the ancient.
nobles; too impaticnt to fubmlit to the drudgery of civil business,
too impetuous to oblcrve the forms, or to enter into the details
necetliary in conducl ing it, they were glad to lay that burden upon
a finall number, while they themselves had no other labour than
limply to give, or to refuti thcir fianclion to the bills, which were

prclfntcd

B]oOK I. presented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only directed

v'~ the whole proceedings of Parliament, but poffefled a negative before

debate. That committee was chosen and constituted in such a man-
ner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole right of
nominating the Lords of Articles %. They came afterwards to be
elected by the Parliament, and consisted of an equal number out
of each estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and eight
Spiritual Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and of the eight
great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgefles as would unite in opposition to his
measures. Capable either of influencing their eletion, or of gain-
ing them when eleced, the King commonly found the Lords of

* IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be held

March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of Articles were chosen and met on the 7th,
five days before the assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly eleeed
so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the Prince
alone pofleffed the right of electing them. There are two different accounts of the
manner of their election at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the Arch-
bishop of Glasgow, " We, accompanied with our nobility for the time, past to
-" the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th day of
4 this instant, and eleaed the Lords Articulars." If we explain there words, accord-
ing to ftrici Grammar, we muff conclude that the Queen herself eleled them.
It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then pre-
sent with her, viz. her privy counfillors, and others, eleated the Lords of Articles.
Keith's Hist. of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prcfly affirms that the Queen herfclf clci-ed them. Keith's Append. zG6. 7lhcther
we embrace the one or the other of there opinions, is of no confcquence. If the
privy counfcllors and nobles attending the court had a right to clet the Lords of
Articles, it was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had had the
sole nomination of them.

Articles

Articles no less obsequious to his will, than his own privy council, BOOK I.
and by means of his authority with them, he could put a nega- v
tive upon his Parliament before debate, as well as after it; and
what may seem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince in
Europe actually possessed, in one instance, a prerogative which the
molt absolute could never attain *.

To this account of the internal constitution of Scotland, it will State of E-

rope at the be-
not be improper to add a view of the political Rate of Europe at ginningof the

that i6th century-.

' HAVING. deduced the history of the committee of Lords of Artieles, as low as

the subjea of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some-
of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this singular inltitution, and the
political use which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments became more nu-
merous, and more considerable by the admiflion of the representatives of the Lefler
Barons, the preserving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise,.
an objec of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence, that the Lords
of Articles could not find leisure to confider the great multitude of affairs laid be-
fore them, obtained an aLt, appointing four persons to be named out of each eftaie,
who (hould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parliament t, to receive
all supplications, &c. and rcjeaing what they thought frivolous, should engross in
a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No pro-
vision is made in the At for the choice of this fele& body, and the King would,
ofcourfe, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was beginning
to introduce these innovations, which gave To much offence to the nation, he dreaded.
the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was
made use of to fccure the Lords of Articles for the- Crown. The Temporal.
Peers were appointed to chufe eight Bishops, and the Bilhops eight Peers, there
fixtccn met together, and elclted eight Knights of the fliirc, and eight Bur-
geffes, and to these the crown ofliccrs were added as usual. If we can only sup-
pose eight persons of so numerous a body, as the peers of Scotland were become
by that time, attached to the court, thef, it is obvious, would be the men whom
the Bifflops would chulf, and of consequence, the whole Lords of Articles were

-1 AMc. 222. P. 1594.

thu

BooK I. that period, where the following history commences. A thorough

knowledge of that general system, of which every kingdom in
Europe forms a part, is not less requisite towards understanding
the history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar
government and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend
domestic occurrences and revolutions, but without the former,
foreign tranfadtions must be altogether myllerious and unintel-
ligible. By attending to this, many dark passages in our hiflory
may be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of historians
have seen only the effec, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in France and its

declension in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remark-
able alteration in the political state of Europe. Kingdoms which
were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles,
acquired firmness and strength, by being united into a regular
monarchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and im-
portance. They meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged in
wars at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and great taxes
imposed for their subsistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in contfant pay; that fcrvice grew to be honoural)le; and ca-
valry, in which the strength of European armies had hitherto con-

the tools and creatures of the King. This practicc, so inconsistent with liberty, was
abolished during the civil war; and the fiatutc of Jdmes VI. was repealed. After
the Refloration, Parliamcnts became more servile than ever. What was only a tem-
porary device, in the reign of Charles I. was then converted into a tfanding law.

l" or my part, fays the author from w hom I have borrowed many of these parti-

C' culars, I should have thought it lets criminal in oui Refloration Parliament, to have

' openly bellowed upon the Kingl a negative before debate, than, in such an undcr-
.' hand artificial manner, to betray their conflitucnts, and the nation.',' Ifltys on
13rit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, howcver, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil to
Aug. 156o, printed in the Appendix, that this Parliament had fomle alppc)Calce of
aiicicnt precedent to juflify their unworthy conduct.

finled,

fllfed, though proper enough for the short and voluntary excur- Boo K I.
lions of barons who served at their own expence, were found to
be unfit either for making, or defending any important conqueil.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany firfi appeared to make a trial of their new firength.
The division of that country into so many fmiall fiates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms, invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accuitomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrcls
by innocent and bloodless victories, were astonished at the fight of
real war; and as they could not refit the torrent, they suffered it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of strength; and neceflity and felf-prefervation led
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern politics, by
teaching them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this happy device,
the liberty of Italy was long preserved. The scales were poised by
very skilful hands; the smallest variations were attended to, and
no Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be
dangerous.

A SYSTEMr of conduL, purifued with so much fucccfs in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it tb nc-
ccflary, that it soon became a mattcr of chief attention to all 'ile
politicians. Every lcp) any Prince took was ol)icrv(d l)y all his
neighbours. Ambafiidors, a kind of honourable fsics, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, refidcld alimoft cunlantly at every
diflferent court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions.

VOL. I. 1 lD r;Zr

BooK I. Dangers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented withl

'-'""'"' more ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any power

which rose above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were
no longer the only causes of hostility, it became common to take
arms out of policy; and war, both. inits commencement, and in
its operations, was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the
passions of men. Almost every war in Europe became general,
and the most inconsiderable flates acquired importance,. because
they could add weight to either scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year ii55,.

and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial crown. in the year
1519, divided between them the strength and affecions of all
Europe. Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal
jealousy, or to the caprice of private pafinon, but was founded so.
much in nature and true policy, that it subsisted between their
posterity for several ages; and, notwithitanding their present acci-
dental and unnatural union, must again revive. Charles succeeded
to all the dominions of the house of Austria. No family had ever
gained so much by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions
of this kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a short time, from obscure
Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Archdukes of Austria and Kings of
Lohlcmia, and were in poefffioim of the imperial dignity by a fort
of hereditary right. Befidcs theie territories in Germany, Charles
was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which
belonged to tlhe IIoulf of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces
cnlglrolcd, at lthat tinc, the riches and commerce of one half of
Iurope; ;and lie drc\v from them, on many occasions, those im-
incsic dilms, lwhich no people without trade and liberty arc able
to crontilllntc. Sp;iin furniflhcd him a gallant and hardy infantry,.
tol \vol(c sdl cipilile e was indebted for all his conqucfis. And at

the

the fame time, by the discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth BooK I.
was opened to him, which all the extravagance of ambition could -
not exhaust. These advantages rendered Charles the first Prince
in Europe; but he wished to be more, and openly aspired to uni-
versal monarchy. His genius was of that kind which ripens
slowly, and lies long concealed; but it grew up, without obferva-
tion, to an unexpected height and vigour. He poffefled, in an
eminent degree, the characteristic virtues of all the different races
of Princes to whom he was allied. In forming his fchlemes, lie
discovered all the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-
father; he pursued them with that obstinate and inflexible perle-
verance which has ever been peculiar to the Austrian blood; and
in executing them, he could employ the magnanimity and bold-
ness of his Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal to his
power, and neither of them would have been inferior to his designs,
had not Providence, in pity to mankind, and in order to preserve
them from the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised up
Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were
less extensive, but more united than the Emperor's. His fubjecSs
were numerous, active and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers
of their King. To Charles power was the only obje- of dcfire,
and he pursued it with an unwearied and joyless indullry. Francis
could mingle plcafurc and elegance with his ambition, and though
he neglccted some advantagcs, which a more phlegmatic or more
frugal Prince would lhave improved, an active and intrepid courage
fipplicd all his defecqs, and checked or dcficatcd many of the
Empleror's dcfigns.

Ti I. ref of Europe ol)ervcd all the motions of thelle inighlty

)ivals, w'itlh a jcalous attention. 01) tlI o:cC lide,
tlle Italians tilv

1, ? tli'

BOOK I. the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to avert

~~' iit, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often employed

with success. They endeavoured to divide the power of the two
contcnding Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union of feve-
ral small flates, to counterpoise him, whose power became too great.
But, what they concerted with much wisdom, they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the encroachments of military power..

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

witl less delicacy, but with a stronger hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power;, and the advantageous
situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquility, his immenfc
wealth, and absolute authority, rendered him the natural guardian
of the liberty of Europe. Each. of the rivals courted: him with
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the passions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity and
rcfentment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and his.
neighbours easily found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His reign was a per-
petual icrics of blunders in politics, and while he icteemed hinmfelf
lic nwilll plrince in Europe, he was a conflant dupe to those, who.
found it nicctellhry, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this fitulation of E1urop1C, Scotland, which had hitherto

'wnltc(d hier flrcingtl in the quarrels between France and EIngland,
tinccrl-cd from her oblclurity, took her flation in the fyfltc, and.

began

began to have some influence upon the fate of c'iflant nations. BOOK I.
Her assistance w-as, frequently, of consequence to the contending
parties, and the balance was often so nicely adjuR.fd, that it was
in her power to make it lean to either fide. The part assigned her,
at this junture, was to divert Henry from carrying his arms into
the continent. That Prince, having routed the French at Guinegat,
and inveRted Terouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition which ended with
his life. For the fame reason, Francis encouraged and afifled the
Duke of Albany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which
were in the interest of England, and would willingly have per-
fwvaded the Scots to revenge the death of their King, and to enter
into a new war with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was the intcreft of
both Kings, that the Scots should continue inactive; and a long
tranquillity was the effect of their union. Charles endeavoured
to break this, and to embarrass Henry by another inroad of the
Scots. For this end, he made great advances to James V. flatter-
ing the vanity of the young Monarch, by elec(ing him a Knight
of the Golden Fleece, and by offering him a match in the imperial
family; wlile, in return for tliefe empty honours, he demanded
of him to renounce his alliance with France, and to declare war
against EnglandI But James, who had much to lose, and who
could gain little by embracing the Emperor's propoifLls, rejcctd
them with decency, and kecping firm to his ancient. allies, left
Henry at full liberty to act upon the continent with his whole
fircngth..

H-lENI R hiimflclf began'hlis reign, by imitating the exam plc of
his anccllors wlith regard to Scotland. I-e leld its po;cr illn lch

Ce' tremcln

Boox I. extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain its friendsh'ip-;

L '' bbut, on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving

the antiquated pretensions of the crown of England to the fove-
reignty over Scotland. But his own experience, and the example
of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was
impossible to defend an open and extensive frontier, against the
incursions of an active and martial people. During any war on
the continent this obliged him to divide the strength of his king-
dom. It was necessary to maintain a kind of army of observation
in the north of England; and after all precautions, the Scottifhl
borderers, who were superior to all mankind in the pracice of
irregular war, often made successful inroads, and spread terror
and desolation over many counties. I-Ie fell, at last, upon the
true secret of policy, with refpet to Scotland, which his predecef-
fors had too little penetration to discover, or too much pride to
employ. The situation of the country, and the bravery of the
people, made the conquest of Scotland impossible; but the national
poverty, and the violence of faclion, rendered it an easy matter
to divide, and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former
dcfign, and resolvcd to employ the utmofc address in executing the
latter. It had not yet become honourable for one Prince to receive
pay fi-om another under the more decent name of a subsidy. But,
in all ages, the fime arguments have been good in courts, and of
weight with minitcers, factious leaders, and favourites. What
were the argumcnts, by vywhich Henry brought over so many to
his intercl durin the minority of James V. we klnow by the ori-
ginal warrants fill extant , for rcmitting considerable slums into
Scotlandl. lBy a proper difiribution of theclc, mnany pcrifons of note
,Cere .anllc t)o 111 party, and a litCion whlich held fecrct corre--

'. Burn. Ilift. cf. v. i. p. 7.

2. )onlldcnce

fpondence with England, and received all its directions from thence, BOOK I.
appears henceforward in all our domeRfic contests. In the sequel -"
of the history, we shall find Henry labouring to extend his influ-
ence in Scotland. His successors adopted the fame plan, and
improved upon it. The affairs of the two kingdoms became inter-
woven, and their interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almost equally between them, and the authority,
which she inherited in the one, was not greater than. that, which
-she acquired in the other,.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

OF

SCOTLAND,
S C O T L A NX D.

BOOK II.
A R Y Queen of Scots was born a few days before the BOOK II.

death of her Father James V. The situation in which he ---

Dec, 14,1542.
left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the prospect of BirthofMary,

and siate of

a turbulent and disastrous reign. A war against England had been the kingdom.
undertaken without neceflity, and carried on without success.
Mlany persons of the first rank had fallen into the hands of the
Englifl, iin the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and
were still prifoncrs at London. Among the refl of the nobles
there was little union, either in their views, or in their afl'elions;
a;nd the religious difputcs, occasioncd by the opinions of the re-
formers, growing every day more violent, added to tlh rage of
those fadlions which are natural to a form of government nearly
ariflocratical.

VOL. 1, M TrlE

BooK I. THE government of a QOueen was unknown in Scotland, and

did not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial people.
The government of an infant Queen was flill more destitute of
real authority; and the profpe& of a long and feeble minority in-
vited to facion by the hope of impunity. James had not even
provided the common remedy against the difordcrs of a minority,
by committing to proper persons the care of his daughter's edu-
cation, and the adminifiration of affairs in her name. Thougl
he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly
burst into a florm, he was so little able to disperse them, or to
defend his daughter and kingdom against the imminent cala-
mities, that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to the
mercy of fortune, and left open to every pretender, the office of
Regent, which he could not fix to his own fatisfadion.

retenfinns of C RDI NAL Beat oun, who had for many years been confidered
Cardirll Boa-
toun tothere- as prime minister, was the first who claimed that high dignity;
gency. and in support of his pretensions, he produced a teftamernt',

which he himself had forged in the name of the late King; and
without any other right, instantly asSumed the title of Regent.
I-Ie hoped by the affifance of the clergy, the countenance of
France, the connivance of the Queen Dowager, and the fiup-
port of the whole Popifl fiaEion, to hold by force, what le had
sized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to
be a favourite of the nation. Those among the nobles who
wi-hled for a Rcformation in religion dreaded his severity, and
others confidcrec the elevation of a Churchman to the higliefl-
oilice in the kingdom as a dcpreflion of themfclvcs. At their
inrlligation, James Ilamilton Earl of Arran, and next heir to the

* Sadlcr's Let. 1 I.

Q(!cn,

Queen, rouzed himself from his inactivity, and was prevailed on BooK II.
to aspire to that itation, to which proximity of blood gave him a --
natural title. The nobles, who were assembled for that purpose, Earl of Arran

chosen Re-

unanimously conferred on him the office of Regent; and the pub- gent.
lic voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and cha- Charmaer of

Beatoun.

raaer, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Car-
dinal was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experience
he had acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew
upon him from continual success. His high station in the church
placed him in the way of great employments; his abilities
were equal to the greatest of these; nor did he reckon any of
them to be above his merit. As his own eminence was founded
upon the power of the church of Rome, he was a zealous de-
fender of that superstition, and for the fame reason an avowed
*enemy to the doctrine of the Reformers. Political motives alone
determined him to support the one, or to oppose the other. His
early application to public business kept him unacquainted with
the learning and controversies of the age; he gave judgment,
however, upon all the points in dispute, with a precipitancy, vio-
lence, and rigour, which cotemporary hiflorians mention with in-
dignation.

THE character of the Earl of Arran was, in almost every thing, or Arran.
the reverse of Beatoun's. IIe was neither infeccd with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty: The love of cafe extinguinlcd the former,
the softness of his temper prcfervcd him from the latter. Timidity
and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occasioned
by his natural conflitution, and the other arising from a confciou'-

MI z ness

EoolK II. ness that his abilities were not equal to his flation. With these

--- J cdliipofitions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but

his public conduct was without courage, or dignity, or con-
fifience. The perpetual fiave of his own fears, and, by confe-
quence, the perpetual tool of those, who found their advantage in
praeifing upon them. But as no other person could be set in
opposition to the Cardinal, with any probability of fucccfs, the
nation declared in his favour with so general a consent, that the
artifices of his rival could not withstand its united strength.

Schelm1e oF THIE Earl of Arran had scarce taken pofleffion of his new dig-
Ilenry V I[.
with regard to nity, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave
Scot'and.

cot'ad birth to events of the most fatal consequence to himself, and to

the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no
longer afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs
against France; and immediately conceived hopes of rendering this
security perpetual by the marriage of Edward his only son with
the young Queen of Scots. He communicated his intention to
the prisoners taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it,
by the promise of liberty, as the reward of the success. In the
mean time, he permitted them to return into Scotland, that by
tlheir prcfence in the Parliament which the Regent had called,
they might be the better able to pcrfwadc thcir countrymen to
f-ill in with his proposals. A cauic, entrufled to fich able and
zealous advocates, could not well mil's of comingL to an hIappy iflluc.
All tloic lwho feared the Cardinal, or who dcfircdl a clianel in
n'liicnn, were fond of an alliance, which affordlcl protcction to
lhe (lod(rine v1which they had cmlbraced, as well as to their ownl
per'tln, againllt the rage of that powerful and haughty Prelate.

BUT-

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of im- BOOK II.

proving this favourable conjuncQure. Address and delicacy in ma- 111 conduaed
naging the fears, and follies, and interests of men, were arts with by himrelf.
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had formed
upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had pro-
posed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to con-
ceal them. Instead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the
Scots, what time and accidents would soon have enabled him to
recover, he at once alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by
demanding that the Queen's person fliould be immediately com-
mitted to his cufltody, and that the government of the kingdom
should be put in his hands during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions Odious to the

Scots, though

to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejecled with in partaccept-
indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with ed b them.
England at the price of their own liberty. The parliament of
Scotland, however, influenced by the nobles who returned fi-om ilarch
England, desirous of peace with that kingdom; and delivered, 's1:.
by the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prifoncr, from any
opposition to which he might have given rife; coniented to a
treaty of marriage and of union, but upon fmewhat a more
equal footing. And after tome dark and unlfccefsftul intrigues,
by which his ambafiador endeavourled to carry off the young
Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into IEngland, I Icenry vas obliged to
give up his own proposals, and to accept of theirs. On Iiis f11r,
he conlcntcd that the QOcen ihould continue to rcl(lce iI ScotiIllid,
and hlimfellf remanin exclulded froIm any liare il the gov\lernimenlt of
the kingdom. On the oilier h:lnl, the Scots alrccJ t) 1Cnl iicl'
Sovereign into England las lol as Ihe attainlled the full ae, (i' teii

-, ; t [ '

BOOK II. years, and instantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to
`-`~ be kept as hostages by Henry till the Queen's arrival at his court.

Favoured by THE treaty was still so manifestly of advantage to England, that
the Regent.

the Regent loft much of the public confidence by consenting to it.
The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate

Oppcfd by and improve this to the utmost. He complained loudly, that the
the Cardinal.

Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extinction of true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an ex-
communicated heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an an-
cient kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descending into the
ignominious itation of a dependent province; and, in one hour,
the weakness or treachery of a single man surrendering every thing,
for which the Scottish nation had firuggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal were not without
effec. They were addrefled to prejudices and passions which are
deeply rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour,
and pride of independence, which, at the beginning of the present
century, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an
union with England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that
time, induce the whole nation to declare againfl the alliance which
had been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fiibjeQed to
the fame King, and governed by the fame maxims, had confide-
rably abated old animofities, and prepared both people for incor-
porating. In the other, injuries were fill frcfl, the wounds on
both fides were open, and, in the warmth of rcfcntmcnt, it was

5 natural

natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At BOOK II.
the Union in 1707, the wisdom of parliament despised the ground- -'
less murmurs occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in I543,
the complaints of the nation were better grounded, and urged with
a zeal and unanimity, which it is neither just nor safe to disregard.
The rage of the people rose to such an height, that the English
ambassador could hardly be proteced from their insults. The clergy
contributed a great fum towards preserving the church from the
dominion of a prince, whose system of Reformation was so fatal to
their power. The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal, so
lately in such a cruel manner, were now ready to applaud and to fe-
cond him, as the defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful Barons decla- He excitesal-

red openly against the Alliance with England. By their affifance, natiQ thewho
the Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her mo- the Englin'.
ther, and added to his party the splendor and authority of the royal
name . He received, at the fame time, a more real accession to
his strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox,
whose return from France he had earnefily solicited. This young
nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton. He
had many claims upon the Regent, and pretended a right to ex-
clude him, not only from succeeding to the Cirovwn, but to deprive
him of the poffcfion of his private fortune. The Cardinal flat-
tered his vanity, with the profpel of marrying the Queen Dow-
ager, and aflcted to treat hiln with so much rcfe'Ic, that the
Regent became jealous of himn as a rival in power.

TrI is I'lllfciion was artfully heightcnct by the Abbot of P.iflecy,
who rcturn'ed into Scotland ftme time before the Earl of Lcnn:x,

Keith's Hill. of Scotl. 30.

ald

Boox II. and a&ced in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural bro-

C''" ther of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm

partizan of France, and a zealous defender of the established
Religion. He took hold of the Regent by the proper handle,
and endeavoured to bring about a change in his ientiments, by
working upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
difaffetion of the clergy, and the rage of the people; the re-
fentment of France, the power of the Cardinal, and the preten-
sions of Lennox, were all represented with aggravation, and
with their most threatening afpe:.

IMIEAN while, the day appointed for the ratification of the

treaty with England, and the delivery of the hostages approached,
and the Regent was still undetermined in his own mind. He
a&ed to the last with that irresolution and inconsistence, which is
peculiar to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to have
the chief part in the condua of difficult affairs. On the 25th of
August, he ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an enemy to his

Obliges the country. On the 3d of September, he secretly withdrew from
Regent to re-
nounce the Edinburgh, met with the Cardinal at Callender, renounced the
friendslip withlEngland. fricndflip of England, and declared for the intereffs of France".

HEINRY, in order to gain the Regent, had. not spared the mofl

imagnificent promifcs. Hec had offered to give the princfcs Eliza-
betl in marriage to his cldeft son, and to conflitute him King of
that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon findinig his intcrcil in the Kingdom to be lcfs confidlcable
than he had imagined, tlle IngSlif monarch began to treat him1

Sadlcr, 339, 356.

with

with little respeCt, The young Queen was now in the custody of Booi II.
his enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more popu- -
lar. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to
elec another Regent. The French King was ready to afford them
his protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the Regent could
not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve
the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himself into the arms of the party, which adhered to
France.

SOON after this sudden revolution in his political principles, the And to per-

fecutc the

Regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The spirit of Rcforlnrs.
controversy was then new and warm; books of that kind were
eagerly read by men of every rank; the love of novelty, or the
conviction of truth, had led the Regent to express great esteem
for the writings of the Reformers; and having been powerfully
supported by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in order
to gratify them, entertained, in his own family, two of the most
noted preachers of the Proteflant doctrine, and, in his first parlia-
ment, consented to an act, by which the laity were permitted to
read the scriptures in a language which they underflood. Truth
needed only a fair hearing to be an overmatch for crror. Ablur-
dilics, which had long imnpoled on the ignorance and credulity of
mankind, were dctccad and cxpofcd to public ridicule; and under
tihe countenance of the Regent, the lceformation nmade grct advan-
ces. The Cardinal obflirved its prol-rcfs with concern, and was at
the utmonf pains to olbfliru it. I-lc rcprccfntcd to the lRegent lis
great imprudcnce in giving cncouragcmcnt to opinions, to itvour-

VoL. I. N able

BOOK IT. able to Lennox's pretensions; that his own legitimacy depended

upon the validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the Pope's
authority; and that by fuffcring it to be called in queflion, he
weakened his own title to the fuccelion, and furnifled his rival
with the only argument, by which it could be rendered doubtful ..
These insinuations made a deep imprcffion on the Begent's timo-
rous spirit, who, at the proflpe of fitch imaginary dangers, was-
as much startled as the Cardinal could have wished ; and his zeal
for the Proteflant religion was not long proof against his fear.
He publickly abjured the doctrine of the reformers in the Francis-
can church at Stirling, and declared not only for the political, but
the religious opinions of his new confidents.

THrE Protestant doChrine did not susser much by his apoftacy.

It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no difcou-
ragement or severity could extirpate it. The. Regent indeed con-
sented to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the established religion. The
Reformers were persecutcd with all the cruelty, which fuperitition
inipires into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that
dreadful death, which the church lias appointed for the punifli-
ment of its enemies; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly
reemlbling the patience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs,
that more were converted, than terrified by fuich fpeeacles.

e l'r.E prctcnflons of the Earl of Lcnnox to the fucceflflo were thus founded:

Mary, the daIgh:Cr of James II. was married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth,
1a ( lighter of that marliage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lcnnox, and the
prclf'nt Elal was her granllllbr. I lhe Rcgcnt was likcwife the grand on of thle Prirn-
cfi .Viaty. But his f.tihcr having married Janet Beaton the Regcrit's mother, alfcr
he hlad obtaincd a divorce from Elizabeth Ilonic his former wife, Lcnnox pretended
that the fentencc of divorce was iunjui(-, anid that the Regent beilgi born while Eliza-
bcth Hlcic was fIill alive, ought to be confidercd as illcgitimatc. Crawl. Peer. 1.92.

S Ti :T

THE Cardinal, however, was now in possession of every thing BooK II.

his ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a D -,,oui, ,e-
Regent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear gofis the

CIll't direc-

from the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconflancy forfeited i(" cfa!r;s.
the public esteem, was contemined by one half of the nation, and
little trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox
were the only thing which remained to embarrass him. I-le had
very successfully made use of that nobleman to work uponl the
Regent's jcaloufy and fear, but as lie no longer stood in need of
such an initrument, he was willing to get rid of him with decency.
Lennox soon began to-fufiic& his intention; promises, flattery, and
refpea were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubftan-
tial services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, instead of attaining power and dignity
himself, saw that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition pushed him on
to seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of Arran's friend-
ship. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and declared
for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with open arms,
received a convert, who added so much lustre to their cause.

TfIE two facions which divided the kingdom were f(ill the

fame, without any alterations in their views or principles; but, by
one of those strange revolutions, which were frequent in that age,
they had, in the course of a few weeks, changed thcir leaders.
The Regent was at the head of the partizans of France and the
defenders of Popery, and Lennox in the fame flation with tlhe
advocates for the Englifil alliance, and a reformation in rcligion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work, which the other

N 2 upheld

BOOK II. upheld with the fame hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to

' defiroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start of the Cardinal's

ativity. He surprised both him and the Regent by a sudden march
to Edinburgh with a numerous army; and might easily have
crushed them, before they could prepare for their defence. But
he was weak enough to liften to proposals for an accommodation;
and the Cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty
to such a length, that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who
served, as is usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their
own expence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace, inflead of
giving the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to
retrieve his affairs ended yet more- unfortunately. One body of
his troops was cut to pieces, and the reft dispersed; and with the
poor remains of a ruined party, he mulf either have submitted to
the conqueror, or have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach
of an English army had not brought him a short relief.

Tenry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, with
;; b ot which he had been treated, both by the Regent and parliament of

Scotland, who, at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and firicter confederacy witl
France. The rigour of the season retarded for some time the exe-
cution of Ilis vengeance. But, in the ipring, a considerable body
of infantry wlich was dcflined for France, rcccived orders to fail
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to join
it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little cxpcecd(l such a vilit.
'They h;ad triflcd that the Frcnch war would lind ;lemploymlllnt
or all !-Henry's ifrces; and from aln unlaccountablle Icurilyv wt'Ce

;wholly v

wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of BoOK II.
Hartford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this "'
army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above Leith. Mlay 3, 14 4.
He was quickly master of that place; and marching directly to
Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plundering the
adjacent country, the riches-, and most open in Scotland, he set on
fire both these towns; and upon the approach of some troops ga-
thered together by the Regent, put his booty on board the fleet,
and with his land-forces retired safely to the English borders, deli-
vering the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion,
concerted with little policy, carried on at a great expence, and
attended with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest of
Scotland, he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was fill in his view, he loft a great deal. Such
a rough courtship, as the Earl of Huntly humorously called it,
disgusted the whole nation; their aversion for the match grew into
abhorrence; and exasperated by so many indignities, the Scots
were never, at any period, more attached to France, or more alie-
nated from England.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Regent and French

King, continued a corrcfpondence with England, wvhich ruined his
own interest, without promoting I-Ienry's. Many of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their aFlctlion to.
him, refuetle to concur in any dcfign to favour the public enemy.
And after a few feeble and unifutccefslul attempts to d(illuril the Re-
gent's adlmininfration, lie wa;i obliged to fly for flfctv to the court
of Kngland, herlc -Ienry rewardedt fcrviccs xlLic lie cii:l tiic
inclination, but not the pwcer to pcrlfrll), by 'iis, lin1 i1. l'.;ai-
rii.li his niece the Lady MalIrart D3ouglat. 1 .is tliiliap.i' cilr,

i()\\S'. ,','

EooK II. however, was detined to be the father of a race of Kings. He saw

his son Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpe-
tual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And,
from that time, his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.
A peace con- MEAN while hostilities were continued by both nations, but with

clud. little vigour on either fide. The historians of that age relate mi-

nutely the circumstances of several fifrmifles and inroads, which
as they did not produce any considerable effedt, at this distance of
time, deserve no remembrance *. At last an end was put to this

languid

* THOUGH this war was diflinguifhed by no important or decisive action, it was,

however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There fill remain two original papers,
which give us some idea of the miseries, to which the most fertile counties in the
kingdom were exposed by the sudden and deftruative incursions of the borderers.
The firlt seems to be the'report made to Henry by the English wardens of the
marches, for the year 1544, and contains their exploits from the 2d of July, to the
i7th of November. The account it gives of the different inroads, or Forrays, as
they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the fum total of mischief they did
is thus computed:
Towns, towers, tfedes, barnekyns, paryfhc-churches, baftcl-houfes call

down or burnt - - -2

Scots slain 403
Prifoncrs taken - 816
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken -o, 386
Sheep - - - I2, 492
Nags and geldings 1,296
Goats -- 200
Bolls of corn -- 850
Infight-gear, i. c. houlhold fiuriture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State Papers, 43.

The

languid and inactive war, by a peace, in which England, France, BooK II.
and Scotland were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude the une

June 54.6.

Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that
vengeance which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England was of the
last consequence to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing to
attack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to purchase
Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave them
exposed to danger. By yielding some things to the interest, and
more to the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission, flattery,
and address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots included in
the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before the conclusion of The murder

this peace, rendered it more acceptable to the whole nation. Car- of Bou
dinal Beatoun had not used his power with moderation, equal to
the prudence by which he attained it. Notwithtianding his great

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of Hartford, between the

8th and 23d of September, 1545; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, razed, and defiroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,

lonafierics and Friar-houfes - 7
Castles, towers, and piles -
Market towns - - - 5

Villages - - ,

- 2l

lilns - .- - 1

Hospitals - .

All there were cant down or burnt. Haynes 52. As the Scots weic no less flilful in
the praclice of irrcgular war, we may conclude that the dan:lnig which they' did in
l.lglIlnl was not incolfidcrable ; and that their raids were no !c'b waflincl, than tlhe
forrays of the E1gliflh.

lbilitiecS,

BOOK II. abilities, he had too many of the passions and prejudices of an an-

gry leader of a faEtion, to govern a divided people with temper.
His resentment against one party of the nobility, his insolence
towards the reft, his severity to the Reformers, and, above all,
the b'arbarous and illegal execution of the famous George Wi-
lhart, a man of honourable birth, and of primitive fandity,
wore out the patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold
hand was wanting to gratify the public wish by his deftrution.
Private revenge, inflamned and fanetified by a false zeal for re-
ligion, quickly supplied this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest
son of the Earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal
with injustice and contempt. It was not the temper of the
man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to digest an affront. And
as the profeflion of his adversary screened him from the effects of
what is called an honourable resentment, he resolved to take that
satisfaction, which he could not demand. This resolution de-
serves as much censure, as the singular courage and conduct with
which he put it in execution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at
that time, resided in the castle of Saint Andrew's, which he had
fortified at great expence, and, in the opinion of the age, had
rendered it impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town at
his devotion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In tlis situation, sixteen persons undertook to furprize his castle,
and to atlalfiEnate himself; and their fucccfs was equal to the bold-
l.,1-> :,5:.' ncfs of the attelmpt. Early in the morning they fcized on the gate

of tlie cafilc, which was set open to the workmein who were m-
ploycd in linilhing the fortifications; and having placed sentries at
the dloor of tlic Cardinal's apartment, they aw.akcned his numecrous
cdomincfis one by one, and turning them out of the cafile, they
\'itllnlt noi!;, (:r tumuilt, or violence to any other perlfon, delivcred

their

their country, though by a most unjustifiable action, from an am- BooK IT.
bitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his
cruelty and cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the French The Rercnt

interefi in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among a ,v ,, lo li.
great party in the nation, but when deprived of-the genius and au- e urd
thority of so Ikilful a leader, was of finall consequence. Nothing
can equal the consternation which a blow so unexpeQced occa-
sioned among his adherents; while the Regent secretly enjoyed
an event, which removed out of his way a rival, who had not
only eclipscd his greatness, but almost extinguished his power.
Decency, however, the honour of the church, the importunity
of the Queen Dowager and her facion, his engagements with
France, and, above all these, the desire of recovering his eldest
son, whom the Cardinal had detained for some time at St. An-
drew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who, together with the castle,
had fallen into the hands of the conspirators, induced him to
take arms, in order to revenge the death of a man he hated.

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One

part of military science, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the difciplinc, and
impetuosity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for flcges,
as they were active in the field. An hundred and fifty men,
whiclh was the greatcfl number the conspirators ever aflicmbled,
refilled all the efforts of the Regent for five months e, in a place,
which a single battalion, witi a few battering cannon, would

; Elpifl. Reg. Scot. 2. 379.
VOL.- I. 0 nw

BooyK II. now reduce in a few hours. This tedious siege was concluded
'"'* by a truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the confpi-

rators an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament;
and upon obtaining there, they engaged to surrender the castle,
and to set his son at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty.

On both fides, they fought only to amuse, and to gain time. The
Regent had applied to France for assistance, and expeted soon to
have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lefly and
his affociatea were not at first incited by Henry to murder the Car-
dinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him.
Notwithstanding the silence of cotemporary hiflorians, there are
violent presumptions of the former; of the latter there is un-
doubted certainty *. During the siege, the conspirators had re-
ceived from England supplies both of money and provisions; and
as Henry was preparing to renew his proposals concerning the
marriage and the union he had projected, and to second his
negociations with a numerous army, they hoped, by concurring
with him, to be in a situation, in which they would no longer
need a pardon, but might claim a reward.

January 28, THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It happened in
1547. the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater splendor than

true glory; bustling, though not acive; oppressive in domeflic
government, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the
vices of this prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the
virtues of others. I-s rapaciousness, his profusion, and even his
tyranny, by deprefiing the ancient nobility, and by adding new

* IKcith, Co.

proper~ty

property and power to the Commons, laid the foundations of the BOOK II.
British liberty. His other passions contributed no less towards the
downfal of Popery, and the eifablifhment of religious freedom
in the nation. His resentment led him to abolish the power, and
his covetousness to seize the wealth of the church; and by with-
drawing these supports, made it easy, in the following reign, to
overturn the whole fabric of fuperitition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who had been alter-

nately his rival and his friend; but his successor Henry II. was
not negleCtful of the French interest in Scotland. He sent a con- Trop arrre
fiderable body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to
the Regent's assistance. By their long experience in the Italian
and German wars, the French had become as dextrous in the
conduc of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the bold-
ness and despair of the conspirators could not defend them againfi
their superior art, they, after a short refifnance, surrendered to Force the
Strozzi, who engaged, in the name of the King his master, for Ande' s5St.
the security of their lives; and as his prisoners transported them surrender.
into France. The castle itself, the monument of Beatoun's power
and vanity, was demolished, in obedience to the canon law,
which, with admirable policy, denounces its anathemas even
against the houses in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal hap-
pens to be flied, and ordains them to be laid in ruins *.

THE Archbishopric of St. Andrew's was bestowed by the Re-
gent upon his natural brother, John I-amilton Abbot of Paiiley.

o Burn. [-ift. Rcf. I. 33'8.

0 2 TutL

BooKx II. THIE delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.

'New, treach Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief diretion of as-
,vili':]nJ. fairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. conduted them-

selves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late mafier,
and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they had
not abilities or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their inva-

sion of Scotland occasioned, we ihall flop to take notice of a cir-
cumftance unobserved by cotemporary historians, but extremely re-
markable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
which then prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son in the castle of St.
Andrew's; and as they needed the protetion of the English, itwas
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by deliver-
ing to them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the
Crown, in the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was
a dreadful profpedt. And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell
upon a very extraordinary expedient. By an ad made of purpose,
they excluded " the Regent's eldest son from all right of succession,
" public or private, so long as he should be detained a prisoner,

and substituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their

" seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
"the Regent !." Succession by hereditary right is an idea so ob-
vious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to make a
breach in it, but in cafes of extreme neceflity. Such a necessity
did the Parliament difcovcr in the prefcnt situation. Hatred to
England, founded on the memory of part hostilities, and heigh-
tened by the finart of recent injuries, was the national paflion. This

- EpiL-. Rcg. Scot. 2. 359.

diatcd

ditated that uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal fuc- BOOK II.
cession was so remarkably broken. The modern theories, which _.
represent this right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not
to be violated upon any consideration whatsoever, seem to have
been then altogether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Hartford, now Scotland in-

vaded by the

Duke of Somerset, and Protestor of England, entered Scotland English.
at the head of i8,ooo men; and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60
flips appeared on the coast, to second his land-forces. The Scots
had for some observed this storm gathering, and were prepared
for it. Their army was almost double to that of the enemy, and
posted to the greatest advantage on a rising ground, above Muffel-
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these
circumstances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw his dan-
ger, and would willingly have extricated herself out of it, by a
new overture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable. But
this moderation being imputed to fear, his proposals were re-
jeaed with that scorn, which the confidence of success inspires;
and if the conduc of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish
army, had been in any degree equal to his confidence, the deftruc-
tion of the English muff have been inevitable. They were in a
situation, precisely similar to that of their countrymen under
Oliver Cromweli, in the following century. The Scots had
chofien their ground so well, that it was impofible to force them
to give battle; a few days had exhaufled the forage and provision
of a narrow country; the fleet could only furnish a scanty and
precarious fubifilence; a retreat thcrcfore was ncccflhry; but
difgracc, and perhaps ruin were the confliqucnccs of rctreating.

ON

BoOK II. O both there occasions, the national heat and impetuosity of the

t ' Scots saved the English, and precipitated their own country into the

Battle of utmost danger. The undisciplined courage of the private men be-
Pinkey. came impatient at the fight of an enemy. The General was

afraid of nothing, but that the English would escape from him by
flight; and leaving his strong camp, he attacked the Duke of So-

Septemberlo, merfet near Pinkey, with no better success than his rashness de-
'5s+7.

served. The Protector had drawn up his troops on a gentle emi-
nence, and had now the advantage of ground on his fide. The
Scottish army confifled almost entirely of infantry, whose chief
weapon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were very
deep, and their ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy
in three great bodies, and as they passed the river, were confide-
rably exposed to the fire of the English fleet which lay in the bay
of Muffelburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The English
cavalry, flushed with an advantage which they had gained in a
ikirmifl some days before, began the attack with more impe-
tuofity, than good conduc. A body so firm and compact as the
Scots, easily refited the impression of cavalry, broke them, and
drove them off the field. The English infantry, however, ad-
vanced, and the Scots were at once exposed to a flight of arrows,
to a fire in flank from 400 foreign Fuzileers who served the ene-
my, and to their cannon which were planted behind the infantry,
on the highest part of the eminence. The depth and closeness of
their order making it impossible for the Scots to fland long in
this situation; the Earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire towards the
main body. But his fiiends unhappily mistook this motion for a
flight, and fell into confuiion. At that very inflant, the broken
cavalry hating rallied, returned to the charge; the foot pursued

the

the advantage they had gained; the prospect of victory redoubled BOOK II.
the ardour of both; and in a moment the rout of the Scottish ~-'
army became universal, and irretrievable. The encounter in the
field was not long, nor bloody; but, in the pursuit, the English
discovered all the rage and fierceness, which national antipathy,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is
apt to inspire. The pursuit was. continued for five. hours, and to
a great distance- All the three roads by which the Scots fled, were.
strewed with spears and. swords, and targets, and covered with the.
bodies of the slain. Above Io,ooo men fell on this day, one of
the most fatal, Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken prifo-
ners, and among these some persons of diftintion. And the Pro-
teaor had it now in his power to become master, of a kingdom, out.
of which, not many hours before,, he was alnoft obliged to
retire with infamy*..

BUT

* The following paflage in a curious and rare journal of the Protector's expedi-

tion into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in cormiflion with Cecil
as Judge Marfhalof the army, and'printed in 1548, deserves our notice; as it gives
a just idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time. "But what after I
learned, specially touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well of
going to offend, as of fianding to defend, I have thought neceflary here to utter.
Hackbutters have they few or none, and appoint their fight mofR commonly always
a-foot. They come to the field well furniflhed all with jack and skull, dagger and
buckler, and sword-s all broad- and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally
so made to nice, that as I never saw none so good, so think I it hard to devise the
better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice
about his neck, not for cold but for cutting. In their array towards joining with!
the enemy, they cling and thrust To near to the fore ranks flouldcr and fioulder to-
gether, with their pikes in both their hands fileighit afore them, and their followers
in that order so hard at their backs, laying their pikes over thcir foergoers fhoul-
4Ters, that if they do aflail undifctvcercr, no force can well witllfnlid them. Stand-
ing at defence they thrufl bhoulders likewise so nigh together, the fore ranks wel.l

nil?.i,1.

BOOK II. BUT this viatory, however great, was of no real utility, for
Their via'ry want of skill or of leisure, to improve it. Every new injury ren-
oflitlebenefit dered the Scots more averse from an union with England; and the
to theEngliah.

Proteacor neglected the only measure, which would have made it
necessary for them to have given their content to it. He amused
himself in wafting the open country, and in taking or building
several petty castles; whereas by fortifying a few places which
were accessible by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to
the English, and, in a short time, the Scots must either hav eac-
cepted of his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an
improvement of it, his viCtory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the
command of Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other effect
but to precipitate the Scots into new engagements with France.
The situation of the English court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse
for the Duke of Somerset's conduct. That cabal of his enemies which
occasioned his tragical end, was already formed; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and credit at
home. Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his safety
before his fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of hisviaory.
At this time, however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by which

nigh to kneeling, stoop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with
both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of the pike against
their right foot, and the other againlt the enemy breafi-high; their followers crof-
sing their pike points with them forward; and thus with each other so nigh as
space and place will fuffcr, through the whole ward, so thick, that as easily fliall
a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry hedge-hog, as any encounter the
front of their pikes." Other curious particulars are found in this journal, from
which Sir John Hlayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

Thle length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by AdI 44.. P. 1471. to be
fix ells; i. c. eighteen feet fix inches.

8' he

he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his presence suspended BooK II.
its effe& for some time. The supreme power frill remaining in his l
hands, he employed it to recover the opportunity, which he had
loft. A body of troops, by his command, seized and fortified Apr, i 8.
Haddingtoun, a place, which, on account of its distance from the
sea, and from any English garrison, could not be defended without
great expence and danger.

MEAN while the French gained more by the defeat of their Forces the

Scots into a

allies, than the English did by their viEtory. After the death of clofcr union
Cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a
considerable ihare in the direction of affairs. She was warmly
attached by blood, and by inclination, to the French interest; and,
in order to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event
which occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were broken
at Pinkey; and in an assembly of nobles which met at Stirling to
consult upon the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned
towards France, no profped of safety appearing but in assistance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace with England,
the Queen represented that they could not expea- him to take part
in their quarrel, but upon views of personal advantage; and that
without extraordinary concessions in his favour, no afliflance in
proportion to their prcfent exig-encies could 1be obtained. Tlic pre-
judices of the nation powerfully seconded these reprefcntations of
the Qjccn. \Vhat often happens to individuals took place amolng
the nobles in this convention ; they were Rlvaycd cntircly by their
pafilons, and in order to gratify them, they deserted their fonrmcr
principlcs, and difrcgarded their true intcrcft. In the violence of
rcfcnitcnt, they torgot that zeal for the iindcpcnlencc of Scotland,
whicli had prompted them to ricjc the priopofals of Henry VIII.

VOL. I. P and

BOOK II. and by offering, voluntarily, their young Queen in marriage to
Ad to offr the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II. and which was still more, by
itenarriage to proposing to fend her immediately into France to be educated at
the Dauphin. his court, they granted, from a thirst of vengeance, 'what formerly

they would not yield upon any consideration of their own safety.
To gain at once such a kingdom as Scotland, was a matter of no
finall consequence to France. Henry, without hesitation, accepted
the offers of the Scottiih ambassadors, and prepared for the vigorous
defence of his new acquisition. Six thousand veteran soldiers,
under the command of Monsieur DefTe, assisted by some of the
befl officers, who were formed in the long wars of Francis I.
arrived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scotland, with a
spirit equal to their former fame. But their exploits were not con-
fiderable. The Scots soon became jealous of their designs, and
neglected to support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the English, in acting wholly upon the defensive, pre-
vented them from attempting any enterprize of consequence; and
obliged them to exhaust their strength in tedious sieges, under-
taken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the English
to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several finall forts,
which they poffefled in different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of these operations of his troops were

fill of greater importance to the French King. The diversion
which they occasioned, enabled him to wreif Boulogne out of the
hands of the Englilh ; and the influence of his army in Scotland
obtained the concurrence of 'arliament with the overtures made
to him, by the aftlmbly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the
(uccn's marriage with the Dauphin, and her education at the

court

court of France. In vain did a few patriots remonf-rate against BOOK II.
such extravagant concessions, by which Scotland was reduced to Thetreaty for
be a province of France; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be that purpofl

concluded.

master of the kingdom; by which, the friendship of France became
more fatal than the enmity of England; and every thing was
fondly given up to the one, that had been bravely defended against
the other. A point of so much consequence was hastily decided June 5, S548.
in a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the
intrigues of the Qneen Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and
resentment against England, had prepared a great party in the
nation for such a flep; the French General and Ambaflador, by
their liberality and promises, gained over many more. The Regent
himself was weak enough to stoop to the offer of a pension from
France, together with the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that
kingdom. A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
the interest of a faction was preferred before the honour of the
nation.

I-IAVING hurried the Scots into this raih and fatal resolution, the Mary sent to

source of many calamities to themselves, and to their Sovereign, be educatced
source of many calamities to themselves, and to their Sovereign, in France,
the French allowed them no time for reflection or repentance.
The fleet, which had brought over their forces, was frill in Scot-
land, and, without delay, convoyed the Queen into France. Mary
was then fix years old, and by her education in that court, one of
the politcft, but most corrupted in Europe, fihe acquired every
accompliflmnent that could add to her charms as a woman, and
contracted many of those prejudices, which occasioncd her misfor-
tunes as a Qiccn.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their hands, it was the
intcrcft of the French to fuiffer the war in Scotland to languish.

P 2.. T e

BooK I. The recovering of the Boulonnois was the object Henry had most

'c"J at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide

the attention and strength of the English, whose donmefic faCtions
deprived both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour.
The government of England had undergone a great revolution.
The Duke of Somerset's power had been acquired with too much vio-
lence, and was exercised with too little moderation, to be of long
continuance. Many good qualities, added to great love of his
country, could not attone for his ambition in usurping the sole
direction of affairs. Many of the most eminent courtiers combined
againfl him; and the Earl of Warwick their leader, no less ambi-
tious, but more artful than Somerset, conducted his measures with
so much dexterity, as to raise himself upon the ruins of his rival.
Without the invidious name of Protetor, he succeeded to all the
power and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and he
quickly found peace to be necessary for the establishment of his new
authority, and the execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

Peice con- HENRY was no stranger to Warwick's situation, and improved
eluded. his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conducting the negociations

for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he pleated to the
Englifl Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advantageous

March 2., to that monarch and his allies. England consented to restore Bou-
I; o- logne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all pretensions

to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quest of her country. A few small forts, of which the English
troops had hitherto kept poflffion, were razed ; and peace betwecn
the two kingdoms was eflablifled on its ancientfoundation.

BOTI the Britifl nations lofll power, as well as reputation, by
this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war of clnulation and

refcntinen t,

resentment, rather than of interest; and was carried on, under the Boo K II.
influence of national animofities, which were blind to all advan-
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness,
conduCted it with more ikill; and by dexterously availing them-
selves of every circumitance which occurred, recovered pofieflion
of an important territory which they had loll, and added to their
monarchy a new kingdom. The ambition of the English Miniifer
betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies bellowed, on them the latter; their
ownaddrefs and good policy merited both,.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the French The Sccts he-

forces left Scotland, as much to their own fatisfation, as to that ofci ,cnch
of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the calling to their aflift-
ance a people more powerful than themselves, was a dangerous
expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, those who
had come over to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to com-
mand in it; and on many occasions they repented the rath invi-
tation they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French were, in
that age what they are in the present, one of the mofl polished
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expedi-
tions into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north,
that their manners have been remarkably incompatible with the
manners of every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their
own cufloms, because they want knowledge and tafle to discover
the reasonableness and propriety ofcufloms which differ from them.
Nations, which hold the first rank in politcncfs, are frequently no
less tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient

8 world;

BOOK II. -world; and the French are the fame in the modern. Full of them-

'-- '-' selves; flattered by the imitation of their neighbours; and accuf-

tomed to confider their own modes as the standards of elegance;
they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the diffinguifhing manners
of their own nation, or to make any allowance for what may differ
from them among others. For this reason, the behaviour of their
-armies has, on every occasion, been insupportable to strangers, and
has always exposed them to, hatred, and often to deftrudion. In
that age, they overran Italy four several times, by their valour,
and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The' Scots, naturally an
irascible and high-fpirited people, and who, of all nations, can
least bear the most ditlant insinuation of contempt, were not of a
temper to admit all the pretensions of such afluming guests. The
symptoms of alienation were soon visible; they seconded the mili-
tary operations of the French troops with the utmost coldness, and
their disgust grew insensibly to a degree of indignation that could
hardly be restrained; and on occasion of a very flight accident,
broke out with fatal violence. A private French soldier engaging
in an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took
arms, with equal rage, in defence of their countrymen. The
Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and several citizens of diftintion
were killed in the fray; and the French were obliged to avoid the
fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Notwith-
flanding the ancient alliance of France and Scotland, and the long
intercourse of good offices between the two nations, an aversion
for the French took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the
tefll's whereof were deeply felt, and operated powerfully through
the fuilbfciuent period.

T'.iorcr or ;ROM the death of Cardinal Bcatoun, nothing has been said of
thc Rcfoima- the slate of religion. While the war with England continued, the

tion.clery

6 clergy

clergy had no leisure to ooleft the Protestants; and they were not BOOK II.
yet considerable enough to expet any thing more than connivance '
and impunity. The new doetrines were still in their infancy; but,-
during this flort interval of tranquillity, they acquired strength,.
and advanced, by large and firm steps, towards a full: establish-
ment in the kingdom. The first preachers against Popery in Scot-
land, of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V..
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation was partial,.
and at second hand; some of them had been educated in England;
all of them had borrowed their notions from the books published
there ;; and, in the first dawn. of the new light, they did not ven-
ture far before their leaders. But, in a short time, the dotrines.
and writings of the foreign Reformers became generally known;
the inquisitive genius of the age pressed forward in querl of truth;
the discovery of one error opened the way to others; the downfal
of one impoSture drew many after it; the whole fabric, which ig-
norance and superstition had erected in times of darkness, began
to totter;, and nothing was wanting to complete its ruin, but a dar-
ing and active leader to direc the attack.. Such was the famous
John Knox, who, with.better qualificationsof learning, and more
extensive views than any of his predecefolrs in Scotland, poieffled
a, natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above fear. IIe be-
gan. his public miniftty at St. Andrew's in the year I547, with
that success, which always accompanies a bold and popular elo-
quence. Inflead of amusing himfilf with lopping the branches,.
he struck direcly at the root of Popery, and attacked both the doc-
trine and.difcipline of the cflablifhcd church, with a vehemence
peculiar to himself,, but admirably ilited to the temper and wifles
of the age.

AN

BOOK II. AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not have easily
'-'' eefcaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and

progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at first,
he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while the
conspirators kept possession of it, preached publickly under their
protection. The great revolution in England, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in Scotland.
Henry had loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Popery.
The Ministers of his son Edward VI. cast them off altogether,
and eifablifhed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame footing,
whereon it now flands in that kingdom. The influence of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy effects of ecclesiastical li-
berty, in the one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
duat themselves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a diptance from court; they
gained credit, as happens on the first publication of every new reli-
gion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen of the greatest diftincion, having, about this
time, openly espoused their principles, they were no longer under
the neceflity of acting with the fame reserve; and with more fecu-
rity and encouragcmcnt, they had likewise greater success. The
means of acquiring and spreading knowledge became more com-
mon, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew
every day bolder and more univcrfal.

I-I. i T, Y for the Reformation, this spirit was flill under some

ircnflrain. IL hid not yet attained firmnocfs and vigour, fuilicicnt to
ovcitllurn a I)lcln, founded on the deepeCf policy, and fuipportcd

by

by the most fornidable power. Under the present circumfl-ances, Boox II.
any attempt towards action must have been fatal to the Protestant --
dotrines; and it is no small proof of the authority, as well as pe-
netration of the heads of the party, that they were able to reltrain
the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that critical and ma-
ture juncture, when every tfep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement from two dif-
ferent quarters, whence they never could have expeted it. The
ambition of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land haflened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scotland; and
by a singular disposition of Providence, the persons who opposed
the Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fiercest
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY of Guise possessed the fame bold and aspiring spirit, The QOeen

which distinguished her family. But in her it was softened by the pres tor the
female charaacer, and accompanied with greater temper and ad- office of Re-

gent.

.dress. Her brothers, in order to attain the high objets at which
they aimed, ventured upon such daring .measures, as suited their
great courage. H-er designs upon the supreme power were con-
cealed with the utmost care, and advanced by address and refine-
ments more natural to her sex. By a dexterous application of
those talents, file had acquired a considerable influence on the
councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted with the government
of women; and without the finalleft right to any flare in tlhe
administration of affairs, had cngroflcd the chief dircclion of
them into her own hands. But flte did not long reft satisficd with
the enjoymcnt of this precarious power, which thl ficklencfs of
the Rcgcnt, or the ambition of those who governed him, might
Ib easily diflurb; and flhc began to fct on foot new intrigues,

VOL. I. Q. with

BooK II. with a design of undermining him, and of opening to herself a

way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her brothers entered
warmly into this scheme, and Supported it with all their credit at
the court of France. The French King willingly concurred in a
measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland entirely under
management, and in any future broil with England, to turn its
whole force upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the Queen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chufe; either violently to wrest the
power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his con-
sent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and fatious peo-
ple, the former was a very uncertain and dangerous experiment.
The latter appeared to be no lets impracicable. To persuade
a man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a
level with those, above whom he was raised; and to be content
with the second place where he hath held the firit, may well pass
for a wild and chimerical projec. This, however, the Queen at-
tempted; and the prudence of the attempt was sufficiently jus-
tified by its success.

THE Regent's inconfancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his adminiftra-
tion, raised the prejudices both of the nobles and of the people
againt hlim, to a great height; and the Queen secretly fomented
these with much indufiry. All who wifled for a change met
with a gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of dif-
affeclion was nouriflied by such hopes and promises, as, in every

Conrts tlhe age, inpore on the credulity of the faclious. The favourers of
l~c! I .,
r s.

the Reformation being the oonf numerous and fprcading body of
the Regent's enemies, file applied to them, with a particular at-

tention ;

tention; and the gentleness of her disposition, and seeming indif- Boox IT.
ference to the religious points in dispute, made all her promises of '---
protedtion and indulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so
great a part of the nation willing to fall in with her measures,
the Queen set out for France, under pretence of visiting her
daughter, and took along with her those noblemen, who pofleffed
the greatest power and credit among their countrymen. Softened
by the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the civilities of
the French King, and the caresses of the house of Guise, and in-
fluenced by the seasonable difiribution of a few favours, and the
liberal promise of many more, they were brought to approve of
all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE she advanced by these flow but sure steps, the Regent

either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or ne-
gle&ed to provide againfl it. The firfi discovery of the train
which was laid came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of
Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross, whom the Qieen had
gained over to her interest, and then employed as the most proper
instruments for obtaining his content. The overture was made to
him in the name of the French King, enforced by proper threat-
nCings, in order to work upon his natural timidity, and fwectcncd
by every promise that could reconcile him to a propoial so dif-
agreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation of his Frcnch title,
together with a confidcrable pension, the parliamentary acknow-
ledgment of his right of filcccfion to the Crown, and a public ra-
tification of his condu&L duringl his rcaency, wcre offered him.
On the other hand, the difpllcafllc of the French King, the
power and popularity of the QCecn Dowagcr, the (lifafl'cciol of
the nobles, witl the dainger of an afitr-reckoning, were rcprc-
fcnted in the firongcl: colours.

Qz Ir

BoOK II. Ir was not possible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary and

unexpected, without some previous itruggle; and had the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and pas-
five spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have rejeced
it with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and ambi-
tion of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obtfrution to her
views. He was lying at the point of death, and in his absence,
the influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper counter-
balanced several of the firongeft passions in the human mind, and
obtained his consent toa voluntary Surrender of the supreme power.
Dec. 1i55 AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with so much ease,

the Queen returned into Scotland, in full expeetation of taking
immediate poffeffioln of her new dignity. But, by this time,. the
Archbish-op of St. Andrew's had recovered-of that distemper, which
the ignorance of the Scottish physicians had pronounced to be in-
curable. This he owed to the assistance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
some useful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical fci.
ences, which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries. As a pre-
tender to af:rology and magic, he was revered and consulted by all
Europe; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he was but little
known. The archbillop, it is probable, confidercd him as a powcr-
ful magician, when he applied to him for relief; but it was his
knowledge asa philofophcr, which enabled him to cure his difcafe *.

* Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidcrcd as an Aflrologcr than a

Pliilofoplher; in his book DC Gnitlis, we find a calculation of the Archbiflmios's
nativity, fiom which ie pretendls both to have prcdialcd his difcafc, and to have
cffcle(l his cure. [-Ie received, Iron) the Archbilfop, a reward of 800ooo crowns.
A gcatL um n in that ag D. 1cI'ta , p. 3z.

TOG ETIIER

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop recovered the en- BOOK IT.

tire government of the Regent, and quickly persuaded him to re-
cal that dilhonourable promise, which he had been reduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great her furprize and
indignation were, at this fresh instance of his inconflancy, the was
obliged to dissemble, that the might have leisure to renew her in-
trigues with all parties; with. the Protestants, whom she favoured
and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to whom she ren-
dered herself agreeable by various arts ; and with the Regent him-
self, in order to gain whom, ihe employed every argument. But
whatever impressions her emissaries might have made on the Re-
gent, it was no easy matter to overreach or to intimidate the
Archbiihop. Under his management, the negociations were spun
out to a great length, and his brother maintained his flation with
that address and firmness, which its importance so well merited.
The universal defection of the nobility, the growing power of the
Protestants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reite-
rated solicitations of the French King, and, above all, the inter-
position of the young Queen, who was now entering the twelfth
year of her age, and claimed a right of nominating whom ihe
pleased to be Regent, obliged him, at last, to resign that high Pret:cils on
office, which he had held many years. He obtained, however, 'hgr, hi' of-'
the fame advantageous terms for himself, which had.been for- fice.
merly stipulated..

IT was in the Parliament which met on.the loth of April, i554, She obtainj

the Rcgencyi

fliat the. Earl of Arran executed this extraordinary refignation;he egn
and at the fame time Mary of C(uife was raifitd to that dignity,
which had been so long the objc(l of her wifiles. Tihs, wvitli
their own approbation, a woman, and a firanger, was advalnced to
:he fuprcmc authority, over :a lircc and turbulent people, who

i(.:Ido:t

BOOK II. feldotn submitted, without relucance, to the legal and ancient

government of their native Monarc1ls.

Reformation WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much
continues to
make great towards the progress of the Reformation, by the protection which
progress. The afforded it, from motives of ambition; the English Queen,

by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons acive in
July6, 153. promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended the throne of England,

on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married Philip
II. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish super-
ftition, and the fierceness of that age, she added the private re-
fehtment of her own, and of her mother's sufferings, with which
nhe loaded the Reformed Religion; and the peevishness and feve-
rity of her natural temper carried the acrimony of all these pas-
lions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her persecution
equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who have been the greatest
reproach to human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could
scarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the un-
relenting Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to mitigate the
rigour of her proceedings. Many among the most eminent Re-
formers fuffcred for the doctrines which they had taught; others
fled from the storm. To the greater part of these, Switzerland
and Germany opened a secure asylum; and not a few, out of
chlice or ncccflity, fled into Scotland. What they had seen and
felt in England, did not abate the warmth and zeal of their in-
dignation againfl popery. Their attacks were bolder and more
fuiccefs-ul tlh:n cv, r; and their doctrines made a rapid progrcfs
among all r. nls of men.

TlI l.s : doclQrincs, calculated to rectify the opinions, and to re-
form the malllners of mankllind, had hitherto produced no other

8 cflcd-s;

effets; but they soon began to operate with greater violence, and BOOK II.
proved the occasion, not only of subverting the established reli- A view .fthe
gion, but of shaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom. which contfi-
The causes which facilitated the introdutiDn of these new opinions buted tvuards

that.

into Scotland, and which difleminated them so fast through the
nation, merit, on that account, a particular and careful inquiry.
The Reformation is one of the greatest events in the history of
mankind, and in whatever point of light we view it, is infiruc-
tive and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the Isth and i6th centuries rouzed

the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters
of authority by which it had been so long reftrainied, and ven-
turing to move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into every
fubje&, with great boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the first objects which drew their
attention. Long before Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open to
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the efla-
blifhed fuperfltiton. That filbtle and refining people, satisfied with
enjoying those discoveries in secret, were little dirpofcd to affiume
the dangerous charatder of Reformers, and concluded the know-
ledge of truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar
minds must be overawed and governed by popular errors. 13ut,
animated with a more noble and difintereccld zcal, the German
Theologian boldly cr-ctcd the nfandard of trulth, and upheld it
'with an unconquerable intrepidity, which merits the admiration
and gratitude of all ihccccding ages.

T1 v,

BooK II. TH E occasion of Luther's being first difgufied with the tenets of

the Romiih church, and how, from a small rupture, the quarrel
widened into an irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the heart of Germany,
his opinions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and
wherever they came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-
founded fyftein. The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
and the power and bigotry of the Austrian family, fupprefled these
notions on their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of Eu-
rope. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by multiplied
impositions, could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor sub-
dued by the fame force; and encouraged by some Princes from
piety, and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

'THE superstition of Popery seems to have grown to the most ex-

travagant height, in those countries which are situated towards the
different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern
climates, rendered them susceptible of the deepest impressions of
fuperflitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were
no less favourable to-the progress of the fame spirit, among the
northern nations. They knew little, and were disposed to be-
lievc every thing. The moll glaring absurditics did not shock
their gross undcrfiandings, and the molt improbable fictions
*vwcrc'received with implicit assent and admiration.

Ac col DING , I., that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land, wais of the mofl bigotted and illiberal kind. Those docdrilcs
,which arc molt apt to flhock the human undcrflanding, and those

legends

legends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the people Boor If.
without any attempt to palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever .~_
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the
other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of fupertlition; for it is the nature of that spirit to observe
no bounds in its refpet and liberality towards those, whose charac-
ter it esteems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demonstrated how
much they were under its influence, by their vast additions to the
immunities and riches of the clergy. The profuse piety of David I.
who acquired on that account the name of Saint, transferred almost
the whole crown-lands, which were at that time of great extent,
into the hands of Ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous
Prince was imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among all
orders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood with new posses-
sions. The riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant;
but Scotland was one of those countries, wherein they had farthest
exceeded the just proportion. The Scottiih clergy paid one half
of every tax imposed on land; and as there is no reason to think
that, in that age, they would be loaded with any unequal share
of the burden, we may conclude, that, by the time of the reforma-
tion, little less than one half of the property in the nation had
fallen into the hands of a society, which is always acquiring, and
can never lose.

TlrE nature, too, of a considerable part of their property ex-

tended the influence of the clergy. Many cftatcs, throughout the
kingdom, held of the church ; church-lands were let in lcafe at an
cafy rent, and were poflieflcd by the younger ouns, and descendants

VOL. I. i of

BooK lI. of the best families *. The connexion betweenfuperior and valatl.
" '- between landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave rife

to an union- of great advantage to the church; and in estimating,
the influence of the popish ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as.
well as the real amount of their revenues,, muff be attended to,,
and taken into the account,

THIS extraordinary fharein the national property was accompa-

nied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the
kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers was
extremely finall, and when the Lesser Barons. and representatives
of Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclesiastics formed.
a considerable body there.. And it appears from the ancient rolls
of Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the lords of Ar-
ticles, that the proceedings of that high court must have been, in
a great measure, under their diretion t..

THE reverence due to their sacred charater, whicli was often.

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the
Popish clergy are remarkable, both as causes and effeas of that
dominion, vwhich they had acquired: over the reft of mankind..
They were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior
species; they were neither fuiljed to the fame laws, nor tried by.
the fame judges.. Every guard, that religion could supply, was
placed around their power, their poffecflons, and their persons;
and cndeavours were uscd, not without success, to represent them
all as equally sacred.

'l Keith, 52I. Not. (1b) -1 Spots. Hill. of the Ch. of Scot. 449.

THiE

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable, BooK II.

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the reverence which
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in place of there,
were substituted studies, barbarous and uninftrucive; but as the
ecclesiastics alone were conversant in them, this procured them
esteem; and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude
ages, which knew nothing. War was the sole profession of the
nobles, and hunting their chief amusement; they divided their
time between these; unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved
by science, they disdained any employment foreign from military
affairs, or which required rather penetration and address, than
bodily vigour. Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy
were entrusted; because they alone were properly qualified for the
trust. Almost all the high offices in civil government devolved,
on this account, into their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the
first fubjeat in the kingdom, both in dignity and power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of Cardinal Bea-
toun, fifty-four persons had held that high office; and of these,
forty-three had been ecclesiastics -. The Lords of Session were
supreme Judges in all matters of civil right; and by its original
constitution, the President and one half of the Senators in this
court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated from

the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy; and undiftra'edl by
those cares, and unincumbered with those burdens which occupy
and opprcfs other men, the intcreft: of their order became their
only objec, and they were at full leisure to purfuc it.

* Crawf. Oflic. of State.

R 2 TiE

Boox TI. THE nature of their function gave them access to all persons,

- - ' aand at all seasons. They could employ all the motives of fear,

and of hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate most
powerfully on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the
credulous; they bcfieged the beds of the sick and of the dying.
They suffered few to go out of the world without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church; and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by bestowing riches upon those,
who called themselves his servants.

WHEN their own industry, or the fuperftiton of mankind failed

of producing this effect, the Ecclesiastics had influence enough to
call in the aid of law. Whoever died intteJate, was presumed to
have destined his moveables to pious uses. The church took pof-
session of them. The children, the wife, the creditors of the per-
son deceased were often excluded from any share in what was
esteemed a sacred property'. As men are apt to trust to the con-
tinuance of life with foolish confidence, and childishly shun every
thing, that forces them to think of their mortality, many die with-
out fettling their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the
clergy in this cafe, of which there are frequent vefliges in our
laws, though none in our historians, may be reckoned among the
most plentiful sources of the wealth of the church.

AT the faime timel no matrimonial or teflamentary cause could

be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which the clergy
themniflves had framed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions
of there courts were enforced, added to their authority. A fcntcnce

:! E :I)'s on it. Anticq. I74.

8 of

of excommunication was no less formidable, than a sentence of out- Boo K II.
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions, and againit various
crimes: and besides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men,
or as citizens; and the aid of the secular power concurred with
the superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the
church no less destruCtive than terrible.

T these general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth and power of the popifli church; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to difcovcr
the foundations, on which a itruture so tfupendous was ereced.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their own fuperflition

and profifenefs, to raise the clergy from poverty and obscurity to
riches and eminence, they began, by degrees, to feel and to mur-
mur at their incroachments. No wonder haughty and martial
Barons ihould view the power and poffeflions of the church with
envy; and regard the lazy and inactive character of churchmen.
with the utmost contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just offence to the
people, and considerably abated the veneration, which they were
accustomed to yield to that order of men.

IJMESSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and,

above all, the severe injuncqion of celibacy, had concurred to intro-
duce this corruption of morals among the clergy; who prcfiirning
too much upon the fubmiflion of the people, were at no pains
cither to conceal, or to disguise their own vices. According to the
accounts of the Reformcrs, confirmcd by fcvcral Popilh writerc,

the

BOOK II. the most open and scandalous dissolution of manners prevailed

among the Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame
public pomp, which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the
marriage of his natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's
son t; and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly continued to
the end of his days a criminal correspondence with her mother,
who was a woman of rank. The other prelates seem not to have
been more regular and exemplary than their Primate :.

IMEN of such characters ought, in reason, to have been alarmed

at the first clamours raised against their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the Protestant preachers; but the Popith
ecclesiastics, either out of pride or ignorance, neglected the proper
methods for silencing them. Instead of reforming their lives, or
disguising their vices, they affeced to despise the censures of the
people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
aufterities, endeavoured to resemble the first propagators of Chrifti-
anity, the Popish clergy were compared to all those persons, who

* Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 202, 205. Lefl. de Reb. Gest. Scot. 232.

+ The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in which he calls her my
daughter, are fill extant. Keith, p. 42.

' A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy is found in the public

records. A greater number of letters of legitimation was granted during the first
thirty years after the Reformation, than during the whole period that has clapsed
since that time. These were obtained by the sons of the Popilf clergy. The eccle-
fiaflics, who were allowed to retain their benefices, alienated them to their children;
wlo, when they acquired wealth, were dcfirous that the laain of illegitimacy might
no longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of the ScottiliJ BiJh)ops, we
find several inflanccs of such alienations of church lands, by the Popifl incumbents,
to their natural children.

6 are

are most infamous in history, for the enormity and scandal of their BooK IL
crimes..

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the eflablilhed doctrines; instead of at-
tempting td found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to
reason; they left them without any other support or recommenda-
tion than the authority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and
the merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they insisted in-
their discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being.
left wholly to Monks of the lowest and mofi illiterate orders, their
compositions were still more wretched and contemptible, than the
fubjeds. on which they insisted. While the Reformers were
attended by crowded and admiring audiences, the Popish preachers
were either universally deserted,. or liefened to with. scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order to recover-their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of the
peoples was equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As many doc-
trines of their church had derived their credit, at first, from the
authority of false miracles, they now endeavoured to call in there
to their aid*". But those lying wonders, whicl were beheld with,
unfufpicious admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in times of
darkness and of ignorance, met with a very different reception, in.
a more enlightened period. The vigilance of the Reformers de-
tected these impofturcs, and exposed not only them, but the cause,
which needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

o S$potfwood, 69;

As.

BOO.K II. As the Popish ecclesiastics became more and more the objects of

hatred and of contempt, the discourses of the Reformers were
listened to as so many calls to liberty; and besides the pious indig-
nation which they excited against those corrupt docrines, which
had perverted the nature of true-Chriftianity; besides the zeal,
which they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity
of religion; they gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to
other views and passions. They hoped to shake off the yoke of
ecclesiastical dominion, which they had long felt to be oppressive,
and which they now discovered to be unchristian. They expected
to recover possession of the church revenues, which they were now
taught to confider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a
profusion no less undifcerning, than unbounded. They flattered
themselves that a check would be given to the pride and luxury
of the clergy, who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themselves within the sphere, peculiar to their sacred character.
An aversion for the eftablifled church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was raised by considerations of religion,
and heightened by motives of policy, spread fast through the nation,
and excited a spirit, that burst out, at last, with irresistible violence.

R L TG 0 US considerations, alone, were sufficient to have rouzed

this spirit. The points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much ir- po:tance to the happiness of mankind, and
so cfilctial to Chriflianity, that they merited all the zeal with
which the Reformers contended in order to eflablifl them. But
the Reformation having been rcprclfcnted as the effcdl of some wild
and cnthufiaflic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt to ac-
count for the cagcrnrcs and zeal with which our ancestors cm-
braced and propagated the Protcllant doarincs, by taking a view of

the

lhe political motives, alone, which influenced them, and by BooK IT.
ihewing how naturally these prompted them to ad with so much
ardor, will not, perhaps, be esteemed an unnecessary digression.
We now return to the course of our history.

THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent seems to have '5Its

transported her, at first, beyond the known prudence, and mode-
ration of her character. She began her administration, by con-
ferring upon foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a The QIcen

Recent be-
ftep, which both from the inability of firangers to difchargc theie gins heradmi-

niltration wiiil
offices with vigour, and from the envy which their preferment oibeunpopo-

lar mea1ure:.

excites among the natives, is never attended with good conle-
quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with
the management of the public revenues; Bonot was appointed
Governor of Orkney; and Rubay honoured with the custody of
the Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chancellor". It was with
the highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of the
greatest eminence and authority, dealt out among strangers. By
there promotions they conceived the Queen to have offered an in-
fult both to their understandings, and to their courage; to the
former, by fippofing them unfit for those flations, which their
ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to the latter, by ima-
gining that they were tame enough not to complain of an affront,
which, in no former age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an incident hap-
pened which inflamed their aversion from French councils to the
'highcll degree. Ever since the famous contest between the lioutcs

* Lcny, de Rcb. Gcef. Scot. 189.
Vo0 . I. S of

BOOK II. of Valois and Plantagenet, the French had been accustomed to

embarrass the English, and to divide their strength by the sudden
and formidable incursions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these
inroads were seldom attended with any real advantage to Scotland,
and exposed it to the dangerous resentment of a powerful neigh-
bour, the Scots began to grow less tracable than formerly, and
scrupled, any longer, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of
their own quiet and security. The change, too, which was daily
introducing into the art of war, rendered the affiflance of the
Scottifl forces of less importance to the French Monarch. For
these reasons, Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would take part in her
husband's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to secure, in Scotland,
the assistance of some troops, which would be more at his com-
mand than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains who were
almost independent. In prosecution of this design, but under
pretence of relieving the nobles from the expence and danger of
,5 ldefending the borders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parlia-

mcent, to register the value of lands throughout the kingdom, to
ilpoic on them a finall tax, and to apply that revenue towards
maintaining a body of regular troops, in conflant pay. A fixed
tax upon land, which the growing expence of government hath
introduced into almost every part of Europe, was unknown at
that time, and seemed altogether inconsistent with the free and in-
dependent spirit of the feudal government. Nothing could be
more (hocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the entrust-
ing, to merccnary hands, the defence of those territories which
had been acquired, or preservcd by the blood of their ancestors.
TI'hey received this propofhl with the utmost indignation. About
3oo of the lcll r Barons repaired in a body to the Qeecn Regent,
and rcpr-citntcd their cfnfe of the intended innovation, with that

manly

manly and determined boldness, which is natural to a free people, BOOK II.
in a martial age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so firm
a tone, and supported by such formidable numbers, the Queen
prudently abandoned a scheme, which she found to be universally
odious. As the Queen herself was known perfectly to under-
fland the circumfiances and temper of the nation, this measure
was imputed wholly to the suggestions of her foreign counsellors;
and the Scots were ready to proceed to the most violent extre-
mities against them.

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to the flame. Attempts to
They had now commenced hostilities against Spain, and Philip had kingd'Cm i

a war with

prevailed on the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with a England.
considerable body of her troops. In order to deprive him of this
aid, Henry had recourse, as he projeced, to the Scots; and at-
tempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's character, who, far
from any ambitious scheme of diflurbing her neighbours, was
wholly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical subjects;
the nobles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent at New-
bottle, liitened to the solicitations of the French Monarch with
extreme coldness, and prudently declined engaging the kingdom
in an enterprize so dangerous and unnecessary. \What file could
not obtain by persuasion, the Queen Regent brought aboutt by a
firatagem. Notwitliflanding the peace vwhich fubifiled between
the two kingdoms, flhe commanded her French foldicrs to rcbuild
a finall fort near Bcrwick, which was appointed, by the lafl
treaty, to be razed. The garrison of Bcrwick sallied out; inter-
rupted time work; and ravaged the a(jaccnt country. This infull
rouzed tile fiery spirit of tlec Scots, and their plromptncls () rc-
vcge tlhe lcal alppearance of national injurly dinlipa:c]d, il a

S 2 11m(qic1tt,

Boo;i II. moment, the wife and pacific resolutions which they had so lately

'- ' formed. War was determined, and orders instantly given for

raising a numerous army. But before their forces could assemble,
the ardor of thcir indignation had time to cool, and the Englif-,
having discovered no intention to push the war with vigour, the
nobles resumed their pacific fyflem, and resolved to fland alto-
gether upon the defenrive. They marched to the banks of the
Tweed, they prevented the incursions of the enemy, and having
done what they thought sufficient for the safety and honour of
their country, the Queen could not induce them, either by her in-
treaties, or her artifices, to advance another flep.

WHILE the Scots perfifled in their inactivity, D'Oyfel the

Commander of the French troops, who possessed entirely the con-
fidence of the Queen Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance,
to engage the two nations in hofiilities. Contrary to the orders of
the Scottish General, he marched over the Tweed with his own
soldiers, and inveited Werk, a garrison of the Englifil. The
Scots, instead of seconding his attempt, were enraged at his prc-
fumption. The Queen's partiality towards France had long been
lftfpetled; but it was now visible that she wantonly sacrificcd the
peace and safety of Scotland, to the interefc of that ambitious
and afluming ally. Under the feudal governments, it was in
camps, that fubjeds were accuflomcd to addrcfs the boldclt rc-

onnfrancecs to their Sovcreigns. Wlhilc arms were in their
Ihands, tlicy felt tlicir own flrtrngth ; and at that timei all tlieir
rcprccifntations of grievances carried the authority of coinmandls.
On tli s occasion, the indignation of tlhe nobles) broke out with

Clich violence, that the Queen prcceivin all attempts to cengcage

ttlimi in acLion to lIe vain, abr1uptly dilini i fCd her army, anil
rct:ir''l \vith the utmost tlanei and (li;gfl; having dilscovIcrcl the

imllpotlence

impotence of her own authority, without effeding any thing BOOK II..
which could be of advantage to France. --

IT is observable, that this first instance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported by those who favoured the
Reformation, and as fle still needed them for a counterpoise to
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of
Hamilton; they were now treated by her with. great refped, and
even admitted to no inconsiderable flare in her favour and confi-
dence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators
againfl Cardinal Beatoun were, about this time, recalled by her
from banishment; and, through her connivance, the Protestant
preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by these infiances of the
Q.een's moderation and humanity, the Proteflants left to others
the office of remonfirating; and the leaders of the opposite sac-
tion set them the first example of disputing the will of their
Sovereign-

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious her autho- 7 ,. lQt;-en',

rity was, while it depended on the poise of thcie contrary faliions, the D.ul, iin,,
fie enleavoured to efabliflli it on a broader and inore fcurc fouln-
dation, by haflening the conclusion of her dautghter' s malrria;c wvithl
thc Dauphin. Amiable as the Ql ccn of Scots thcnl w\;, ill t!e
biloo) of youtih; and conhiderable as the tcrritol;cs \\crc, \\hlilt
flhc ould have added to the French monrc -hv; :rcal ns ''erc ni)t

iwaniting to (liltiadd Henry froml colnplcatinl' llis firfl pl)ian ol mar-

r)ilng her to liis ion. Thlc Conlll)le hlontmnrcncv lIulc cr ii l>c thcd
11 his intcrcfl to dcfeat an alliaince v'hlicli reilcl: e ' in ili r
lu ilrc

011.

BooK I1. on the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the impossibility
C-'"-" of maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbulent people,

during the absence of their Sovereign; and for that reason, had
advised Henry to bestow the young Queen upon one of the Princes
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might preserve that
kingdom and useful ally to France, which, by a nearer union to
the Crown, would become a mutinous and ungovernable province .
But at this time, the Confiable was a prisoner in the hands of the
Spaniards, and the Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their
glory; and their influence, seconded by the charms of the young
QOecn, triumphed over the prudent, but envious remonstrances
-:f their rival.
Dec. 4, THE French King accordingly applied to the Parliament of Scot-

557 land, which appointed eight of its members - to represent the

whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
character, were some of the most avowed and zealous advocates
for the Reformation; by which, may be estimated the degree of
respect and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kingdom. The instruCtions of the Parliament to those commis-
fioners flill remain 1:, and do honour to the wisdom and integrity
of that afimbly. At the fame time that they manifetfed, with re-
spcd to the articles of marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity
and intcrefi of their Sovereign, they employed every precaution
which prudence could dictate, for preserving the liberty and inde-

* lMclv. Mcm. 15.

-1 Viz. The Archbishop of Glasgow, the Biflhop of Ross, the Bifliop of Orkney,

the Earls of Rotlics and Caflils, Lordl Flccming, Lord Scton, the Prior of St. An-
dlrcw's, and John Erfkin of Dun.

:I Kecith, Appcid 1 3.

7 pendlilc<':

pendence of the nation, and for securing the succession of the BooK IT.
Crown in the house of Hamilton.

WiTH regard to each of these, the Scots obtained whatever fa-

tisfadion their fear orjealoufy could demand. The young Queen,
the Dauphin, and the King of France ratified every article, with
the mofl solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, un-
der their hands and feals. But on the part of France, all this
was one continued scene of studied and elaborate deceit. Previous
to these public tranfadtions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjust,
and invalid; by which, failing the heirs of her own body, Ihe
conferred the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or
succession might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
France, declaring all promises to the contrary, which the neceflity
of her affairs and the follicitations of her fubjeds had extorted,
or might extort, from her, to be void and of no obligation ".
As it gives us a proper idea of the charaCter of the French court
under Henry II. we may observe that the King himself, the Keeper
of the Great Seals, the Duke of Guile, and the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, were the persons engaged in conducting this perfidious and
dillonourable projec. The Queen of Scots was the only inno-
cent aator in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience,
her education in a foreign country, and her deference to her
uncle's will, muff vindicate lier, in the judgment of every impar-
tial perfbn, fiom any imputation of blame on that account.

Tins grant, by which Mary beflowed the inheritance of her
Lingdom upon frrangers, was concealed with the utinoRl care from

s Corps Diplomat. torn. v. 21. Kcith, 73.

Ilc['

BOOK II. her subj-es. They seem, however, not to have been unacquaint-
' - ' ed with the intention of the French to overturn the settlement of

the succession in favour of the duke of Chatelherault. The zeal,
with which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the mea-
fures of the Queen Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears
and iufpicions of that prudent prelate, on this head *.
Ap'S'l 1+, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and

the French, who had hitherto affected to draw a veil over their de-
signs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions without
any dilguife. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the Dauphin should assume the name of King of Scotland.
This they confidered only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They in-
lifted that the Dauphin's title should be publickly recognized; that
'the Crown Matrimonial should be conferred upon him; and that
all the rights pertaining to the husband of a Queen should be vetted
in his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heiress kept possession of her estate during his own life, if he hap-
pened to survive her, and the children born of the marriage+. This
was called the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at ap-
plying this rule, which takes place in private inheritancs, to the
succession of the kingdom; and that seems to be implied in
their demand of the Crown tMatrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the
Scottish historians, and which they have negleced to explain.
As the French had reason to expect difficulties in carrying through

* About this time, the French fecm to have had rome design of reviving the Earl

of Lcnnox's pretcnfions to the Succeflion, in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke
of Chatelherault. Ilaynes, 2I5, 219. Forbc Collcl. vol. i. 189.

t Reg. Maj, lib, ii. 58. t

this

this measure, they began with founding the deputies who were BooK II.
then at Paris. The English, in the marriage articles between their -
Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to the age, of that
prudent jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner should be
admitted so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottiih
deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin, expressed
themselves with remarkable caution *. Their answer was in the
fame spirit, refpecful, but firm; and discovered a fixed reiblution
of contenting to nothing, that tended to introduce any alteration
in the order of succession to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies t happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effeas
of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by the
emissaries of the house of Guise. The historians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refpeEt to stories of this kind,
which are so well calculated to please the malignity of some men,
and to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all,
that, in every age, they have been swallowed without examination,
and believed contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots should easily
give credit to a suspicion, which received such strong colours of
probability, both from their own resentment, and fiom the known
charader of the Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
juflice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human nature, it mull, how-
ever, be observed, that as we can discover no motive, which could
induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scots of that
age, influenced by national animositics and prejudices, were inca-

* Kcith, Append. 20.
-- The Biflop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothcs, the Earl of Caffils, and Lord
Fleming.

VOL. I. T pable

BOOK II. pable of examining the circumitances of the cafe with calmness, or
'-v of judging concerning them with candour. All parties agreed in,

believing the French to have been guilty of this deteflable adion;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase the aversion for
them which was growing among all ranks of men.

The Regent NOTXWITIISTANDI-NG the cold reception which their proposal
prevail, on the
Ptarlinient to concerning the Gorown lMatriimonial met with from the Scottish de-
Novm 2'9. puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par-

tizans of the house of H-amilton, suspicious of their designs upon
the succession, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the
feeble and unsteady conduc of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withstand the influence of France,
and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded, on this occasion,
by all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Besides, that
artful Princess, dressed out the French demands in a less offensive
garb, and threw in so many limitations as fecmed to render them
of finall confequcnce. These either deceived the Scots, or removed
their scruples; and in compliance to the Queen, they pafied an ad',
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and with the
iondeft credulity, trusted to tire frail security of words and statutes,
againfli the dangerous encroachments of power '!.
Con:'tinlct to Tii concurrence of the Proteflants, with the Queen Regent,

Lo1t. 11-" in promoting a mcafire ob acceptable to France, while the Popill

clergy under the influence of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, op-
polfed it with Io much violence -', is one of those singular circum-

Th 'Ieli AJc of Patlianment is worded with the utmofl carc, with a view to guard

.q : inft any breach of the orlcr of fucccllioi. But the Duke, not relying on this
alone( enticr !d a f olCemn protefl-tion to secure his own right, Keith, 76. It is plain,
that he ( 'lpclc'd ht e I lcinch of having f onm intention to set aside hi riglit of lucccf-
fioln; ,,), il.o cd. if they had nol d(Cfigll of that kind, the nagcrncrs with which they
uItd ili}
thi il tLCl1;ill wa; chi tlilli. 't Mclv. 47.

flances,

fiances, in the conduCt of parties, for which this period is so re- BooK iI.
markable. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dextrous '--
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The Protestants were, by this
time, almost equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own flrength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclesiastics against them. They longed to be
exempted from this oppressive jurifdidion, and publickly to enjoy
the liberty of profefing those opinions, and of exercising that wor-
ship, which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in
truth, and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which
the whole weight of priestly authoritywas opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence must extort it from the
reluctant hand of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, they
might expeCt it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recourse suddenly; and fubjeds seldom venture upon refifiance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On
this occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped to
merit her protection. This disposition the Qcen encouraged to the
utmost, and amuscd them so artfully with many promises, and
some concessions, that, by their assistance, the surmounted in Par-
liament the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jcaloufy,
which would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTIIER circumltance contributed foinevhat to acquire the

Regent fiich conlidcrabl-lc influence in this Parliament. In Scotlandl,
all the bilhoprics, andi those abbeys whicl conflrrcd a title to a
i'at in Parliament, were in the gift of the crown '. From the time

* Sec EcIk T.

T 2 of

BOOK II. of her accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her own

hands almost all those which became vacant, except such as were,
to the great disgust of the nation, beflowed upon foreigners.
Among there, her brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the
abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy foundations
in the kingdom *. By this conduc, she thinned the ecclesiastical
bench t, which was entirely under the influence of the Archbishop
of St. Andrew's, and which, by its numbers and authority, usually
had great weight in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give, at that time, of little consequence.

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one of the most powerful, and the other the most popular leader of
the Protestants, were appointed to carry the crown and other en-
signs of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this. they were diverted
by the part they were called to at, in a more interesting scene,
Mwhich now begins to open.

Elizabeth fuc- BEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceflary to observe, that,
ceeds to the
Crown ofhe the I7th of November, Mary of England finished her short,
England. and inglorious reign. Her filter Elizabeth took possession of the

throne without opposition; and the Protestant religion was, once
more, established by law in England. The accession of a- Queen,
who, under very difficult circumstances, had given itrong indica-
tions of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her
reign so illustrious, attraQed the eyes of all Europe. Among the
Scots both parties observed her first motions with the utmost con-
cern, as they easily foresaw that she would not remain long an in-
different fpeliator of their tranfadions.

' Lefly, 202.
t It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Lefly calls a very full one,
that only fcvcn iiffhops and fixtccn Abbots were prefcnt.

UNDER

UNDER many discouragements and much oppression, the Re- BooK'It.

formation advanced towards a full establishment in Scotland. All -^
the low country, the most populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinaured with the Pro-
teftant opinions; and if the fame impressions were not made in the
more distant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame dif-
positions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whole
most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those, who
desired their inftrutions. Among a people bred to arms, and so
prone to mutiny as the Scots; and in an age, when religious pas-
fibns had taken such strong possession of the human mind, and:
moved and agitated it with so much violence; the peaceable and
regular demeanour of so. numerous a party is truly aflonifhing.
From the death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffered
in Scotland for the Protestant religion, thirty years had. elapsed,
and during so long a period, no violation.of public order or tran-
quillity had proceeded from that se&t;. and though roused and
irritated by the most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they
did, in no instance, transgress those bounds of duty which the law
prescribes to fubjeds. Besides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the protecion which the Queen Regent, from political motives,
afforded them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's.
encouraged this pacific disposition. That. prelate, whose private
life cotemporary writers tax with great irregularities-t, governed
the church, for some years, with a temper and prudence of which
there are few examples in that age.. But some time before the

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioncd by private revenge, and being

contrived and executed by sixteen persons only, cannot, with justice, be imputed to
the whole Protcflant party.

lI Knox, Buchanan, Keith, 208.

meeting-

Boo; II meeting oflaft Parliament, the Archbishop departed from those

~- lhumane maxims, by which he had hitherto regulated his conduc;

and whether, in spite to the Queen, who had entered into so close
an union with the Protestants, or in compliance with the impor-
tunities of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of persecution against
the Reformed; sentenced to the flames an aged priest, who had
been conviced of embracing the Protestant opinions; and fum-
moned several others, fufpeted of the fame crime, to appear before
a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

N T I-IN G could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un-

expected and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which they
espoused the defence of a cause, that now seemed devoted to de-
ftrucion. They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regent; and
as her success in the Parliament, which was then about to meet,
depended on their concurrence, she not only sheltered them from
the impending storm, but permitted them the exercise of their re-
ligion, with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unfa-
tisficd with this precarious tenure, by which they held their reli-
gious liberty, the Protestants laboured to render their possession of
it more fecurc and indcpendent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for some legal protceion, against the
exorbitant and opprcfiive jurifdiaion of the ecclesiastical courts,
wvhich, by their arbitrary method of proceeding, founded in the
.canon law, were led to cnrtcnces thc most fllocking to humanity,
'by maxims the moos repugnant to jufticc. But the Queen, who
dreaded the cil'cls of a debate on this delicate fubiject, which could
*nlt fail of exciting high and dangerous paflions, prevailed on the
leaders of the party, by new and more folcrn promifcs of her pro-
te0.ion, to dclift lfom any application to Parliamcnt, where their

numnbers

t

rnumbers and influence would, in all probability, have procured BooK II.
them, if not the entire redress, at least, some mitigation of their -
grievances.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po-

pifll clergy, but with the fame ill success, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addressed to.that order of
men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error, are
lacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered to truth; but from any society of men, no such efort can
be expeted. The corruptions of a society, recommended by corn-
mon utility, and justified by universal pratice, are viewed, by its
members, without shame, or horror; and Reformation never pro-
ceeds from themselves, but is always forced upon them by some
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behaviour of the convocation in the present conjunCture. All
dhe demands of the Protestants were rejeced with contempt; and
the Popiih clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent concef-
sions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted.
the doCtrines of their church, concerning some of the most ex-
ceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new
offence .

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Proteflants firfl

began to fuiifpe fomc change in the Regent's difrpoition towards
them. Thoughl joined with them for many years, by intcrel, and
united, as they conceived, by the firongell ties of afifc4ion and of
gratitude, fhie difcovcrcd, on this occation, evident s)ymptoms, not
onily of coldncfis, but of a growing dil' ufn and avcrfion. In order

" Kcitl, 81.
7 t1,

BooK II. to account for this, our historians do little more than produce the
t.__-.- trite observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter the

characer, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no longer
preserved her accustomed moderation, 'but, with an insolence usual
to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose assistance she
had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity
of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the Queen's difpo-
fition, that we must search for the motives of her present conduct.
These were derived from another, and a more remote source,
which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfaaions, we shall en-
deavour to open with some care.

Ambitious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc-
views of the
.rinces of cefsful, than daring; 'but all their schemes were distinguished by

n. being vast and unbounded. Though strangers at the court of

France, their eminent qualities had raised them, in a short time,
to an height of power, superior to that of all other fubjeCs, and
had placed them on a level even with the Princes of the blood
themfelvcs. The church, the army, the revenue, were under
their direcdion. Nothing but the royal dignity remained unat-
taincd, and they were elevated to a near alliance with it, by the
marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gra-
tify their own vanity, and to render their niece more worthy the
heir of France, they set on foot her claim to the Crown of England,
which was founded on pretences not unplaufiblc.

THIm tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII, are known

to all the world. Movcd by the caprices of his love, or of his
accfcntment, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or

beheaded

beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he married. In order to BooK IL.
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by 1559'
at of Parliament; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistence
which distinguishes his character, he, in his last will, whereby he
was impowered to fettle the order of succession, called both of
them to the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward;
and, at the fame time, pafling by the posterity of his eldet filler
Margaret Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of succession
to continue in the descendants of his younger siser, the Duchess
of Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity whereof was ad-
mitted by the English, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her acceflion
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her finser Eliza-
beth, and rendered her possession of it precarious and insecure.
Rome trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen
of such eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears alarmed
the court of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a
throne, to which the Queen of Scots could form so many preten-
sions, occupied by a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good
Catholics, excluded her from any legal right of succession. Tlc
impotent hatred of the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of
Philip II. would have produced no sudden or formidable cfccLt
The ardent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain,
who, at that time, governed the court of France, was more dc-
cilivc, and more to be dreaded. Infligatcc( by them, Icnry,
soon after the death of Mary, persuadcd his daughter-in-law and '(ic y rcr-
hcr huifband, to afiulln the title of King and Quccn of England. .itninc th
They affectcd to publilh this to all Europe. They usec that flyle tio' 0:giJn

VOL. I. U and

!BoK II. and appellation in public papers, some of which flill remain*.

' Thle arms of England were engraved on their coin and plate, and
1559.

horn by them on all occasions. No preparations, however, were
made to support this impolitic and premature claim. Elizabeth
was already feated on her throne; she poffefled all the intrepidity
of spirit, and all the arts of policy, which were necefEaly for
miaintaning that station. England was growing into reputation
fir naval power. The marine of France had been utterly neg-
lected; and Scotland remained the only avenue, by which the

i, '.",ve to i- territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It was on that fide,
'! 1! EIng-
L.... tIhrefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined to make their

attackl-; and, by using the name and prctenfions of the Scottifhi
Qncen, they hoped to rouze the Englilh Catholics, formidable at
that time by their zeal and numbers, and cxafperated to the ut-
molt against Elizabeth, on account of the change which she had
made in the national religion.

1, i,,,,.'o IJr wa~is vain to cxpcsE the affillance of the Scottifl Protestants
;,, ,'A : t , , to dethronle a Qtiecn, whom all Europe esteemed the guardian

:, .'j;i' and diefcl nder of the lReformed faith. To break the power and

reputation of tllat party in Scotland, became, for this reason, a
neccclIary lep towards the invasion of England. WVith this, the
i'liiliccs of Lorr:ain rcfolvcd to open their fchcmc. And as perse-
"iiltin) was the only method for lupprefring religiols opinions,
ll!w)\vll il tllat agc, or dictatcd l)y the despotic and sanguinary
l il'-it (f tli llfIii li fnpcrlflitionl, tills, in its utmoflt violence, they
1.:L r-,,inl,(ld ti epl)lo)y. Tlhe arl of Argyll, tile Prior of St.
/\il(il-c \'s, ;int!1 othelr leadlcs o(- tlie party, \were imarked out 1))

'' A ci c[ 's | )iluih. Scot. No. 6[8 & 1 6),
l'.bc , C, ]:'dt . i. ? ',:. ' 7

tillcI'.

them for immediate deftrurtion'; and they hoped, by punlliling BooK IIL
them, to intimidate their followers. Inftrudions for this pur- -"-- 9

r559.

pose were sent from France to the Queen Regent. That 1humane
and sagacious Princess condemned a measure, which was equally
violent and impolitic. By long refidcnce in Scotland, the had
become acquainted with the eager and impatient temper of the
nation; the well knew the power, the number, and popularity of
the Proteflant leaders; and had been a witnecs to the intrepid and
unconquerable resolution which religious fervour could infpirc.
What, then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous spirit,
which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce bccn able to
restrain ? If it once broke loose, the authority of a Regent would
be little capable to subdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if,
in order to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give
the alarm to the whole nation, irritated already at the exccflive
power which the French possessed in the kingdom, and suspicious
of all their designs. Amidst the shock which this might occa-
sion, far from hoping to exterminate the Protestant doCcrine, it
would be well if the whole fabric of the established church were
not filaken, and perhaps overturned from the foundation. ThciL
prudent remonfirances made no imprcllion on her brotlcrs; pre-
cipitant, but inflexible in all their rcfolutions, thly illi'C( oni
the full and rigorous execution of tlheir plall. Mary, panionatcly
devoted to the intcrefis of France, alnd rcady, oin all occalionls, to
l1crifice her own opinions to the inclinattions of licr brothcrs, pre-
pa:.red to execute their coimmands, with i.l!i;)litl iublnllilioi -|'; andc
contrary to lier own judgl nllt, and to all the rules o' ibund policy,

* I'oibcs, i. 15:'.
I MclI , . I. ,icm. tc CaflclnauI. ;p. J[c. \vo'. ii. 4, (G.

U ihec

BOOK II. the became the instrument of exciting civil commotions in Scot-

559-- land, which ended with the ruin of the French power, and of
'559.

the Popish religion in that kingdom.

The Rerent FRonM the time of the Queen's competition for the Regency
di wll ihT r- with the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popish clergy, under the di-
g ir lto e retion of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in

opposition to all her measures. Her first flep towards the execu-
tion of her new scheme was to regain their favour. Nor was
this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popish ecclesiastics,
separated from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and most successful invention of human policy; and com-
bined among themselves in the closest and most sacred union;
have been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all private and
particular pafTions to the dignity and interest of their order.
Delighted, on this occasion, with the profped of triumphing over
a faction, whose encroachments they had long dreaded; and
animated with the hopes of re-establishing their declining gran-
deur on a firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory of
pail injuries, and engaged to second the Queen in all her attempts
to check the progress of the Reformation. The Queen, being
secure of their aflitance, openly approved of the decrees of the
convocation, by which the principles of the Reformers were con-
demned; and at the fame time, ffie issued a Proclamation, en-
joining all persons to observe the approaching feflival of Easter,
according to the Romifli ritual.

As it was no longer pollible to miflake the Queen's intentions,

the Proteflants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glcncairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of

Loudon,

Loudon, to expostulate with her, concerning this change towards BOOK II.
severity, which their former services had so little merited, and '559
which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to expect.
She, without disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution
of extirpating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And,
upon their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly,
but honest boldness, ihe so far forgot her usual moderation, as to
utter a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition
may be to entertain it, prudence should teach them to conceal as
much as possible. " The promises of Princes, fays she, ought

not to be too carefully remembered, nor the performance of
" them exacted, unless it suits their own conveniency."

THE indignation which betrayed the Queen into this rafim ex- Summons
preflion, was nothing in comparison of that, with which she was their preach-

ers o(0 appear

animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the Reformed before her.
religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once,
she threw off the mask, and commanded all the Proteflant preach-
ers in the kingdom to be summoned to a court of juflice, which
was to be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Prote-
ftants, who, from their union, began, about this time, to be
difiinguifhed by the name of the CONGREGATION, were
alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger; and instantly re-
solved not to abandon the men, to whom they were indebted for
the most valuable of all blessings, the knowledge of truth. At
that time there prevailed in Scotland, with refpec to criminal
trials, a cuflom, introduced, at first, by the inflitutions of vas-
falagc and clanfhip, and tolerated, afterwards, under a feeble
government; any person accuscd of a crime was accompanied to
the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends ;lrd adherents, al-
fcmnblcd for that purpofc, from every corner of the kingdom.

Authorized

BooK II. Authorized by this ancient praQice, the Reformed convened, in
~-" 5 ' great numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The Queen
i559.

dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed,
and in order to prevent them from advancing, she empowered
John 'Erskine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the
party, to promise, in her name, that she would put a stop to the
intended trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue ad-
vanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced himself
of the Qteen's sincerity, served her with the utmost zeal. And
the Protcflants, avcrfe from proceeding to any ad of violence,
lifecned with pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The preachers,
with a few leaders of the party, remained at Perth ; the mul-
titude, which had gathered from different parts of the kingdom,
dispersed, and retired to their own habitations.

Bi-rc.ks a r..c- BUT, notwithltanding this solemn promise, the Queen, on the
misc on xi hch
they had re- tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been

iil. umnloncd, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of justice
took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconsistent
with that integrity which should prevail in all tranfal ions between
Sovrcc;igns and their fblljcts, thle Qccn forfeited the eflccrm
and confidence of the whole nation. The Protefcants, fliocked
no let-; at the indecency, with which fle viola.ted the public failh,
than at the daiigcr lwich lihreatened tliemlfllvs, prcpared bloldly
for their own dei !rce. gErkline, cnraged at having Ien m:acle
the innfllriiment for decccivin' liis party, il anltly aba;ndnecd Stir-
lingt, and re'pairii]ng to PeIrtl, added to tle zeal of lis albociatc;,
by his relprcllcltations of the Q1 en's inllcxible rcltlution to fillp-
prois their religion.

TiE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his re- BOOK I1.
presentations: IHe having been carried a prisoner into France, I-5

'559.
together wYith the other persons taken in the caflie of St. An- ' h occ-

"i~~~~~~~~~

i !s* '

i i * r~~~~~~ion, n n infsr-

drew's, soon made his escape out of that country; and residing ie;lion at
sometimes in England, fometimcs in Scotland, had, at lafc, been
driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of tlh Popiih cler-
gy, and was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was
called by the leaders of the Protcelants in Scotland; and, in
compliance with their solicitations, he set out for his native
country, where he arrived a few dcays before the tlial appoint-
ed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth, to share with
his brethren in the common danger, or to aftfil them in pro-
moting the common cause. While their minds were in that
iferlent, ;which the Queen's perfidioufilefs and their own danger
occasioned, lie mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
against idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmoll rage.
The indl;cretion of a priclft, who, immediately after Knox's fe--
iln, w-as 1)reparilng to celebrate mass, and began to decorate tlh
aitar for that purpose, precipitated them into immediate a1cion.
V i tIl tumultualry, but irresistible violence, they fell upon the
churches in that city, overturned the altars, defaced the 1piuLlres,
bro1ke in pieces the images; and proceeding next to the monafle-.
rics, they, in a few hours, laid tlioe fUlnptlt)tous lrics alimofl
leCvl witli tIle groulld. Tllis riotous inilliri-ed'ion was not tIle es-
fc1: of any concert or previous deliberationl: cenlurfed y the re-
I;frmed preachers, andl prublicklIy condelmned l, tlie perlons o
Imoll power andt credit with tlle plarty, it muilt be regarded merel y
;,s ai accidelntal ci ruptio of tputlar rag1 ,::.

!.' Kinox: Ilif. 127, 1 ,'.

BOOK II. BUT to the Queen herself, these proceedings appeared in a very

55~' different light. Besides their manifest contempt for her authority,
'559.

The Kegent the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, .which she
marches ,-
gainft them. esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both there accounts, the de-

termined to infliEt the severest vengeance on the whole party. She
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces the could levy of a sudden, she marched
diretly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the Protestant leaders, be-
fore they could assemble their followers, whom out of confidence in
her disingenuous promises they had been rashly induced to dismiss.
Intelligence of there preparations and menaces was soon conveyed
to Perth. The Protestants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen,
by addresses both to herself, and to the persons of greatest credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, animated
with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so good a
cause, flocked, in such numbers, to Perth, that they not only fe-
cured the town from danger, but, within a few days, were in a
condition to take the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced
with an army 7000 strong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to engage. The

Queen dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the ser-
vour of religion raised above the sense of fear, or of danger. The
Protestants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior of
St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons of their party, flill
adhering to the Queen; and dcftitute of their aid and counfcl, dc-
clincd hazarding an aaion, the ill filccefs of which might have
proved the ruin of her cause. The profpcl of an accommoda-
tion was for these rcafons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll

a nd

and the Prior, who were the Queen's commiflioners for conducting BOOK II.
the negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of reconciling 1-'

I559.

the contending fadions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving unex-
pectedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation, aug-
mented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accordingly A treaty con-
concluded, in which it was stipulated, that both armies hould be CluLd.
disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen; that in-
demnity fliould be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurrecion; that no French garri-
son should be left in Perth, and no French soldiers fiould approach
within three miles of that place; and that a Parliament fliould
immediately be held, in order to colnpofe whatever Jif'erenccs
might fill remain ',

THE leaders of the Congregation, distrustful of the (Qeen's fin- May 29.

cerity, and sensible that conceflions, flowing not from inclination,
but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could not long remain
in force, entered into a new association, by which they bound
themselves, on the first infringement of the present treaty, or on
the least appearance of danger to their religion, to reassemble their
followers, and to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the
cause of God and of their country --.

THIE Queen, by her conduct, demonstratcd there precautions to n.ol:cn hl,

the Ict .

be the result of no groundless or unneccfiary iear. No fooncr were
the Protcflant forces difiificd, than flil broke every article in the
treaty. She introduced French troops into Perlh, fined fi:ncl oi
Itic inhabitants, banifehd others, removed thelc 'laU, ilr;ttcs out oi:
ollicc, and, on her retiring to Stirling., ilic left clii helr ac gair-

Kcith, 89. *| Knox, i>;.
VOL. I. X riil

BoOK II. rifon of 600 men, with orders to allow the exercise of no other

5 religion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of Perth, a place
'559.

at that time of some strength, and a town the moit proper of any
in the kingdom for the fRation of a garrison, seems to have allured
the Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach of public
faith; which she endeavoured to colour, by alleging that the
body of men left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots,
though kept in pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the Religion, but the Liberties of the
kingdom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be
employed as infiruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing
the yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots
then was, the poverty of their country made it impossible to keep
their armies long assembled; and even a very frnall body of regular
troops might have proved formidable to the nation, though con-
sifting wholly of soldiers. But what number of French forces were
then in Scotland, at what times, and under what pretexts they
returned, after having left the kingdom in the year 1550, we can-
not, with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary historians often
fele&c, with little judgment, the circumstances which they tranfinit
to posterity; and, with rcfpcd to matters of the greatest curiosity
and importance, leave ticceeding ages altogcther in the dark. We
may coInjcurc however, from rome paitages in Buchanan, that
the French and Scots in French pay, amounted at Icaft to 3000
menC, ulldcr the command of Mlonf. D'Oytcl, a creature of the
houitc of Guile; and they werc soon augLmclntcd to a much more
formiditl)lc number.

TII:

THE Queen, encouraged by having so considerable a body of BOOK II.

well difeiplined troops at her command, and intfigated by the vio- I-'"'
lent counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash aaion, once more
threw the nation into the most dangerous convulsions. The Earl The Protest-

rnts again

of Argyll and Prior of St. Andrew's instantly deserted a court, talck arms.
where faith and honour seemed to them to be no longer regarded.
The Barons from the neighbouring counties repaired to them, the
preachers rouzed the people to arms, and wherever they came, the
fame violent operations, which accident had occasioned at Perth,
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged multitude was
let loose, and churches and monasteries, the monuments of eccle-
fiaftic pride and luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the QOeen, without losing a

moment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congre-
gation got the ftaitt, once more, of her vigilance and activity. in
that warlike age, when all men were accustomed to arms, and on
the least profped of danger were ready to run to them, the leaders
of the Protestants found no difficulty to raise an army. Though
they set out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an hundred
horse, crowds flocked to their tfandards fiom every corner of the
country through which they marched, and before they reached
Falkland, a village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
thle Queen with tfuperior force 't

TiE Queccen filrprized at the approach of so ifrmidable a lboy,

which was drawn up by its leaders iln fich a mallncl', as; adddlt
greatly in appcearance to its numllbers, had a;galln rccourjc to licc--

ri Knox, .11.

BooK II. ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Pro-

teflant religion, their zeal for which had at first rouzed the leaders
1559.

of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had

They aim at now in view. They were animated with the warmest love of civil
redreffin, ci-
vil as w^ll as liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, from the
grievances attempts of the French forces; and these two paflions mingling,

added reciprocally to each other's strength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the human
mind with more liberal and generous sentiments concerning civil
government. The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to
the power of Princes. The implicit fubmiflion to all hl.r decrees,
which is exated by the Romifli Church, prepares and breaks the
mind for political servitude; and the dotrines of the Reformers)
by overturning the established system of fuperfiition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold spirit of enquiry,
which led men to reje&t theological errors, accompanied them in
other sciences, and discovered every where the fame manly zeal
for truth. A new study introduced at the fame time, added greater
force to the spirit of liberty. Men became acquainted with the
Greek and Roman authors, who described exquisite models of free
government, far superior to the inaccurate and oppressive system
eflabliflcd by the feudal law; and produced such illuflrious ex-
amnples of public virtue as wonderfully ifuitcd both the circumnftances,
and spirit of that age. Many among the mofl eminent reformers,
wcrc tlhcmflclvcs confidcrable maflers in ancient learning; and all
of tlicm cngc(rly) adopted the maxims and spirit of the ancients,
wvtl regardi to government :-. The moil ardent love of liberty

accompanicd

*Y The cxccfnive ad(mir;ition i of isncicnt policy was tle occafioi of Knox's f.imous
book coIiccrniiin the Govrnim'cnt of JlJomcn, vhlcrciii, conformable to the n.xin:;

of

accompanied the Proteflant religion, throughout all its progress; BOOK II.
and wherever it was embraced, it rouzed an independent spirit, 559.
which rendered men attentive to their privileges as fubjecs, and
jealous of the incroachments of their Sovereigns. Knox, and the
other preachers of the Reformation, infused generous sentiments
concerning government into the minds of their hearers; and the
Scottish Barons, naturally free and bold, were prompted to assert
their rights with more freedom and boldness than ever. Instead of
obeying the Queen Regent, who had enjoined them to lay down
their arms, they demanded not only the redrcfs of their religious
grievances, but as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and
securing its liberties, required the immediate expulsion of the
French troops out of Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power
to make so important a concession, without the concurrence of the
French Monarch; and as some time was requisite in order to obtain
that, she hoped, during this interval, to receive such reinforce-
ments from France, as would insure the accomplishment of that
dcfign, which she had twice attempted with unequal flrength.
Mean while, fihe agreed to a cessation of arms for eight days, and, June 11.
before the expiration of these, engaged to transport the Frencl
troops to the South fide of the Forth ; and to fend commiflioncrs
to St. Andrew's, who fliould labour to bring all differ;,'..: to ac-
coimmodation. As Ihe hoped, by means of the Frenclh lioops, to
overawe the Protcllants in the southern counties, the sori-er article

of the ancient legislators, which modern expcrience has [-roved to be ill ffiundcd, he
prlnounces the elevation of wom ien to the fuprcme mthol ity, to be utreily d(rftruL!i . C
of god government. lis principles, authorities, andl cx:nli.s tvcre .al dr;wn f,):n]
,lnc cit writers. The fanc ohbLrC ation may be nl de wvih " ( I

;,Id

to I.,'s

)ialongue, e ,

'/ti,-. Rl 0/i ('u ld Scstos. It is bfunded not on h

il L i mI ims f lcudd., but
ofl a Cinllt gOVC llllllt.

BOOK II. in the treaty was puntually executed; the latter, having been

L-"" inserted merely to amuse the Congregation, was no longer rememni
1559.

bered.

Afecond trea- BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the Queen
ty violated.

loft all credit with her adversaries; and no safety appearing in any
other course, they again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated between
Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining sub-
jeted to the insolence and exacions of the garrison, which the
OQeen had left there, implored the assistance of the Congregation
for their relief. Thither they marched, and having, without effect,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The Queen employed
the Earl of Huntly and Lord Erskine to divert them from this
enterprize. But her wonted artifices were now of no avail; re-
peated so often, they could deceive no longer; and without liften-
ing to her offers, the Protestants continued the siege, and soon
obliged the garrison to capitulate.

Rapid march AFTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stir-
nud ficcsC of
tlic rITLI- linSg, a place of some strength, and, from its command of the only
c""tS, bridge over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of

the Congregation, having intelligence of her dcfign, prevented the
cxecution of it, by a hafly march thither, with part of their forces.
The inhabitants, heartily attachcd to tlle cause, fct open to them
the satcs of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame
rapidity, towardls Edinburgh, which the Quccn, on their approacll,
aibandoned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

TIIE Protestant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the BOOK II.
ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excesses of violence were '-T"--

1559.

committed upon churches and monasteries. The former were
spoiled of every decoration, which was then esteemed sacred, the
latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at this distance of time, to
condemn the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the over-
throw of so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our ancestors
magnificence, and among the noblest ornaments of the kingdom.
But, amidst the violence of a Reformation, carried on in oppofi-
tion to legal authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more proper to allure
and interest the multitude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the
eflablifhed church. However absurd and ill-founded the fpecula-
tive errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and attention are requi-
site towards discovering them. The abuses and corruptions, which
had crept into the public worship of that church, lay more open
to observation, and by firiking the senses, excited more universal
disgust. Under the long reign of Heathenism, superstition seems to
have exhausted its talent of invention, so that when a superstitious
spirit seized Christians, they were obliged to imitate the Heathens
in the pomp and magnificence of their ceremonies, and to borrow
from them the ornaments and decorations of their temples. To the
pure and simple worflip of the primitive Chrillians, there succeedcd
a ipecies of splendid idolatry, nearly resembling those Pagan origi-
nals, whence it had been copied. The contrariety of Lfclh oblcr-
vances, to the spirit of Chrillianity, was almot thel firfl thing, in
thc IRomilhl fyflem, which awakened the indignation of the Rcilorn-
crs, wlo applying to thlcc, the dcnunciations in the Old Tclla-
mncnt againnl idolatry, imagined that they could not endeavour at
ll)prlcfllng tlhem, with too much zeal. No talk could be more

5 acceptable

BOOK II. acceptable to the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fuperfti-
-'"--'J tion; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the

I559.

man whose hand was most adventrous and successful in executing a
work efeemcd so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain this
impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its rallies
were, they tended direcly to that end which they had in view;
for by demolishing the monasteries throughout the kingdom, and
setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it impossible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidit there irregular proceedings, a circumstance, which

does honour to the conduCt and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed to any personal in-
fult, and not a single man suffered death .

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which these

great revolutions were effeted, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 300
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior of
St. Andrew's t-; with this inconsiderable force they advanced. But
wherever they came, the people joined them in a body ; their army
was seldom lcfs numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every town
were thrown open to receive them; and, without i-riking a single
Imne 29. blow, they took poficifion of the capital of the kingdom.

Tiis rapid and aflonilfing ficcefs seems to have encouraged the
Reformecrs to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.

Lcfly, 231. i1 Keith, 9,.

Nol:

Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration for their religion, Book II.
they now, openly, aimed at establishing the Protestant doctrine on

'559.

the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their
residence at Edinburgh; and, by their appointment, Knox and
some other preachers taking poffeflion of the pulpits, which had
been abandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed against the
errors of Popery, with such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining
many proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had prudently given way

to a torrent which ihe could not resist, observed, with pleasure,
that it now began to subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the expences of a cain-
paign, protracted so long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhausted all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous
or wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh.
As intelligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty, what-
ever was tranfaaed at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar.
And the Queen, regulating her own condua by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amused them with the profpcd of an im-
mediate accommodation; while, at the fame time, fle, by studicd
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpof, to such a lcngth,
that, in the end, the party dwindled to an inconfiderlabl numbler,
aint, as if peace had been already re-cftablifhlcd, bccalle c:r-l'-'is oi'
military dilciplinc. The Q!ccn, who watched for fuilh an op'1(or-
tinily, advanced, uncxpcdedlly, by a fiutld(n nlmarcl in tihe i!;';!li
with all hlerforces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled tlhat iity

VOL. 1. Y v' it.

BOOK IT. with the ntmoft consternation. The Protestants, weakened by the

imprudent dispersion of their followers, durst not encounter the
French troops in the open field; and were even unable to defend an
ill-fortified town against their afflults. Unwilling, however, to
abandon the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by
facing the enemies army, to gain time for colle&cing their own as-
fociates. But, the Queen, in spite of all their resistance, would
have easily forced her way into the town, if the seasonable conclu-
lion of a truce had not procured her admission, without the effu-
sion of blood.
A tlird treaty. TIIEIR dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to

liften to any overtures of peace; and as the Qecen was looking
daily for the arrival of a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pec&ed great advantages from a ceflation of arms, she alii agreed
to it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a suspension of
hostilities, from the 24th of July to the ioth of January, it was
flipulated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants
fiould open the gates of Edinburgh next morning to the Queen
Regent; remain in dutiful fubjeaion to her government; abtain
from all future violation of religious houses; and give no interrup-
tion to the established clergy, either in the discharge of their func-
tions, or in the enjoyment of their benefices. On the other hand,
the Queen agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or profcf-
fors of the Protcflant religion; to allow no other form of worflip
in ldinblrgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and pub-
lic excrcilc of it all over tle kingdom. The Qucen, by thcl
liberal conccllions in behalf of their religion, lhopcd to obotl the
Protcflants, andl cxpeL:ed, from indulging their favourite pali;on,
to rlCil(ir them more compliant with rclpca to other articles, pr-

5 ticularly

ticularly the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. The BooK II.
anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining this body of men,
rendered them, more and more, the objecs of national jealousy
and aversion. The immediate expulsion of them was therefore
demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but the Queen, taking
advantage of the distress of the adverse party, eluded the request,
and would consent to nothing more, than that a French garrison
should not be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate state of their affairs, imposed on the Congrega-

tion the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, however,
was very far from giving them fatisfaaion. Whatever apprcllen-
sions the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces
in the kingdom, were abundantly justified during the late com-
motions. A small body of those troops, maintained in conflant
pay, and rendered formidable by regular discipline, had checked
the progress of a martial people, though animated with zeal both
for religion and liberty. The smallest addition to their number,
and a considerable one was daily expected, might prove fatal to
public liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the danger of
being reduced from an independent kingdom, to the mean con-
dition of a province, annexed to the empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent calamity, the Duke

of Chatclherault, and Earl of H-untly, immediately after con-
cluding the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of the
Congregation. Theef two noblemen, the mofl potent, at tha'
time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the party, which adllhci-cd
to the eflablified church. They had followed the Qceccn, dtltiii,'
tle late commotions, and having access to ol)fcrvc moCr narrowly

Y 2 111

Boox II. the dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the

yoke which was preparing for their country, surmounted all
other considerations, and determined them rather to endanger
the religion which they professed, than to giye their aid towards
the execution of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther,
and promiied to Argyll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's,
who were appointed to meet with them, that if the Queen
should, with her usual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty
of truce, or refuse to gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by
difminling her French troops, they would, then, inflantly join
with their countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public safety, and the preservation of their liberties rendered
necefiary -..
July s. ABOUT this time, died Henry II of France; just when he had

adopted a fyrfem, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have reflored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Constable
Montmorency, by the afliftance of the Duchess of Valentinois,
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, fccmed juflly to merit. That prudent minister imputed the
infurrecilons in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardi-
nal of Lorrain, whofc violent and precipitant councils could not
fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men, whose
minds were poflclfcd with that jcaloufy, which is infcparablc from
tlec love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour which ac-

K nox, 154. -- Mclv. 49.

companies

companies religious zeal: And, in order to convince Henry, that BooK II.
he did not load his rivals with any groundless accusation,. he pre- --
vailed to have Melvil -, a Scottiflh Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inflruaions to observe the
motions both of the Regent, and of her adversaries; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by
Melvil's report.

DID history indulge herself in such speculations, it would be

amusing to enquire what a different direction might have been
given by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a dif-
ferent iflue, Melvil's report, which would have set the conduc of
the malecontents in the most favourable light, might have con-
dulced the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and
artful policy, the progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon France. Perhaps,
by gaining possession of this avenue, the French might have made
their way into England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's
title to the Crown, they might have re-eftablislied the Roman Ca-
tholic religion, and dcftroyed the liberties of that kingdom. 3But,
into this boundless field of fancy and conjecturc, the historian mull
make no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and to explain
their real caufcs and cflects, is his peculiar and only province.

Ti-iEl tragical and untimely death of the French Monarch, put .ccciT,,i of

an cnd to all moderate and pacific mlcalures, with regald to Sco(t- tll,.Coll;of
land. Thel Duke of CGuifl, and the Cardinal lis br-otlher, llupon c.
the acccflon of Francis II. a Prince void oi gcniu;, and withtlout

* 'lce Author of thec Memoirs..

clxperience

BooK II. expericiecc, assumed the chief direclion of French affairs. Allied

'559' so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Queen

of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of
regal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not
long remain inative in their hands. The fame vast schemes of
ambition, which they had planned out under the former reign,
were again resumed; and they were enabled, by possessing such
ample authority, to pursue them with more vigour, and greater
probability of success. They beheld, with infinite regret, the pro-
grefs of the Protestant religion in Scotland; and sensible what an
unsurmountable obstacle it would prove to their designs, they bent
all their fhrength to check its growth, before it rose to any greater
height. For this purpose, they carried on their preparations with
all possible expedition, and encouraged the Queen their filer to
expect, in a short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as the
zeal of their adversaries, however desperate, would not venture to
oppose.

No R were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of those

violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of France, since the
death of Henry, or careless of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of their cause, as
well as their personal safety, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of their own rcfolutions, they endeavoured to guard
against division, and to cement together more clofcly, by entering
into a flriacr bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two per-
sons concurred in this new aflbciation, who brought a great ac-
ccflion both of reputation and of power to the Party. These were
the Duke of Chatclhcrauilt, and his ckIlcl fin the F.arl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having rcfidcd some years in France, where

he

he commanded the Scottifil Guards, had imbibed the Protestant BooK II.
opinions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth, I559.
and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, with refpedt
to the points in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that junture, on the extinCtion of the
Protestant religion; in order to accomplish which, the greatest ex-
cesses of violence were committed. The church was suffered to
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were fufpeced of heresy.
Courts were erected, in different parts of France, to take cogni-
zance of this crime, and by their sentences, fcveral persons of dif-
tintion were condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to feled, for a sacrifice, some person, whose fall
might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth,
nor eminence in station, could exempt from punishment, those
who should be guilty of this unpardonable tranigretElon. The
Earl of Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy vidim".
As he was allied to one throne, and the prefumlptive heir to an-
other; as he possessed the first rank in his own country, and enjoyed
an honourable station in France; his condemnation could not flil
of making the desired impression on the whole kingdom. But the
Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall fomc expreflions, which raifel
Arran's suspicions of the design, he cfcapcd the intended blow
by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, rcfentment, all prompltcd
him to seek revenge upon theic persecutors of himself and of the
religion wli icl he profCTllhd; and as he lpafled through I'n l;ic1,
o1 Ihis return to his native country, Elizabetl, by hopes and pro-

* Thuan, lib. xxiv, ,. p4 2. Edit. Fi;1ncol .

EooK IT. mises, inflamed those passions, and sent him back into Scotland,

animated with the fame implacable aversion to France, which pof-

1559.

Fal o; A. ran fefied a great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated
joins the Pio-
thl1ant,. these sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who was

already extremely difgufled with the measures carrying on in Scot-
land; and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in
every inflance, by thol: about him, he now sufFered himself to be
drawn from the Quecn Regent; and having joined the Congrega-
tion, was confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpeC& to him, this diftintion was merely nominal.

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the pcrfon who moved
and atuated the whole body of the Proteflants, among whom, he
pofieffed that unbounded confidence, which his strenuous adherence
to their interest, and his great abilities, so justly merited. He was
the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine; and
as that amorous monarch had left several others a burden upon
the Crown, they were all leflined for the church, where they
could be placed in stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred
upon James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became dif-
gufltd with the indolence and retirement of a monastic life; and
his cnterprifing genius called him forth, to act a principal part on
a more public and conspicuous theatre. The fccne, in which lie
appeared, required talents of diffcrcnt kinds: military virtue and
political d(ilccrnmcnt were equally neccflary in order to render
himl illunlrious. These lie poffltled in an emilnent degree. To the
nmoR uiilqucflionablle pcrfonal bravery, lie added great flkill in the
art of \v:a, and in every entcrprive his arms were crowned wiLt
ftwccefs. HI-Is lagacity and penetration in civil alfi irs enable. d hinm,

;lmi (111.

amidf[ the reeling and turbulence of factions, to hold a prosperous BOOK IL
course. While his boldness in defence of the Reformation, toge- 159.
ther with the decency, and even severity of his manners, secured
him the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, without
which, it was impoifible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over
mankind.

IT was not without reason that the Queen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obftruQ her designs. And as the could
not, with all her address, make the least impression on his
fidelity to his associates, mle endeavoured to lessen his influence,
and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy and diftruf, by
insinuating that the ambition of the Prior aspired beyond the con-
dition of a subject, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown
itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little credit. What-

ever thoughts of this kind, the presumption of unexpeaced fuc-
cess, and his elevation to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may
be alleged to have inspired, at any subsequent period, it is cer-
tain that, at this junaure, he could form no such vaftl design. To
dethrone a Quecn, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of nMo-
narchs; who had been guilty of no acion, by whicli sic could
forfeit the elleem and aficrlion of her fuiljct&s; who could employ
in ldcfence of lher rilihts, the forces o' a kingdom, much more
powerful than her o'.vn; and to faubltitute, iln her placc, a pcrle l,
wlIhomn tile illegitimacy of his b1irth, )by the practice o01 all civi-
lized nations, rendered inca;pable of any inheritlnce, citllhr )lpbll
orl private; was a pr'ojc2. t{o cliimeical, as the moll t (1-tx ravaalt:
;nmbition would icarce entertain, and could never conccivc t1) 1IC

VOL. I. Z pralicable.

BooK II. pra&icable. The promise, too, which the Prior made to Melvil,

1"55, of residing conftantlyin France, on condition the public grievances

were redressed"; the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of
Chatelherault and his son, the presumptive heirs to the Crown;
and the concurrence of almost the whole Scottish nobles, in pro-
moting the measures, by which he gave offence to the French
court, go far towards his vindication from those illegal and cri-
minal designs, with the imputation of which the Queen endea-
voured, at that time, to load him.

Troops ar:ive THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some
a.d fortily ' degree, for the loss which the Qteen furfained by the defetion of
LeCith. the Duke of Chatelherault. These were, immediately, commanded

to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious
haibour, and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and
in a plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the head-quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular measure, by the man-
ner of executing it, was rendered still more unpopular. In order
to bring the town entirely under their command, the French
turned out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking
poflcfilon of the hoults, which they had obliged them to abandon,
prefentced, to the view of the Scots, two obje-s equally irritating
a;lnd ofienfivc; on the one hand, a number of their countrymen
expelled their habitations by violence, and wandering without any
certain abode ; on the other, a colony of foreigncrs, fettling, with
(thI'ir wvivcs and chilldren, in the lieart of Scotland, growing into
Ilrcnrgtll by dlily rcinftorccmcnts, and openly prcparing a yoke, to
whircll, vilthi't f()me timely cxcrtion of national Ilfirit, the h\'iulc
[kii;: dnoini tltiu , of nIecllity, submit.

' IV[1.'il, 5-I.

IT
0

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the Congregation Book IT.
beheld this bold and decisive ilep, taken by the Queen Regent: -'

i559'

nor did they hesitate a moment, whether they should employ Ti'.*;;-.
their whole strength, in one generous effort, to rescue their reli- I' aj

a ill;i

gion and liberty from impending deftrultion. But, in order to l
justify their own condut, and to throw the blame entirely on
their adversaries, they rclblved to prefcrve the appearances of de-
cency and refpet towards their superiors, and to have no recourse
to arms, without the motl urgent and apparent neccffity. They Scp:. ),.
joined, with this view, in an address to the Regent, reprefentinl.,
in the ilrongeft terms, their dissatisfaction with the Incafurcs fime
was pursuing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jca-
loufies of the nation, by desisting from fortifying Leith. The
Queen, conscious of her present advantageous situation, and elated
with the hopes of fresh succours, was in no disposition for liften-
ing to demands utterly inconfiflent with her views, and urged
with that bold importunity, which is so little acceptable to Princes.

Ti-HE suggestions of her French Counsellors contributed, with- Thc Recent

C){l e

] , ard'

out doubt, to alienate her still farther from any scheme of accom- t!,,i-
modation. As the Queen was ready, on all occasions, to difcovcr i'""d:'
an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her countlrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the violent
nmeafnres they were driving on, tool care to place near her such
pcrlons as betraycd her, by their insinuations, into many adions,
which her own unbiaflcd jndgmecnt would have hiighl y conldiClIICCl.
And as their iLcccfs in the prefcnt junilture, wheni all things were
lhaflening towards a crisis, depended entircly onl the Queen's firm-
lnis, the l'rinces of Lorrain didl no1 tlrufi vliolly to the inlille:c!
of tlheir ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater wciglit

Z to

BooK IL. their councils, they called in aid the Ministers of religion; and,
'~~-'"-" by the authority of their sacred charaaer, they hoped effectually

to recommend to their filter, that system of severity which they
had eipoufed"*. With this view, but under pretence of confound-
ing the Proteflants by the ikill of such able mailers in contro-
verfy, they appointed several French divines to reside in Scotland.
At the head of these, and with the charater of legate from the
Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of Amiens, and afterwards Arch-
bishop and Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigott, servilely devoted
to the house of Guise, and a proper instrument for recommend-
ing or executing the mofi outrageous measures.

AMIIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these Dodtors

had little opportunity to display their address in the use of their
theological weapons. But they gave no small offence to the na-
tion by one of their ations. They persuaded the Queen to
seize the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had re-
mained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of the Prote-
Jiants; and having, by a new and solemn consecration, purified
the fabric from the pollution, with which they supposed the
profane niniltrations of the Protestants to have defiled it, they,
in direct contradiction to one article in the late treaty, re-efta-
bliflhcd there the rites of the Romish church. This, added to
the indifcfrencc, and even contempt, with which the Qiecn re-
ccived their rcmonflrances, convinced the Lords of the Con-
gregation, that it was not only vain to cxpcd any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but abiolutely neccifary to take arms in
their own dflencc.

Lcfly, 215. C;iflclnau, np. j obb. iol. ii . 16. 473. - I Davila, lIl;:to'n.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every BooK IT.
consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold flep -I559

1559.
without delay. It was but a finall part of the French auxiliaries Tr:ey LKe

anrms in their

which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith, though own defence.
advancing fall, were till far from being compleat. Under these
circumRnances of disadvantage, they conceived it poflible to fur-
prize the Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive blow,
to prevent all future bloodshed and contention. Full of these ex-
pedations, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a nu- Oaober 6.
merous army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary
so vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent. With her usual
sagacity, she both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper
course to avoid it. Instead of keeping the field against enemies,
superior in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the
ardour of their courage, she retired into Leith, and determined
patiently to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and
unfinished as the fortifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither with heavy can-
non, nor with military stores, and utterly ignorant of the method
of attacking any place fortified with more art than those antient
towers, ereced all over the kingdom, in defence of private pro-
perty against the incursions of banditti.

NOR did the Queen, meanwhile, neglcl to have rccourfc to

those arts, which flie had often employed, to weaken or divide
her aldvcrfarics. By private fbCllicitationsl and pl)rlinifCs, site fl()t
tile fidelity, or ablatcll thie a;lor of ti)ml . 13 ) open rc)irac)ll atl
;taecufl ionl, tfhc hlailcd the rltl)it;tion r , anl dcl inilfl icdl the ;a tlio-

rily of' others. 11cr cmi!1.ries were every w here ;t w)trk, a ',
ln()txithlilaindlin the .cal 1IC rellisio ; lnd lilac'i+, a\\iii l, 1,'

;tl l.~Itt,.t.t &

BOOK II. animated the nation, they seem to have laboured not without fuc-

'"' '
cess. We find Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints

of the lukewarm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread
among his party'. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and sus-
sered a momentary intermission, it soon blazed up with frefl
-;igolur, and rose to a greater height than ever.

R.necw' their TR E Qeen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which
roninran- Ille made to a new remonstrance from the Lords of the Congre-

gation. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre-
sented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other meafurcs, which
they conceived to be detruitive to the peace and liberty of the
kingdom ; and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed, more openly than ever, their rcfolution of proceeding to
the utmost extremities, in order to put a fop to such dangerous
encroachments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with
i; much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less vigorous and
explicit. She pretended that fie was not accountable to the con-
federate Lords f)r any part of her conduc; and upon no repre-
icntation of theirs, would she either abandon measures, which flle
deemed ncccflary; or dilinils forces, which fle found useful; or
dcmnolifh a fortii!cation, which might prove of advantage. At

1, t
8 i hout
ic.:C!-,. the faiin tilme, flic rCequired tflhem, on pain of trcafon, to disband

the I-rccs which they hlad ailcm,1)cd.

Ti is haughty and imperiois fnile fOLunded harlily to Scottish
noblels, imnpalticnt, from1 their national characecr, of the ilighteCf.

* Ilpox, I 80ea

appeCarance

appearance of injury; accustomed, even from their own Mo- BOOK II.
narchs, to the most refpeaful treatment; and possessing, under an S9
ariftocratical form of government, such a share of power as equalled,
at all times, and often controlled that of the Sovereign. They
were sensible, at once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's intentions;
and as there now remained but one flep to take, they wanted
neither public spirit nor resolution to take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from the efiablifhed Dclibiclna

Collecrrning

forms of the constitution, for which, even amidfl their mofl vio- t!,hP Coul,
lent operations, men always retain the greatest reverence, they al- Ough to lake.
fembled the whole Peers, Barons, and Reprefcntatives of bur-
roughs who adhered to their party. These formed a convention, O:Iobcr :.
which exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual
meetings of parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid
before them the declaration whlich the Queen had given in answer
ro their remontirance; re-prcfcnted the unavoidable ruin, which
the incaiures, the therein avowed and juflified, would bring upon
the kingdom; and requiring their direction with regard to the
obedience due to an aclminir'ation so unjufi and oppressive, they
ilubIritted to their (lcci!ion, a qucflion, one of the most delicate
andl interesting that can pno.'lbly fll! under the consideration of
ful jccts.

Tr ls afln:mbly procccc-;l to d!.cicd, witli no less diflpatcl than

unanimity. Strangers t,) ',)c

, re f-ns, wvlicli 1)rotl-ct( b i) iels;

iin;clqua11iltlcd witlh the arts, \V'hich ma.:le a igiur-c in debate; and

much11 more fitted f')- 1i0>on,

tsl:!lr (!iLrt)'ii; ; V;OIr.l';T ic pco],lc

.i]xv:avs li:icn te ;a coincluti li,

:ll(l !)ri nj tai -r

(. lih)c-.r iions to tlhe

fl)rtcll ill',c. It xv.ls tlhe vc ;i l1rt ov!

o' (..u, i-,
0 c:.ldinc und to

r'c 'lvc

BOOK I1. resolve this nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjeEts

- towards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however abrupt
z559.

their proceedings may appear, they were not destitute of folem-
nity. As the determination of the point in doubt, was conceived
to be no less the office of divines, than of laymen, the former
were called to assist with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared
for the whole order, and pronounced, without hesitation, both
from the precepts and examples in Scripture, that it was lawful
for subjects not only to resist tyrannical Princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, becomes an inftru-
ment for destroying those, whom the'Almighty ordained them to
protect. The decision of persons, revered so highly for their
sacred character, but more for their zeal and their piety, had great
weight with the whole assembly. Not satisfied with the common
indiscriminate manner of signifying content, every person present
was called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up in

They deprive order, all gave their suffrages, without one dissenting voice, for
the Queen of
tlle office of depriving the Queen of the office of Regent, which ihe had ex-
R*e'tt. ercifed so much to the detriment of the kingdom *.

The ri;., ons THTS extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the love of
tliell CLn .;jd l.

liberty, than to zeal for religion. In the ac of deprivation, religi-
ous grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach-.
mcnts of the Qtecn upon the civil constitution are produced, by
the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their conducn to
have been not only juifl, but necefllary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom at peace with all the world; the fcizing and
fortifying towns in diffrcint parts of the country; the promotingp
firangcrs to oflices of great power and dignity ; the debaiing tlti

'* nox, 184.

current

current coin ; the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing of BOOK II.
new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king-

1559.

dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated aCts of vio-
lence, are enumerated at a great length, and placed in the firongeft
light. On all there accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors by birth-right, to their monarchs, and the
guardians and defenders of the constitution, had a right to inter-
pose; and therefore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Queen, and with many expressions of duty and sub-
mission towards them, they deprived the Queen Regent of her
office, and ordained, that, for the future, no obedience ihould be
given to her commands t.

Vo L E N T as this acion may appear, there wanted not principles

in the constitution, nor precedents in the history of Scotland, to
justify and to authorize it. Under the ariftocratical form of go-
vernment eflablifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign

* T'he flandard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the 16th of

James v. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold, when coined, produced xo8 pounds
of current money. But under the Queen Regent's adminifiration, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably encreafed,
produced 144 pounds current money. In I529, a pound weight of silver, when
coined, produced 91. 2s.; but in 1556, it produced 131. current money. Rud-
dim. Prrefat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotixe, p. 80, 81. from which it appears that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether dcftitute
of foundation.

-I M. Caflelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the Princes of Lorrain

with regard to the afitirs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his usual candour, that the
Scots declared war against the Queen Regent, rather from a dcfire of vindicating their
civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mcm. 446.

VoL. 1. A a was

Boor II. was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-

5 selves petty Princes, possessing extensive jurifdiaions, almost inde-
1559.

pendent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in
every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to the
King. Hence the many instances of the impotence of regal autho-
rity, which are to be found in the Scottish history. In every age,
the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of controuling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take the field
in defence of them, every error in administration was observed,.
every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indig-
nation, and no Prince ever ventured to tranfgrcfs the boundaries
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
iftance, which shook, or overturned his throne. Encouraged by
the spirit of the constitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into the mal-adminiftra-
tion of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country from being
enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to execute
such a pernicious scheme*.

" The ac of deprivation, and a Letter from the Lords of the Congregation to the

Queen Regent, are frill extant, Knox, 184. They discover not only, that masculine
and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are remark-
able for a precision, and vigour of cxpreffion, which we are furprized to meet with in
an age so unpolifhed. The fame observation may be made with refpea to the other
public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad tafle of an age may render the
compositions of authors by profeflion obscure, or affected, or absurd; but the language
of business is nearly the fame at all times; and wherever men think clearly, and are
thoroughly interceftd, they express themselves with perspicuity and force.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

B O O K III.
T H E Lords of the Congregation soon found that their zeal BOOK III.

had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond ---

I559,

their utmost ability to accomplish. The French garrison, Tlhe Iogre.

despising their numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender glved in-dif-
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were they fuffi- ficulties.
ciently skilful in the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
possessed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accuf-
tomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were strangers to the
fatigues of a long campaign, and soon became impatient of the
severe and conflant duty which a ficge requires. The Qeen's
cnifTnirics, who found it cafy to mingle with their countrymcn,
were at the utmofl pains to hcighten thcir difgufi, which difico-
vercd itfclf at firfl in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion of
the want of moncy for paying the army, broke out into open mu-

A a z tiny.

BooK IIll tiny. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure from the un-

1 5 i bridled insolence of the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, inter-
I559.

posing too rashly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by
their rage. Discord, consternation, and perplexity reigned in the
camp of the Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with
his usual timidity, under the terror of approaching danger, and
discovered manifest symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in
espousing such a desperate cause.

Apply to Eli- IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse
Z .beth for as-
filtance. to Elizabeth, from whose protetion they could derive their only

reasonable hopes of success. Some of their more sagacious lead-
ers, having foreseen that the party might probably be involved in
great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in any such
exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with the court
of England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which
the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her Crown, was early
sensible of how much importance it would be not only to check
the progress of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own in-
fluence in that kingdom t; and perceiving how effetually the pre-
fcnt infurretions would contribute to retard or defeat the tcheme s
formed against England, fie liflened with pleasure to these appli-
cations of the malecontents, and gave them private assurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph T, an agent extremely
proper for conducing any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scot-
land, and residing secretly among the Lords of the Congregation,
observed and quickened their motions. Money seemed to be the
only thing they wanted at that time; and it was owing to a season-

* Burn. Hiil. Rcf. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 21.
1 Sec Append, No I. 1: Keith, Append. 29.

able

able remittance from England ", that the Scottish nobles had been BooK III-
enabled to take the field, and to advance towards Leith. But as
Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and studious to preserve ap- 559
pearances with France, her subsidies were beptowed at first with
extreme frugality. The subsistence of an army, and the expences
of a siege, soon exhausted this penurious supply, to which the
Lords of the Congregation could make little addition from their
own funds; and the ruin and dispersion of the party must have
instantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiifon was sent, with She fends

them a finall

the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and castle of Crun'nof ,ey,
Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest
importance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James
Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were employed to command
there, and were entrusted with a discretionary power of supplying
the Scottish malecontents, according to the exigency of their affairs.
From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns, but little to the ad-
vantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's which is li
infiigation, lay in wait for him on his return, dispersed his fol- t'ccepted.
lowers, wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIs unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere despair some of the more zealous attempted to assault Leith,
but the French beat them back with disgrace, beized their can-
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the
point of entering along with them. All the terror and conflfion,
which the profped of pillage or of malhacre can excite in a place

* Knox, 214. Keith, Append. 44.

takeni

BooK III. taken by storm, filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants

55 fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces of the Con-

gregation were irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's partizans
in the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles
ventured to face the enemy, who, after plundering some houses in
the suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city from
this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provisions which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched
in all haste with a considerable body of their troops, and falling
upon the enemy between Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry
than good conduct, were almost surrounded by a second party of
French, who advanced in order to support their own men. In this
situation, a retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots;
but a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of an enemy
luperior in number, could not long be conducied with order. A

They rc'ire mall body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell
frumn Lcith
in tonfuliont into the utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution

of the French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congregation

funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure, even
within the walls of ELdinburgh, but instantly determined to retire
to fomc place at a greater diflancc from the enemy. In vain did
the Prior of St. Andrcw's and a few. others oppose this cowardly
and ignomlinious, flight. The dread of the prcfcnt danger prevailed
over both the fcnfc of' honour, and zeal for the caufc. At mid-

3 11iig

night, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and BOOK III.
marched without halting till they arrived at Stirling. o. .

I559.

November 6..

DURING this lait insurrection, the great body of the Scottish

nobility joined the Congregation. The Lords Seaton and Borth-
wick were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen,
and assisted her in defending Leith '. Bothwell openly favoured
her cause, but resided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly,
conformable to the crafty policy which distinguishes his character,
amuscd the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to.
assist, with many fair promises, but never joined them with a single
man -. The Earl of Morton, a Member of the Congregation,
fluctuated in a fRate of irresolution, and did not act heartily for
the common cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edinburgh castle,
though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality, which he efieemed
becoming the dignity of his office; and having been entrusted by
Parliament with the command of the principal fortress in the
kingdom, he resolved that neither faction fliould get it into their-
hands.

A FEW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen Mailand re.

volts fora ti-

suffered an irreparable loss by the defection of her principal Secre- Qeen Dovwa-
tary, William Maitland of Lcthington. His zeal for the Reformed ger.
religion, together with his warm remonstrances against the violent
mcatires which the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so much
to her resentment, and to that of her French Counsellors, that he,
fufipcting his life to be in danger, withdrew fccretly from Leith,
and fled to the Lords of the Congregation :; and they, with open
* Kcith, Append. . -. Ibid. Append. 33' Knox, 222. t Knox, 192.

arms ,,

BooK III. arms, received a convert, whose abilities added both strength and

-5S9 reputation to their cause. Maitland had early applied to public

business admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance
with the liberal arts; and, at a time of life, when his country-
men of the fame quality were following the pleasures of the chafe,
or serving as adventurers in the armies of France, he was admit-
ted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a level with
persons of the most consummate experience in the management of
affairs. He poffefled, in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit,
which delights in pursuing bold designs, and was no less master
of that political art and dexterity which is neceflary for carrying
them on with success. But these qualities were deeply tinctured
with the neighbouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess of subtlety and
refinement; his invention, over fertile, suggested to him, on some
occasions, chimerical systems of policy, little suitable to the genius
of the age; and his enterprising spirit engaged him in projets
vast and splendid, but beyond his utmost power to execute. All
the cotemporary writers, to whatever faction they belong, men-
tion him with an admiration, which nothing could have excited
but the greatest superiority of penetration and abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, fRill re-
mained undaunted and eret, and having mounted the pulpit, lihe
addrcffed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse arc

inflrtcd

inserted in his history *, and afford a firiking example of the BooK III.
boldness and freedom of reproof assumed by the firit Reformers, '.
as well as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most
fitted to influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what The LorJs of

course they should hold, now that their own resources were all ex- Caon

C -1a '
haufled, and their deftrution appeared to be unavoidable, with- agai" to Eli-

zabeth.

out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England,
and resolved to irrmplore the affiflance of Elizabeth towards finishing
an enterprize, in which they had so fatally experienced their own
weakness, and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the
molt able negociator of the party, was employed in this embafly.
In his ablence, and during the inactive season of the year, it was
agircd to difiniis their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a
campaign, which had so far exceeded the usual time of service.
But, in order to preserve the counties molt devoted to their intc-
reft, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders, retired
into Fife. The duke of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed hlis
residence at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's ad-
dress or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his country under
her protection. She observed the prevalence of the French coun-
sis, and the progress of their arms in Scotland, with great con-
cern ; and as she well foresaw the dangerous tendency of their
schemes in that kingdom, fle had already come to a resolution
wvitl regard to the part flie herself would ad-, if their power there
flould grow flill more formidable.

* Knox, 193.
VoL. I. B b I>

B3ooK III. IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Council a full and

-' diflin& view of any important matter, which might come before

1559.

Motives them, it seems to have been the practice of Elizabeth's Ministers
shichi deter.
mined her to to prepare memorials, in which they clearly flated the point un-
.ilt rthen. der deliberation, laid down the grounds of the conduct, which

they held to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for carry-
ing their plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written
by Sir William Cecil with his own hand, still remain*; they
are intitled, " A short discussion of the weighty matter of Scot-
"' land," and do honour to the industry and penetration of that
great minister. The motives, which determined the Queen to
espouse so warmly the defence of the Congregation, are repre-
sented with perspicuity and force; and the consequences of sus-
fering the French to establish themselves in Scotland, are predicted
with great accuracy and discernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of nature, that every society hath a right to defend itself,
not only from present dangers, but from such as may probably en-
sue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every Prince
to defend himself by the fame means, which his adversaries employ
to distress him. Upon these grounds, he establishes the right of
England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French openly aimed. The
French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of
England. -Iofilitics had subsisted between the two nations for
many centuries. No treaty of peace, into which they entered, had
ever been cordial or fincerc. No good cfFea was therefore to be

B urnL. vol. iii. Applend. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

expeCted

expeled from the peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted BOOK III.
by present necessity, would be negligently observed, and broken 'Cco

'559.

on the slightest pretences. In a very short time, France would re-
cover its former opulence; and though now drained of men and mo-
ney by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a
condition for ading, and the restless and martial genius of the peo-
ple would render action necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who
at that time had the entire direcion of French affairs, were ani-
mated with the most virulent hatred against the English nation.
They openly called in question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth,
and by advancing the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen
of Scotland, fludied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With
this view, they had laboured to exclude the English from the trea-
ty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a fepa-
rate peace with Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of Queen of
England; and even since the conclusion of the peace they had
solicited at Rome, and obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's
birth to be illegitimate. And though the wisdom and moderation
of the Constable Montmorency had, for fonme time, checked their
career, yet there restraints being now removed by the death of
Henry II. and the disgrace of his Minister, the utmost excefles of
violence were to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed
with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter, whence they can
attack England with most advantage. A war on the borders of
that country expofcs France to no danger, but one unfucccfsful
aalion there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the govern-
ment of England. In political conduLct, it is childiih to wait till
the dcfigns of an encny be ripe for cxecution. The Scotiifh
nobles, after their utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the
field; and far from cxpelling the invadlers ol their librties, hley

13 b z behold

Boo KITI. behold the Frcnch power daily increasing, and must at last cease

-' -'
from flruggling any longer in a contest to unequal. The invading

of England will immediately follow the reduction of the Scottish
malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the
French, Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart
of her own kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a diltance from England, and by support-
ing the Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland
the theatre of the war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lor-
rain in their infancy, and, by such an early and unexpected effort,
to expel the French out of Britain, before their power had time
to take root, and grow up to any formidable height. But as the
matter was of as much importance, as any which could fall under
the consideration of an Englifi Monarch, wisdom and mature
counsel were neceflary in the first place, and afterwards vigour and
expedition in conduCt; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a
tingle moment, might become unavoidable .

THESE arguments produced their full effet upon Elizabeth,

who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to
her.Crown, and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and
happincfs of her fubjeds. From these motives she had ated, in
granting the Congregation an early supply of money; and from
the fame principles ihe determined, in their present exigency, to
afford them more cfftc nal aid. One of Maitland's attendants
was inflantly dilpatchcd into Scotland with the flrongeft assurances
of her protceion, and the Lords of the Congregation were

'I lie arguments which the Scots cmlployec, in order to obtain Elizabeth's aflift-
ancc, arc iulged with grcat force, in a paper of Mlaitland's. See Appendix, NO. 11.

dcfired

desired to fend commissioners into England, to conclude a treaty, BOOK III,
and to fettle the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of t-

1559.
Norfolk *.

MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom no motion of The Queen

Dowager
the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success of mean wvhi:e

fends her

this negociation with the court of England, and foresaw how little French troops
she would be able to resist the united effort of the two kingdoms. agalnl, them,
For this reason she determined, if possible, to get the fart of Eli-
zabeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their present dispersed
and helpless situation, she hoped to put an end to the war, before
the arrival of their English allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were aug-

mented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de Martigues,
with a thousand veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth, they pro-
ceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with ex-
ceffive outrage, the houses and lands of those whom they esteemed
their enemies. Fife was the mo/t populous and powerful county
in the kingdom, and molt devoted to the Congregation, who had
hitherto drawn from thence their most considerable supplies, both
of men and provisions; and therefore, besides punifling the difaf-
feion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the country, the French
proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a gar-
rifon sufficient to bridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to
keep poffefion of a port situated on the main ocean.

* Keith, 114.

Bu :

BooK III. BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's, Lord Ruth-

' ven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of the most aacive leaders of

the Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good condu&,
a service of the utmost importance to their party. Having as-
fembled fix hundred horse, they infested the French with con-
tinual incursions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys
of provisions, cut off their straggling parties, and so harassed
them with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for more
than three weeks from advancing .
i56o. AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, was conitrained to re-

tire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
along the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
January 23. few miles, when from an eminence they descried a powerful fleet

fleering its course up the Firth of Forth. As they knew that the
Marquis D'Elbeuf was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scot-
land with a numerous army, they hastily concluded that there ships
belonged to him, and gave way to the most immoderate transports
of joy, on the prospect of this long-expeded succour. Their great
guns were already fired to welcome their friends, and to spread the
tidings and terror of their arrival among their enemies, when a
finall boat from the opposite coast landed, and blafied their prema-
ture and short-lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the

The Enilifh fleet of England which was in fight, intended for the aid of the Con-
fleet arrives to
their affif t gregation, and was soon to be followed by a formidable land army .
ance.

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, but
dccifivc; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions,

e Knox, 202. 1 Knox, 203.

joined

joined to the deliberation with which she formed them, her admini- Boo K III
firation became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its -56
wisdom. No sooner did ihe determine to afford her protection to
the Lords of the Congregation, than they experienced the aci-
vity, as well as the extent of her power. The season of the
year would not permit her land army to take the field; but left
the French should, in the mean time, receive new reinforcements,
she instantly ordered a strong squadron to cruize in the Firth of
Forth. She seems, by her inftruaions to Winter her Admiral, to
have been desirous of preserving the appearances of friendship
towards the French ". But these were only appearances; if any
French fleet flould attempt to land, he was commanded to pre-
vent it, by every a& of hostility and violence. It was the fight
of this squadron, which occasioned at first so much joy among the
French, but which soon inspired them with such terror, as saved
Fife from the effects of their vengeance. Apprehensive of being
cut off from their companions on the opposite shore, they retreated
towards Stirling with the utmost precipitation, and, in a dread-]
ful season, and through roads almost impassable, arrived at Leith,
harassed and exhaufled with fatigue 1-.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, and conti-

nuing in that station till the conclusion of peace, both prevented
the garrison of Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and
considerably facilitated the operations of their own forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the English squadron, the Commis- They con-

fioners of the Congregation repaired to Berwick, and concluded 1itel ;andc
with the Duke of Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union with February 27.

Keitl, Appendix 45. 1- Knox, 2C3.

Elizabclh,

Booc IIt. Elizabeth, which was of so great advantage to the cause. To

I~6"o'~ give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of the French

arms in Scotland, was the professed design of the contracting par-
ties. In order to this, the Scots engaged never to susser any
closer union of their country with France; and to defend them-
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of conquest; and for
their aiiftance, Elizabeth promised to employ, in Scotland, a
powerful army, which the Scots undertook to join with all their
forces; no place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the
English; whatever should be taken from the enemy was either to
be razed, or kept by the Scots, at their choice; if any invasion
should be made upon England, the Scots were obliged to assist
Elizabeth with part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themselves to deliver hof-
tages to Elizabeth, before the march of her army into Scotland;
in conclusion, the Scots made many protestations of obedience and
loyalty towards their own Queen, in every thing not inconsistent
with their religion, and the liberties of their country .

The Englili TIIE English army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two
rctlOYayLsch thousand horse, under the command of Lord Grey of Wilton, en-
slege to Leith.
April 2. tered Scotland early in the spring. The members of the Congrega-

tion assembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their new al-
lies ; and having joined them with great multitudes of their follow-
crs, they advanced together towards Leith. The French were little
able to keep the field against an enemy so much superior in nulmbcr,
A firong body of troops, dellined for their relief, had been scat-
tered by a violent form, and had either periflcd on the coafi

* Knox, 217.

'I

of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of that BooK 1I.
kingdom*. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the 6 '
Princes of Lorrain should make good the magnificent promises
of affiflance, with which they daily encouraged them; or till Icar-
city of provisions should constrain the English to retire into their
own country. In order to haften this latter event, they did not
neglect the usual, though barbarous precaution for dif-reffing an
invading enemy, by burning and laying waine all the adjacent
countryt. The zeal, however, of the nation fruflrated their in-
tentions; eager to contribute towards removing their oppreflbrs,
the people produced their hidden stores to support their friends;
the neighbouring counties supplied every thing necessary; and
far from wanting fubfiflence, the Engliflh found, in their camp,
all forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had for some time
been known in that part of the kingdom t.

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen Regent re-

tired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a
declining slate, and her mind broken and depressed by the mis-
fortunes of her administration. To avoid the danger and fatigue
of a siege, she committed herself to the protction of Lord ]Fr-
fkinl. This nobleman Rill preserved his neutrality, and by his
intcgrity and love of his country, mcritcd equally the cflccm ot
both parties. H-e received the Queen herself with the utmofl:
Lonour and refpicd, but took care to admit no such retinue, as
might cndangcr his command of the caflle .

: n

Ism. de Cartel. 450o. I KnIox, 225.

:1: Knox, ibid.  Forbcs Collcfl. vol. i. 503. Keith, 122.
VOL. I. C c A 1.I l:\

BooKIII. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the Engifih in-.

L56o.' vefied Leith. The garrison, shut up within the town, was almofls
Apnl, 0. half as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by

an obstinate defence protraaed the siege to a great length. The
circumstances of this siege, related by cotemporary hiflorians,
men without knowledge or experience in the art of war, are
often obscure and imperfect, and at this distance of time are not
considerable enough to be entertaining.

AT firfi the French endeavoured to keep pofleffion of the-

Hawk Hill, a riling ground not far liftant from the town, but were
_:.,-i ';. beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of

the Scottilh cavalry. Within a few days, the trench had their full
revenge; having sallied out u ith a itrong body, they entered the
Engliih trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon,
and killed at leans dcl.ublc the number they had loft in the former
fkirmiIf. Nor tvccre the English more fortunate in an attempt
which they made to take the place by afiualt; they were met with
:.,)y 7. equal courage, and repulied with considerable loss. From the

detail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, it is
easy to observe the different characters of the French and Eng-
lifh troops. The former, trained to war, under the aerive reigns
of Francis I. and IIenry IT. defended themselves not only with
the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter, who
had been more accuflomied to peace, flill preserved the intrepid
and deleratc vllor peculiar to t the nation, but discovered few
marks oi m;illtarly ;cniil, or ofr i- experience in the practice of war.
E 1vcry misL brt inc or dil lipp liIr lmcnlt lduring! tlIe ficgc mun f be im-
puted to maniei:'l crr-r'; in t.),llmdu ' The fucecfs of the beficged
i. tlhelir It.lly :.-.S -wi 'iCntIii- ly to the lPcucrity and negligencll

of the English; many of their officers were abfcnt; their soldiers BooK III.
had left their rfations; and the trenches were almost without a ~ '
guard. The ladders, which had been provided for the afrault,
wanted a great deal of the necesSary length; and the troops em-
ployed in that service were ill supportcd. The trenchls were
opened, at firfl, in an improper place; and as it was found expe-
dient to change the ground, both time and labour were loft. The
weakness of their own Generals, no less than the strength of the
French garrison, rendered the progress of the Englifhl wonderfully
flow. The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part
of their magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to
extreme distress, which the profpc- of relief made them bear
with admirable fortitude.

VHILE the hopes and courage of the French protracted the

siege so far beyond expecation, the leaders of the Congregation
were not idle. By new afficiations and confederacies, they laboured
more perfectly to unite their party. By publicly ratifying tlhe
treaty concluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the al!i--
ance with England firm and indissoluble. Among the subscri)ber
of these papers, we find the Earl of H-untly,, and fomec others wi,
had not hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of thellir
measures -. Several of thcle Lorlds, p.articularly the E:il ot
Huntly, flill adhered to the Popilh clhurch; 1but on tlis occalion,
neither their religious fentiinents, nor their frmer cautious lmax-
ilns, were regarded; the torrent of iational rclcntmclt and inlig-
nation againflC the French hurried tlhen on l'.

I3urn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 22r.

-I- The dread of the Frnchl power didl, o. i lnv occ:tlcionls, firlniiolt thle zc:l,
hliichi tlic Cathulic noblIes lad for thllir rl-liion. Iclilcis th[ I rcfl.i .ptivc cviJIc tc

( c sot

BooK III. THE Queen Regent, the infirument, rather than the cause of

, 1* iinvolving Scotland in those calamities, under which it groaned at

Deai n ri that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pof-
chvast.r of
the Queeal fefed qualities more capable of rendering her adminifiration illu-
June o. firious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no less

address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and hu-
mane, witholtt weakness; zealous for her religion, without bigotry;
a lover ofjuflice, without rigour. One circumstance however, and
that, too, the excccs of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all
thele great qualiiz s, and rendered her government unfortunate, and
her name odious. Devoted to the intcreft of France, her native
country, and attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with
moll passionate fondn fs ; she departed, in order to gratify them.,
from every maxim, which her own rwifdom or humanity would
have approved. She outlived, in a great measure, that reputation
and popularity, which had finoothed her way to the highest flation
in the kingdom; and many examples of falsehood, and some of
severity, in the latter part of her adminifiration, totally alienated
from her the affec'ions of a people, who had once placed in her
an unbounded confidence. But, even by her enemies, these un-
justifiable actions were imputed to the facility, not to the malignity
of her nature ; and whvile they taxed her brothers, and French
couLnfllors, with rafhncfs and cruelty; they fill allowed her the

for this, arising f:om the mcmorial mentioned by Burnct, I-lit. of the Reformation,
vol. iii. 281, andl publincd by him, Appcnd. p. 27g; the inllrulions of Elizabeth to
I'aindolph her agent, put it beyond all loulht, that many zcalous Papists thought the
;ilianice wvith 1Enlail to be gcccefl'ry for lprferving the liberty and iidepclm enlcc of
(the l'2ig!noml. ' \cithl, 158. Iliully Irlili-,ro f b)cai a colicfo1)nlicilcc w itl E1liz.lbcth's
Mlinilcrs, )before the Im.lrh of thelic ]: lil'l ;arny into Scotlalnd. I-laynes State Papers,
2(h, 2.63. Sec Appenl. N" II.

pralfi

praise of prudence and of lenity *. A few days before her death, BooK III.
The desired an interview with the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl --"--
of Argyll, and other chiefs of the Congregation. To them fle la-
mented the fatal issue of those violent councils, which the had been
obliged to follow; and, with the candour natural to a generous
mind, confessed the errors of her own adminifiration, and begged
forgiveness of those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the
fame time, she warned them, amidst their struggles for liberty,
and the shock of arms, not tolofe fight of the loyalty and subjec-
tion, which was due to their Sovereign--. The remainder of
her time, she employed in religious meditations and exerciftcs,
Slie even invited the attendance of Willox, one of the mors emi-
nent among the Reformed preachers, listened to his infiruclions
with reverence and attention :, and prepared for the approach of
death with a decent fortitude.

NOT-HI NC could now save the French troops, ihut up in Leith, RMotves ofthe

rFrench ;ocon-

but the immediate coiiclufion of a peace, or the arrival of a power- clude a peace
ful army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain ainufed their
party in Scotland, with continual expecr ations of the latter, and
had thereby kept alive their hopes and their courage. But at lafc,
the situation of France, rather than the terror of the English arms,
or the remonfh'ances of the Scottifli malecontents, conilraincd
them, though with reluclance, to turn their thoughts towards pa-
cilic councils. The Protfltants in France were, at that time, a
party formidable by their number, and more by the valour and
cnlt-priiing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had treated thncm
with extreme rigour, and difcovcrcd, by every flep lie took, a set-
tled relolution to extirpate tleir religion, and to ruin tliofe who
profllced it. At the profpct of this dangler to thlcnlflvcs, and
" Buclan. 324. 'l1 Lefcy, de Rebus Gcft, Scot. 222. :l. Knlox, 228.

to

BooKIll. to their cauie, the Protestants were alarmed, but not terrified.

I-.o. Animated with zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they not

only prepared for their own defence, but resolved, by some bold
adaion, to anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all the King's
violent measures, they marked them out, to be the first victims of
their indignation. Hence, and not from any disloyalty to the
King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise; and though
the vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lorrain dif-
birch 15.

covered and disappointed that delign, it was easy to observe new
storms gathering in every province of the kingdom, and ready to
burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war. In this
tituation, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was called off
from the thoughts of foreign conquells, to defend the honour and
dignity of the French Crown; and instead of fending new rein-
o)rcements into Scotland, it became necefTary to withdraw the
veteran troops already employed in that kingdom ".

The negoiia- IN order to conduc an affair of so much importance and dcli-
tion f/r that
l.'us'pre. cacy, the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc Bifllop of

Valence, and of the Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially
the norlcr, were reckoned inferior to no persons of thiat age, in
addlcfs and political relinement; Elizabeth opposed to them Am-
lbafiadors of cqual abilities; Cccil her prime Miniller, a man per-
hiaps of the grcateft capacity who had ever held that office; and
\\otton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art of negociatinll
under three filcccilivc Monarchs. The interells of the French
and Englilh courts were soon adjuflcd by men utf i; great dexterity
in ubl. cfills; and as France calily conlFented to withdraw those
f;orces, vwhich had been the chief occalion o1' the1 war; the other

* Lefn', 224.

poilts

points in dispute, between that kingdom and England, were not BooK IILT
matters of tedious, or of difficult discussion. -'

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own Sovereigns for redress, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
open attempts, carried on by comnmand of the King and Queen,
in order to overturn the ancient conflitution, and to suppress the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottifi nobles could not
thinlk themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier againfl
the future encroachments of regal power. But the legal steps to-
wards accomplifling this were not so obvious. The French am-
bafildors confidered the entering into any treaty with fubjccts, and
with rebels, as a condcfcenfion, unworthy the dignity of a Sove-
reign ; and their scruples on this head might have put an end to
lhe treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace had not
iliggcfed an expedient, which seemed to provide for the security
of the fulje , without derogating from the honour of the Prince.
The Scottish nobles agreed, on this occasion, to paTs from the Articles of:hc
point of right and privilege, and to accept the redress of their
.;rievances, as a matter of favour. Whatever additional ltcurity
their anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for public liberty,
prompted them to demand, was granted them in the name of
Francis and Mary, as alis of their royal favour and indulgence.
And left conceflions of this kind should ccem precarious, and liable
to be retracted by the fame power, which had made them, the
FIrench ambafllador agreed to insert them in the treaty with Eliza-
beth, and thereby to bind the King and Queen inviolably to ob-
tcrve them ':cl

IeAitlh, 1.34, &c.

][i

BoOKIII. IN relating this tranfaaion, cotemporary historians have con-
--"-'~ - founded the conccffions of Francis and Mary to their Scottish sub-
156o.

jcQs, with the treaty between France and England; the latter, be-
fides the ratification of former treaties between the two kingdoms,
and stipulations with regard to the time and manner of removing
both armies out of Scotland, contained an article, to which, as
the source of many important events, we fiall often have occasion
to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, ac-
knowledged in the strongest terms; and Francis and Mary solemn-
ly engage, neither to aflume the title, nor to bear the arms of
King and OQueen of England, in any time to come.

IHONOUR1ABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions fie obtained for her allies the Scots were no less advantage-
July 6. ous to them. Monluc and Randan conrented in the name of Fran-

cis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland flould instantly
be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops be here-
after introduced into the kingdom, without the knowledge and
content of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and Dun-
bar should immediately be razed, and no new fort be ereced with-
out the permiflion of Parliament; that a Parliament flould be held
on the firfl day of AuguR-, and that anlcmbly be deemed as valid,
in all respects, as if it had been called by the express command-
ient of the King and Q ccn; that, conformable to the ancient
laws and cuflomls of the country, the King and Queen flould
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliamcnt; that, diuring the Qccn's absence, the adiminillration
of g-overn-mcnt fiould be vcflcd in a council of twelve persons, to
be chlofcn out of twenty-four lnamed by Parliament, fevcn of which
council to be clccled by the Queen, and five by the Parliament;

that,

that hereafter, the King and Queen should not advance foreigners Book III.
to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices 1560.
of Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues upon any ecclesiastic;
that an adt of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and memory of all of-
fences, committed since the 6th of M/arch, 1558, mhould be passed
in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by the King and Queen;
that the King and Queen should not, under colour of punishing
any violation of their authority during that period, seek to deprive
any of their fubjeds of the offices, benefices, or estates which they
now held; that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries
which they had sustained during the late infurreoions, ihould be
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With regard to
religious controversies, the Ambassadors declared that they would
not presume to decide, but permitted the Parliament, at their first
meeting, to examine the points in difference, and to represent
their sense of them to the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega- The effeas of

tion, by their courage and perseverance, condud an enterprize
which, at first, promised a very different issue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by degrees
to great power; and being favoured by many fortunate incidents,
baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of
a more considerable kingdom. The sovereign authority was, by
this treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of the Congregation;
that limited prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto poifeffed,
was almost entirely annihilated; an(l the ariftocratical power, which
always predominated in the Scottilli government, became fuprcxnc

, Keith, 137, &c.
Vox.. 7. ID 0d

BOOK III. and incontroulable. By this treaty, too, the influence of France,

.' 6 which had long been of much weight in the affairs of Scotland,

was greatly diminifled; and not only were the present incroach-
ments of that ambitious ally refirained; but, by confederating
with England, proteaion was provided against any future attempt
from the fame quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in
religion being left to the consideration of Parliament, the Protest-
ants might reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was most
favourable to the opinions which they profeted.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French

and English armies quitted Scotland.
A Parlianent TH E eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards

the approaching parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner
so extraordinary, at such a critical junCture, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with the utmofi
anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariftocratical genius of

the government, was properly an assembly of the nobles. It was
composed of Biflhops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners of
burroughs, who met all together in, one house. The Lesser Barons,
though possesscd of a right to be prefcnt, either in person, or by
their reprefcntatives, fcldom exercised it. The expence of attending,
according to the faiflon of the times, with a numerous train of
vaflals and dependants; the inattention of the age, to any legal or
regular fyflcm of government; but, above all, the exorbitant autho-
rity of the greater nobles, who Ihad drawn the whole power into
thcir own hands, made this privilege of lb little valuc, as to be almost

negleccd.

negleEted. It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times of BOOK III.
tranquillity, few commiflioners of burroughs, and almost none of 56O
the Lesser Barons appeared in Parliament. The ordinary admini-
firation of government was abandoned without scruple or jealousy,
to the King and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary con-
juntures, when the struggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit
ofoppofition to the Crown rose to an height, the Burgefles and
Lesser Barons were rouzed from their inactivity, and stood forth to
vindicate the rights of their country. The turbulent reign of
James III. affords examples in proof of this observation . The
public indignation against the rash designs of that weak and ill-
advised Prince, brought into Parliament, besides the Greater nobles
and prelates, a considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the first of August. The
universal passion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned fpedators
of an assembly, whose acts were likely to prove decisive with refpeEt
to both. From all corners of the kingdom men flocked in, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause which they had defended with their swords in the field.
Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there
appeared the representatives of almost all the burroughs, and above
an hundred Barons, who though of the Icecr order, were Gentle-
men of the firfl rank and lfortune in the nation -'.

THi Parliament was ready to enter on bufiincfs vi ith the utniofl
zeal, when a difliculty was flarted concerning the lawvi'lnclis of the

* Kcilh, 147. 'I Ibid. 146.

3) d 2 ilcctinlg.

BooK III. meeting. No Commiffloner appeared in the name of the King

60o. "and Queen, and no signification of their content and approbation

was yet received. These were deemed, by many, essential to the
very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
this assembly was declared to be as valid, in all refpedQs, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express command of the King
and Queon. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of inoft approved zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importan.ce in the Scottifl Parliament. The delibera-
tions of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with the most
unanimous and acive zeal. The ad of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted with
supreme authority, was to be elected;. and every other thing pre-
fcribed by the late treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it
effectual, passed without dispute or delay. The article of religion

Tts proceed- employed longer time, and was attended with greater difficulty. It
ings with re-
gard to reli- was brought into Parliament,. by a petition from those who had
gion. adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many dosrines of the

Popish church were a contradicion to reason, and a disgrace to re-
ligion ;, its difciplinc had become corrupt and oppreflive; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill-applied. Against all thcfe,
the Protestants rcmonfirated with the utmost fcverity of stile,. which
indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their pernicious ten-.
dcncy could infpirc; and encouraged, by the number and zeal of
their fiiends, to improve such a favourable junculrc, they aimed
the blow at the wlole fabric of Popery; and besought the Parlia-

m1cn1:

ment to interpose their authority for rectifying these multiplied Booi III.
abuses *. i56o.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the ancient fuperflition,

were present in this Parliament. But during thcfe vigorous pro-
ceedings of the Proteflants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze,
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. They
esteemed it impoflible to refill or divert that torrent of religious
zeal, which was fiill in its full strength; they dreaded that their
opposition would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new
aas of violence; they hoped that the King and Queen would soon:
be at leisure to put a flop to the career of their insolent fubjets,
and that, after the rage and havock of the present storm, the former-
tranquillity and order would be restored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the docrine, and even.
the power of the Church, in order to ensure the safety of their own.
persons, and to preserve tle poffeflion of those revenues, which:
were still in their hands. From whatever motives they aaced,,
their silence, which was imputed to the consciousness of a bad
cause, afforded matter of great triumph to the Proteltants, and.
encouraged them to proceed with more boldness and alacrity t.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines.mentioned in the petition of the Protestants; they, moreover,
gave the fancion of their approbation to a Confession. of Faith.
prcfentcd to them by the Reformed teachers l:, and compoledc, as
m*ight be cxpetccd from such a performance at that jundqure, or,
1)urpofe to cxpofe the absurd tenets and practices of the 11omnifi,

! g:KOX, 237. t Ibid. 2.53, : Id. ibid.

churc.i ..

'BOOK III. church. By another act, the jurifdidtion of the ecclesiastical courts

-56. was abolished, and the causes, which formerly came under their

cognizance, were transferred to the decision of civil judges :4. By a
third statute, the exercise of religious worfhlip, according to the
rites of the Romish church, was prohibited. The manner in which
the Parliament inforced the observation of this law discovers the
zeal of that assembly; the first transgression fubjeeted the offender
to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punishment, at the
difcrction of the judge; banishment was the penalty of a second
violation of the law; and a third aa of disobedience was declared
to be capital t. Such firangers were men, at- that time, to the fpi-
rit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with such in-
decent haste did the very persons, who had just escaped the rigour
of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of fe-
verity, of which they themselves had so justly complained.

With regard THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in a few days,
to the reve-
-lus of the the ancient system of religion, which had been eltablifhed so many
,church. ages. In reforming the dodtrine and discipline of the church, the

nobles kept pace with the ardor and expectations even of Knox
hiimfelf. But their proceedings, with respect to these, were not
more rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when
they entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues. Among
tle lay-members, some were already enriched with the spoils of
the church, and others devoured in expectation the wealthy bene-
sices which frill remained untouched. The alteration in religion
had afforded many of the dignified ecclefiaflics themnflves, an op-
portunity of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition

Kcithl, 152. -1 Knox, 254.

of

of tle monasteries, having set the Monks at liberty from their con- IBoK III.
finement, they initantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and corn- I6o.
monlybetook themselves to some fecularemployment. The Abbot,
if he had been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the
Reformation from conviction, or so cunning as to espouse them out
of policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, except
what he allowed for the subsistence of a few superannuated Monks *;
applied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made by the
BReformed teachers for applying these revenues towards the main-
tenance of Miniflers, the education of youth, and the support of
the poor, was' equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They
opposed it with the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and au-
thority, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give no ear to such a
disagreeable demand t. Zealous as the firfl Reformers were, and
animated with a spirit fiiperior to the low considerations' of interefi3,
they beheld these early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice among
their adherents, with indignation.; and we find Knox expressing
the utmost sensibility of' that contempt, with which they were
treated by many, fiom whom he expected a more generous con--
cern for the success, of religion, and the honour of its Ministers +.

A DITFICULTY hath beenn-farted, with regard'to the aas of The va!idity.

ofthis Parlia-

this Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous in rent called in.
itself, and at this distance of time of no importance, is founded on qllclion.
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament
was permitted to take into consideration the state of religion, and
to signify their fcntiiments of it to the King and Oueen. But, in-
etcad of prfcntinig their deiircs to their Sovereigns, in the humble
Kcith, 496. Append. 90o, 191. -1' See Append. No IV. :1: Knox, 239, 256.

so rl .

3ooK IIE. form of a supplication -or address, the Parliament converted them

6 into so many acts; which, although they never received the royal

assent, obtained all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of
laws. In compliance with their injuncions, the efiablifhed system
-of religion was every where overthrown, and that recommended by
the Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of
the people overlooked 'or supplied any defet in the form of these
acts of Parliament, and rendered the observance of them more uni-
versal than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the most regular
or constitutional assembly. By those proceedings, it must, however,
be confessed, that the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated
the last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the
powers which belong to fubjeds. But when once men have been
accustomed to break through the common boundaries of fubjeaion;
and their minds are inflamed with the passions which civil war
inspire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their conduc
by those rules, which can be applied, only where government is in
a slate of order and tranquillity. A nation when obliged to employ
such extraordinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of
every thing which can promote this great end; and the necefity of
the cafe, and the importance of the objec, justify any departure
from the common and eltablifhed forms of the constitution.

Anib.ifhdors IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the
lariamenlt to ordinary forms of business, it became necessary to lay the procecd-
?.'raslcc. ings of Parliament before the King and Queen. For this purpof,

Sir James Sandilands of Caldcr Lord St. John, was appointed to
repair to the Court of France. After holding a course so irrcgu-
lar, the nobles had no reason to flatter thcmfclvcs that Francis and
IMary would ever approve their conduc&, or confirm it, by their

7 royan!

royal aflent. The reception of their Ambaflador was no other BOOK III.
than they might have expected. He was treated by the King 56o

56o.

and Queen with the utmost coldness, and dismissed without ob-
taining the ratification of the Parliament's proceedings. From
the Princes of Lorrain and their partizans, he endured all the
scorn and insult, which it was natural for them to pour upon the
party he represented *.

TH UG H the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le- And to Eliza.

beth.

thington, the Ambassadors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their
ProteCtress, met with a very different reception; they were not
more successful in one part of the negociation intrusted to their
care. The Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from
their union with England, were desirous of rendering it indiffo-
luble. With this view, they impowered these eminent leaders of
their party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable
and effetual aid which ihe had afforded them, and at the fame
time, to beseech her to render the friendship between the nations
perpetual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran, who,
though a subjei, was nearly allied to the royal family of Scot-
land, and, after Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth liflened with

the utmost fatisfadion, and encouraged the Scots, in any future
cxigency, to hope for the continuance of her good officcs; with
regard to the latter, she discovered those fcntiincnts to which hile
adhered throughout her whole reign. Avcrfe fiom nmarriage, as
some pretend through choice, but more probably out of policy,

* Knox, 255. Buch. 32;.
VOL. L E C that

BBooKIII. that ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the

I __6- throne.; but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of
i$6o.

power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of
transmitting her Crown to her own pofierity. The'marriage with
the.Earl of Arran could not be attended with any such extraor-
dinary advantage, as to flake this resolution; she declined it,
therefore, but with many expreflions of good-will towards the
Scottish nation, and of refpea for Arran himself A.

The death of TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, distinguished by so many
Francis II.

remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On
the 4th of December died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble confti-
tution, and of a mean understanding. As he did not leave any if-
sue by the Queen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
those, who, during the late commotions in Scotland, had taken
part with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty,
had acquired an entire ascendant over her husband; and as she
transferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain,
Francis followed them implicitly in whatever trad they were
pleated to lead him. The power of France, under such direcion,
alarmed the Scottiflh malecontents, with apprehensions of danger,
no less formidable, than well founded. The intestine disorders
which raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of Eng-
land in behalf of the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the
Princes of Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland into
execution. But under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impoflible that the commotions in France could be of long
continuance, and many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's

Burn. 3. Ap end. 308. Kcith, 154, &c.

attention,

attention, for the future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either BOoK Il.
of these events the Scots would ifand exposed to all the vengeance, J
which the rcfentment of the French court could inflic. The blow,
however long suspended, was unavoidable, and must fall at last
with redoubled weight. From this profped and expectation of
danger, the Scots were delivered by the death of Francis; the an-
cient confederacy of the two kingdoms had already been broken,
and by this event, the only bond of union which remained was
dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who during the minority of
Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the entire direction of the
French councils, was far from any thoughts of vindicating the
Scottish Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been rivals
in power during the reign of Francis II. and had contended for
the government of that weak and unexperienced Prince; but as the
charms of the wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo-
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a disappointment in her
favourite passion, and beheld now, with secret pleasure, the diffi-
cult and perplexing scene, on which her daughter-in-law was about
to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow which so fad a Mary retires

from the court

reverse of fortune could occasion, flighted by the Queen-mother *; of France.
and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun-
ihine ofprofperity, retire to Rheims, and thered, in solitude, in-
dulged her grief, or hid her indignation. Even the Princes of
Lorrain were obliged to contract their views; {o turn them from
foreign to domestic objctls; and instead of formling vast projecs
with regard to Britain, found it ncceflry to think of acquiring,
aind eftablifling an intcrefl with the new adminiflration.

' Ilcnaut. 340. Caflcln. 454

Ee IT

BOOK III. IT is impofllble to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all

560.Q there accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among

the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give
firmness and stability to that fyitem of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder cotemporary his-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence,
which, by unforeseen expedients, cal secure the peace and hap-
piness of kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence
and invention would utterly despair *.

E0ablihment ABOUT this time, the Proteflant church in Scotland began to
of Pr'fbyteri-
an church assume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the sanCtion of
g.vernment. public authority, and some fixed external policy became necessary

for the government and preservation of the infant society. The
model introduced by the Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long established. The motives, which induced
them to depart so far from the ancient fyflem, deserve to be ex-
plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited the indignation

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popish system: as this disgust at the vices of
ccclefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and flifting from
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effects of the Reformation would naturally have-
extended not only to the docLrine, but to the government of the
Popihl church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former,
would havc ovcrturned the latter. But, in a great part of Ger-

' Knox, 259.

luany,

many, in England, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations BOOK II.
were checked by the power and policy of their princes; and the 56
ancient Episcopal jurifdidion, under a few limitations, was till
continued in those churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to
be more conformable to the practice of the church, since Chriflia-
nity became the eflablified religion of the Roman empire. The
ecclesiastical government was, at that time, plainly copied from the
civil; the first not only borrowed its form, but derived its autho-
rity from the latter; and the dioceses and jurifdidions of Patri-
archs, Archbilhops, and bishops, corresponded with the division
and constitution of the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-coun-
tries, the nature of the government allowing full scope to the ge-
nius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence of order in the church
was destroyed, and an equality established more suitable to the fpi-
rit of republican policy. The situation of the primitive church
suggested the idea, and furnished the model of the latter system,
which has since been called PreJbyterian. The firfi Christians,
oppressed by continual persecutions, and obliged to hold their re-
ligious assemblies by stealth, and in corners, were contented with
a form of government extrermely simple. The influence of reli-
gion, concurred with the ifnfe of danger in extinguishing among
them, the spirit of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank,
the effect of their sufferings, and the cause of many of their vir-
tues. Calvin, whose decisions were received, among the Prote-
ftants of that age, with incredible submission, was the patron and:
restorer of this fcherne of eclefiaftical policy. The church of
Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his direction, was eileemed
the most perfect model of this government; and Knox, who, during
his refidcnce in that city, had flulied and admired it, warmly re-
commended it to the imitation of his countrymel.

AMnON c

BOOK Ill. AMIONG the Scottish nobility, some hated the persons, and

/Go others coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolish-
:56o.

ing that order of men, -the former indulged their refcntment, and
the latter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed
with the most violent aversion to Popery, and approving of every
scheme that departed farthest from the pracice of the Romish
church, were delighted with a system, so admirably suited to their
predominant passion. While the friends of civil liberty beheld,
with pleasure, the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their own
hands, that fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their predecessors
had reared with so much art and induifry; and flattered them-
selves, that by lending their aid to strip churchmen of their dig-
nity and wealth, they might entirely deliver the nation from their
exorbitant and oppressive jurisdiction. The new mode of govern-
ment easily made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interests and passions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his system, Knox did not

deem it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form ;.
Instead of Bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Super-
intendants in different parts of the kingdom. These, as the
name implies, were impowered to inspeCt the life and doctrine of
the other clergy. They presided in the inferior judicatories of
the church, and performed several other parts of the Episcopal
funtion. Their jurifdidion, however, extended to sacred things
only ; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and pretended no right
to the dignity, or revenues of the former Bishops.

Z Spotfwood, 158.

3I Tr TIlE

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial .BooK II.

duty could be committed, was fill extremely small; they had em- 156,.
braced the principles of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different provinces of the
kingdom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regular
classes or societies. The firfi General ATfembly of the church, December20o
which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and
unformed society. The members were but few in number, and
of no considerable rank; no uniform or confiitent rule seems to
have been observed in electing them. From a great part of the
kingdom no representatives appeared. In the name of some entire
counties, but one person was present; while, in other places, a
single town or church sent several members. A convention, so
feeble and irregular, could possess no great authority; and confci-
ous of their own weakness, the members put an end to their de-
bates, without venturing upon any decision of much importance ".

IN order to give greater itrength and confifence to the Pref- i56Ir

byterian plan, Knox, with the afliftance of his brethren, composed
the first book of discipline, which contains the model or platform
of the intended policy t1. They presented it to a convention of
eflates, which was held in the beginning of this year. What- JanuLary i.
ever regulations were proposed with regard to ecclesiastic discipline
and jurisdiction, would have cafily obtained the fandion of that as-
feimbly; but a dcfign to recover the patrimony of the church, which
is there inlinuated, met with a very (liflercnt reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages which would accrue
!,) the public, by a proper application of ccclcliaflical revenues.

' Kciithl , ,14S9. ' ;pot'swoc l, 15.

1,',

BooK III. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

156l ' to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and to support the

poor. In vain did they even intermingle threatnings of the divine
displeasure, againft-the unjust detainers of what was appropriated
to a sacred use. The nobles held fast the prey, which they had
seized; and bestowing upon the proposal, the name of a devout ima-
gination, they affeded to confider it, as a project altogether vifi-
onary, and treated it with the utmost scorn .

The Queen THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's to repair
invited to re-
turn into to the Queen, and to invite her to return into her native country,
Scotland. and to assume the reins of government, which had been too long

committed to other hands. And though some of her subjeCts
dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous consequences
with which it might be attendedt, the bulk of them desired it
with so much ardour, that the invitation was given with the great-
eft appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman Catho-
lics got the start of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards Bishop of Ross, who was commiflioned by them, ar-
rived before him, at the place of her residence i. Lefly endeavour-
ed to infuse into the Queen's mind suspicions of her Protestant sub-
jeds, and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into the arms
of those who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
insisted that she should land at Aberdeen; and as the Protestant doc-
trines had made no considerable progress in that part of the king-
lom, he gave her assurance of being joined, in a few days, by 20,000
men; and flattered her, that with such an army, encouraged by her
presence and authority, she might cafily overturn the Reformed
Church, before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

* ICnox, 256. -1' See Append. N V. :L Lcly, 227.

13 u r

BUT at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were not disposed BooK III.

to liften to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de- i56'
fending themselves against Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wished their
niece to take possession of her kingdom, with as little dilfurbance
as possible. The French officers, too, who had served in Scotland,
dissuaded Mary from all violent measures; and by representing the
power and number of the Protestants to be irresistible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ the leading
men of that party as her Ministers, than to provoke them, by a
frtitlefs opposition, to become her enemies *. Hence proceeded
the confidence and affection, with which the Prior of St. Andrew's
was received by the Queen. His representation of the state of the
kingdom gained great credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the
new channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Efates was held in May. The ar-

rival of an Ambassador from France, seems to have been the oc-
cafion of this meeting. He. was inftruted to solicit the Scots to
renew their ancient alliance with France, to break their new confe-
deracy with England, and to restore the Popish ecclesiastics to the
possession of their revenues, and the exercise of their fundions. It
is no easy matter to form any conjecure concerning the intentions
of the French court, in making there extraordinary and ill-timed
propositions. They were rejcLced with that scorn, which might
well have been expeced from the temper of the nation |'.

* Mclv. 6x. -I Knox, 269, 273.
VOL. I. F f IN

BOOK III. IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not obtain a more

- --' favourable audience than formerly, and their prospect of recovering

the Patrimony of the church still remained as distant and uncertain
as ever. But with regard to another point, they found the zeal of
the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline seemed
to require, that the monuments of Popery, which still remained
in the kingdom, should be demolished '; and, though neither the
fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the
people, remained to justify or excuse this barbarous havock, the
Convention, confidering every religious fabric as a relidc of idolatry,
passed sentence upon them by an aCt in form; and persons, the most
remarkable for the activity of their zeal, were appointed to put it
in execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and
even the sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common ruin.
The first storm of popular infurretion, though impetuous and irre-
fiftible, had extended only to a few counties, and soon spent its
rage; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated the
devastation of every thing venerable and magnificent, which had
escaped its violence t.

Mary begins IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot-
to prepare
for it.p land. Accustomed to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a po-

lite court, fhc still fondly lingered in France, the scene of all these
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of her
own country, and the turbulence of her fubjecCs, which presentcd
her with a very different face of things. The impatience, how-
ever, of her people, the perfwafions of her uncles, but above all,
the studied and mortifying neglect, with which file was treated by

* Spotfwood, 153. t Ibid. 174.

the

the Queen Mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagree- BooK III'
able voyage*. But while she was preparing for it, there were I6
sown between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal jealousy
and discord, which imbittered the life, and shortened the days of
the Scottiih Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the imme- Origin of the

diate occasion of this fatal animosity; the true causes of it lay much twen her and
deeper. Almost every article, in that treaty, had been executed Elizabeth.
by both parties, with a scrupulous exadnefs. The fortifications
of Leith were demolished, and the armies of France and England
withdrawn within the appointed time. The grievances, of the
Scottish malecontents were redresled, and they had obtained what-
ever they could demand for their future security. With regard to
all these, Mary could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to
urge, the ratification of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of contest and diffi-

culty. No Minister ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexterity and success
than Cecil. In the conduct of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
Ibund understanding of this able politician had proved greatly an
overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had artfully
induced the French anbaffadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right belong to Eliza-
beth alone, but alib to proinife, that in all times to come, Mary
should abflain fiom using the titles, or bearing the arms of thofc
].ilngdoms.

Branntome, Jcbl, vol. ii. 482.

; f 2 TlcE

BoOKIII. THE ratification of this article would have been of the most

56 c
fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown of England was an objeEt

worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title
was efleemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the English
themselves, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and active party, openly espoused this opinion; and even
the Protestants, who supported Elizabeth's throne, could not deny
the Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper opportu-
nity to avail herself of all there advantages, could not, in the course
of things, be far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring
this opportunity nearer than was expeded. In these circumstances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that rank
which she had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes; the zeal
of her adherents must have gradually cooled; and the might have
renounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the Eng-
lifh Crown.

NONE of there beneficial consequences escaped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had recourse to every
thing, by which she could hope either to soothe or frighten the
Scottish Q(2een into a compliance with her demands; and if that
Princess had been so unadvised as to ratify the rash concessions of
her Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an
advantage, which, under her management, must have turned to
great account. By such a renunciation, the question, with regard
to the right of succession would have been left altogether open and
undeciccdd, and, by nmeans of Iliat, Elizabeth mnight either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dcpcndance, or, by the au-
thority of her Parliament, hec might have broken in upon the

orldc

order of lineal succession, and transferred the Crown to rome other BooK III.
descendant of the royal blood. The former condut she observed '-
towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, Ihe held in
perpetual fear and fubjelion. The latter, and more rigorous me-
thod of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been employed
againfl Mary, whom, for many reasons, she both envied and hated.

NoR was this flep beyond her power, unprecedented in the his-

tory, or inconsistent with the constitution of England. Though
succession by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eftablified almost in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable inftanccs of deviations from that
rule. The Crown of that kingdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprising in
every age to imitate such an illuflrious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of \Villiam the Norman, the regular courie
of descent had seldom continued through three fucceflive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way to
the throne, called in the authority of the great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence parliamentary and heredi-
tary right became in England of equal consideration. That great
assembly claimed and adually poffefled a power of altering the or-
der of regal fucceflion; and even so late as Henry VIII. an aat of
Parliament had authorized that capricious Monarch to fettle the
order of fucceflion at his pleasure. The English, jealous of their
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of firangcrs, would
have eagerly adopted the paflions of their Sovereign, and might
have bccn cafily induced to exclude the Scottlfh line from the right
cf filcccctling to the Crown. These seem to have been the views

of

BOOK III. of both Queens, and these were the difficulties which retarded the

x6i ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their dicford were to be traced no higher

than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present question to an amicable issue. The
indefinite and ambiguous expression, which Cecil had inserted into
the treaty, might have been changed into one more limited, but
more precise; and Mary, instead of promising to abstain from bear-
ing the title of Queen of England in all times to come, might
have engaged not to assume that title, during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful posterity.

SUCH an amendment, however, did not suit the views of either

Queen. Though Mary had been obliged to suspend, for some
time, the prosecution of her title to the English Crown, she had
not, however, relinquished it. She determined to revive her claim,
on the first profpet of success, and was unwilling to bind herself,
by a positive engagement, not to take advantage of any such fortu-
nate occurrence. Nor would the alteration have been more accept-
able to Elizabeth, who by agreeing to it, would have tacitly re-
cognized the right of her rival to ascend the throne after her decease.
But neither the Scottish nor Englith Queen durfl avow these secret
sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to
disturb the tranquillity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of
Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any ftifii-
cion of a dcfign to alter the order of fucccflion, and to fct aside the
claim of the Scottifl Quecn, would have cxpofcd EIlizabeth to much
andi deserved ccnfurc, and have raified up againfl her many and dan-
gcrous enemies. Thcfc, however carefully concealed, or artfully

dilguilt:d,

disguised, were, in all probability, the real motives which deter- BOOK III.
mined the one Queen to solicit, and the other to refute the ratifi- -

I56i.

cation of the treaty, in its original form; while neither had re-
courfc to that explication of it, which, to an heart unwarped by
political in terest, and sincerely desirous of union and concord, would
have appeared so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occasioned this rup-

ture between the British Queens, rivalfhip of another kind con-
tributed to widen the breach, and female jealousy increased the
violence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extra-
ordinary qualities, by which she equalled or furpafed such of her
sex, as have merited the greatest renown, discovered an admira-
tion of her own person, to a degree, which women of ordinary
understandings either do not entertain, or prudently endeavour to
conceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude to display her
charms, her love of flattery, were all exccflive. Nor were there
weaknesses confined to that period of life, when they arc more
pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the wisest woman of
that, or perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, and affected the
manners of a girl . Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to
Mary, in beauty, and gracefillnefs of person, as she excelled her inl
political abilities, and in the arts of government, she was weak
enough to compare herself with the Scottifl Queen '[; and as it
was impoffiblc fie could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the comparison, ihe envied and hated her as a rival, by
whom iie was eclipsed. In judging of the condua of Princes, we
arc apt to afcribc too much to political motives, and too little to

' Johnfl on Hist. Rcr. Britan. 34.6, 347. Carte, vol. iii, 699. Catalogue of Royal
and Noble Authors, Article EJ7x.

I\ Mclvil, 98.

tlel

BOOK III. the passions which they feel in common with the reft of mankind.

-61. In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her fubfequet

conduCt towards Mary, we mufl not always confider her as a Queen,
we musts ometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no firanger to Mary's difficulties with re-

fpea to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,
to ratify it *. Mary, under various pretences, still contrived to gain
time, and to elude the request. But while the one Queen soli-
cited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with art-
ful delay, they both fludied an extreme politeness of behaviour,
and loaded each other with professions of sisterly love, with reci-
procal declarations of unchangeable esteem and amity.

Elizabeth re- IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among
fuses Mary a
safe condua. Princes, there expressions of friendship are commonly far distant

from the heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course lies
along the English coast. In order to be safe from the insults of the
Englifi fleet, or in cafe of tempestuous weather, to secure a retreat
in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand
of Elizabeth a safe conduat during her voyage. This request,
which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant to another, Eli-
zabeth rejected, in such a manner, as gave rife to no flight fufpi-
cion of a design, either to obftrua the passage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottifhi Queen l'.

Tl Is ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with in-
dignation, but did not retard her departure from France. She was

s Keith, J57'o, o&c. )1 Ibid. 171. Camden. Secc Appendtl. N I. .

accoIlI-

accompanied to Calais, the place where she embarked, in a man- BOOK III.
ner suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful king- -56.
doms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the most
eminent among the French nobles, were in her retinue. Cathe-
rine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with every
circumstance of magnificence and refpeC. After bidding adieu to
her mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in
tears, Mary left that kingdom, the short, but only scene of her
life, in which fortune smiled upon her. While the French coast
continued in fight, she intently gazed upon it, and musing, in a
thoughtful posture, on that height of fortune whence she had fallen,
and presaging, perhaps, the disasters and calamities which imbit-
tered the remainder of her days, she sighed often, and cried our,
" Farewel France ! Farewel beloved country, which I ihall never
" more behold!" Even when the darkness of the night had hid
the land from her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, nor
taste food, but commanding a couch to be placed on the deck, she
there waited the return of day, with the utmost impatience.
Fortune toothed her on this occasion; the galley made little way
during the night. In the morning, the coast of France was Rill
within fight, and she continued to feed her melancholy with the
profpe&t; and as long as her eyes could distinguish it, to utter the
fame tender expreflions of regriet"'. At last a brifl gale arose, by
the favour of which for tome days, and afterward under the covert
of a thick fog, Mary clcaped the Englillh leet, which lay in
wait to intercept herIt'; and on the I9th of August, after an ab-
fence of near thirteen years, landed (iifcly at Leith in her native Arr;ves in

k, .li~~~~~~~~ingd~~~~~oi~ .~ Scotland.
kingdom.

* Brantomc, 483. Uc hliifcllf was in thc lfnic gallcy with thc Q(.en.
l I Goodal, vol. i. 175. Ciflcln. g155-

VOL. . G - g' A.R lI

BOOK III. MARY was received by her fubjeas with shouts and acclama-

tions of joy, and with every demonstration of welcome and regard.
I561.

But as her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable preparation
had been made for it, they could not, with all their efforts, hide
from her the poverty of the country, and were obliged to conduct
her to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe with little pomp. The
Queen, accustomed from her infancy to splendor and magnificence,
and fond of them, as was natural at her age, could not help ob-
serving the change in her situation, and seemed to be deeply as-
seCted with it':.

State of the NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a juncture which
kingdom at called for more wisdom in council, or more courage and steadiness
that time.

in action. The rage of religious controversy was still unabated.
The memory of past oppreflion exasperated the Protestants; the
smart of recent injuries rendered the Papifis desperate; both were
zealous, fierce and irreconcileable. The absence of their Sove-
reign had accustomed the nobles to independence; and, during the
late commotions, they had acquired such an increase of wealth, as
threw great weight into the scale of the aristocracy, which flood
not in need of any accefflon of power.- The kingdom had long
been under the government of Regents, who exercised a delegated
jurifdiclion, attended with little authority, and which inspired no
reverence. A slate of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last
years, without a Regent, without a fuprcme council, without the
power, or even the form of a regular governmcnt t'. A licentious
spirit, unacquainted with subordination, and disdaining the rc-
firaints of law and juflice, had fprcad among all ranks of men.
The influence of Francc, the antient ally of the kingdom, was

'I Brant. 484. 1I Keith, Append. 92.

with-

withdrawn or despised. The English, of enemies become confe- BOOK III.
derates, had grown into confidence with the nation, and had gained I6--~
an ascendant over all its councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not
derive more splendor or power from the friendship of the former,
than they had reason to dread injury and diminution from the in-
terpofition of the latter. Every consideration, whether of interest,
or of felf-prefervation, obliged Elizabeth to depress the royal
authority in Scotland, and to create the Prince perpetual difficul-
ties, by fomenting the spirit of difaffecion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini-

ftration fell into the hands of a young Queen, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her country,
a itranger to her fubjecs, without experience, without allies, and
almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some circum-

fPances, which, though they did not balance there disadvantages,
contributed, however, to alleviate them; and, with skilful ma-
nagement, might have produced great effects. Her subjects, unac-
customed so long to the residence of their Prince, were not only
dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal presence, but in-
spired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power and
profit bestowed by the favour of a Prince, his proteiIon, his fami-
liarity, and even his finiles, confer honour, and win the hearts of
mien. Fromr all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to
tclify their duty and aflfclion to their Sovereign, and fliclied, by
every art, to wipe out the memory of pafl mifcondlcl't, and to lay
in a lock of futire merit. The amutcmeints and gaiety of her
court, which was filled with the moll accoimplillcd of' the French

(- g 2 nobility,

BooKIII. nobility, who had attended her, began to soften and to polish the

C57- rude manners of the nation. Mary herself poffeifed many of

there qualifications, which raise affetion, and procure esteem. The
beauty and gracefulness of her person drew universal admiration,
the elegance and politeness of her manners commanded general
refpeac. To all the charms of her own sex, she added many of the
accomplishments of the other. The progress ihe had made in all
the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteemed necessary or or-
namental, was far beyond what is commonly attained by Princes;
and all her other qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour-
teous affability, which, without lessening the dignity of a Prince,
steals on the hearts of fubjeds with a bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumifances, notwithstanding the threatening as-

peQ of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithstanding the
clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different issue of her reign; and whatever
sudden gusts of faacion he might have expeced, he would never
have dreaded the deflruaive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who should discover the mofi

dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit
of the age broke out in a remarkable initance. On the Sunday as-
ter her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be celebrated in the
chapel of her palace. The firit rumour of this occasioned a fecrct
murmuring among the Protestants who attended the court; com-
plaints and threatenings soon followed; the servants belonging to
the chapel were insulted and abused; and, if the Prior of St. An-
drew's had not seasonably intcrpofed, the rioters might have pro-
cccded to the utmott excclfcs i'.

' IKnox, 284.

23~~~~ I^~~~~r

IT is impossible, at this distance of time, and under circum- BOOK III.

stances so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal
against Popery, which then possessed the nation. Every instance of
condescension to the Papifis was esteemed an ad of apoftacy, and the
toleration of a tingle mass pronounced to be more formidable to the
nation than the invasion of ten thousand armed men '. Under the
influence of there opinions, many Proteflants would have ventured
to go dangerous lengths; and, without attempting to convince their
Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which alone she thought acceptable to him. But the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not only restrained
this impetuous spirit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for the Queen and
her domestics the undisturbed exercise of the Catholic religion.
Near an hundred years after this period, when the violence of reli-
gious animofities had begun to subside, when time and the progress
of learning had enlarged the views of the human mind, an Eng-
lill house of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sove-
reign in the private use of the mass. The Protestant leaders dc-
serve, on this occasion, the praise both of wifdorm and of modera-
tion for conduct so different. But, at the fame time, whoever re-
flecs upon the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be
far from treating the fears and caution of the more zealous Refor-
mers as altogether imaginary, and dctitute of any real foundation.

THIE Protcflants, however, by this compliance with the Queen's
prejudices, obtained a proclamation highly favourable to their rcli-

' Knox, 287.

gion,

BoOK III. gion. The Reformed dotrine, though eftabliihed all over the
'-" ''
5 kingdom, had never received the countenance or fantion of royal

1561.
Augull :5. authority. On this occasion, the Queen declared any attempt to-

wards an alteration or subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

She employs TH E Queen, conformable to the plan which had been concerted
only Prote-
ftants in the ill France, committed the administration of affairs entirely to Pro-
admininill'a-
tlon. teftants. Her council was filled with the most eminent persons of

that party; not a single Papiftwas admitted into any degree of con-
fidence t. The Prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lething-
ton seemed to hold the firfl place in the Queen's affection, and pof-
sessed all the power and reputation of favourite Ministers. Her
choice could not have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her
people; and, by their prudent advice, Mary conducted herself
with so much moderation, and deference to the sentiments of the
nation, as could not fail of gaining the affedtion of her fubjeds :,
the firmest foundation of a Prince's power, and the only genuine
source of his happiness and glory.

Attemnt; to A coRDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another object of
ath' l'li'our great importance to Mary; and though file seems to have had it

much at heart, in the beginning of her administration, to accom-
plifh fuich a defireable conjuntion, yet many events occurred to
widen, rather than to close the breach. The formal offices of friend-
fli p, however, are seldom negleaed among Princes, and Elizabeth,
who had attempted so openly to obfiruc the Qtccn's voyage into
Scotland, <id not fail, a few days after her arri-a], to comlmand
Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that flhe might

': Keith, 50s4. - Knox, 285. :1: Lefly, 235.
I [,,1

be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court, BOOK IT.
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for Elizabeth '.

' i

Both the Ambassadors were received with the utmost civility; and,
oil each fide, the professions of kindness, as they were made with
little sincerity, were listencd to with proportional credit.

BoTIHr were intrufded, however, with something more than mere
matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with fresh importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory conduc of his
Mistress with regard to that point. The multiplicity of public as-
fairs since her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the question
in dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with whom she was
obliged in decency to consult, were the pretences offered in excuse
for her conduct; the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate herself out of these
difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary
was brought to yield a point, which formerly she seemed determined
never to give up. She inftruced Maitland to signify her willing-
ness to disclaim any right to the Crown of England, during the
life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure of
thele, fie were declared next heir by at of parliament '-.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to Mary, who

thereby precluded herself from diflurbing Elizabctl's pofeflion of
the throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's in-
tcrcf-, or more contlradiclory to a passion, which predominated in the
charactcr of that Princcfs. Notwithstanding all the great qualities

a Keith, 18I, &c. ' 1 Canmdcii, 387. Buchli,. 329.

',vhicht

BOOK III. which threw such lustre on her reign, we may observe, that she was

1- tincured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown, which often

betrayed her into mean and ungenerous acions. The peculiarity
of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but did not
infuse this passion. It descended to her from Henry VII. her grand-
father, whom, in several features of his charater, she nearly refem-
bled. Like him she suffered the title by which she held the Crown
to remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit it to
parliamentary discussion, or derive any adddition to her right, from
such authority. Like him, she observed every pretender to the
succession, not only with that attention which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires. The present un-
certainty with regard to the right of succession, operated for Eliza-
beth's advantage, both on her fubjecs, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded her life as the great
security of the national tranquillity; and chose rather to acknow-
ledge a title which was dubious, than to search for one that was
unknown. The latter, while nothing was decided, were held in
dependence, and obliged to court her. The manner in which she
received this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no other
than might have been expeced. She rejected it in a peremptory
tone, with many expressions of a resolution never to permit a
point of so much delicacy to be touched.
September 1. ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public entry into Edin-

burgh with great pomp. Nothing was negleted, which could
cxprefs the duty and affection of the citizens towards their Sove-
reign. But amidst thcfe demonstrations of regard, the genius and
sentiments of the nation discovercd themfclves, in a circumftncc,
which, though inconfiderablc, ought not to be overlooked. As it

wab

was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at every public BooK III.
solemnity; most of these, on this occasion, were contrived to be re- 6
presentations of the vengeance which the Almighty hath inflited
upon idolaters i. Even while they studied to amuse and to-flattcr
the Queen, her subjects could not refrain from testifying their ab-
horrence of that religion which fe professed.

To restore the regular administration of justice, and to reform Retrains the

licence of the

the internal police of the country, became the next objet of the borderers.
Queen's care. The laws enacted for preservation of public or-
der, and the security of private property, were nearly the fame in
Scotland, as in every other civilized country. But the nature of
the Scottish constitution, the impotence of regal authority, the ex-
orbitant power of the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution of these laws feeble,
irregular, and partial. In the counties which border on England,
this defec was most apparent; and the consequences of it most fen-
sibly felt. The inhabitants, firangers to industry, averse from la-
bour, and unacquainted with the arts of peace, fubfitled intirely
by spoil and pillage, and being confederated.in septs or clans, com-
mitted these excesses not only with impunity, but even with ho-
nour. During the unsettled slate of the kingdom from the death
of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual
height; and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were be-
come no less intolerable to their own countrymen, than to the
Englifl. To restrain and punish these outrages, was an action
equally popular in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's
was the person chosen for this important fcrvice, and extraordinary

* Keith, 189.
VOL. I. I-I h powers,

BOOK III. powers, together with the title of the Qu'een's lieutenant, were-

S veffed in him for this- purpose.,

NOTHING can be more ftirprifihg to men, accuffomed to regu-.

lar government, than the preparations made on this occafiom. They'
were such as might be expeded'in the rudest and most imperfet&
state of society. The freeholders of eleven several counties, with
all their followers completely armed; were summoned to assist' the
Lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing resembled a'
military expedition, rather-than the progress of a court of justice*.
The Prior executed his commriffion with such vigour and'prudence,.
as acquired him a great ihcreafe of reputation and popularity among,
his countrymen. Numbers of'the banditti suffered the punifhmenti
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and rigorous admini-
firation of justice, order and tranquillity were reftoxed to that.part.
of the kingdom.

ThePapilts DURING tle absence of the Prior of"St. Andrew's, the leaders;
ain, to get of the Popish faction-eem to have taken some fReps towards infi-
into ifvour nuating themselves into the Q7'i"n's.favour and'confidencet. But
with her.

the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, the moif remarkable person in the,
party for-abilities and political aclil'efs, was received with little fa--
vour at court; and'whatever secret partiality the Queen might have-
towards those who professed the fame religion with herfelfi ihe dif-
covered no inclination, at th'at time, to take the admiinifration of'
affairs out of thel hands, to which flie had already committed it.

Turn cold reception of the Archhifhop of.St. Andrew's was owing
to his conncdion with the house of Hamilton; from which the

* Keith, 198. t Ibid. 203.

ccntll

Queen was much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal BOOK IlI.
could never forgive the zeal, with which the Duke of Chatelhe-
rault and his son the Earl of Arran had espoused the cause of the
Congregation. Princes seldom view their successors without jealousy
and diftrufl. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in power. All these causes concurred in infusing
into the Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The Duke,
indulging his love of retirement, lived at a diflance from court,
without taking pains to insinuate hirnfelf into favour; and though
the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a
most unpardonable ad of imprudence, was the only nobleman of
diftin6tion who opposed Mary's enjoying the exercise of her reli-
gion; and by rashly entering a public protestation against it, entirely
forfeited her favour*. At the fame time, the fordid parsimony of
his father obliged him either to hide himself in some retirement,
or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as first Prince
of the blood, or his high pretensions as suitor to the Eeern 1-.
His love, ,inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience, exafpe-
rated by negle&, preyed gradually on his reason, and, after many
extravagancies, broke out at last in ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of Estates was held Dcc(n.

chiefly on account of ecclesiastical affairs. The assembly of the
church, which fat at the fame time, prerented a petition, contain-
ing many demands with respect to the suppressing of Popery, the
encouraging the Protestant religion, and the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy .. The last was a matter of great import-
ance, and the steps taken towards it dcferve to be traced.

Kcith, 201, 204. Knox, 186. t Keith, 196. . Ibid. 210.

HI h 2 Tiiou(; r

Boox Ill. THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers was now confi-

-g156 1. cerably-increafed, many more were fiill wanted, in every corner of

A new regu. the kingdom. No legal provision having been made for them,
la i'n con-
cr,.ing the they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fubfiflence from
rl Xe!mces of
tlic church. the benevolence of their people. To susser the ministers of an

eflablifhcd church to continue in this state of indigence and depen-
dence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of re-
ligion, and to the maxims of found policy; and would have jufli-
sied all the imputations of avarice, with which the Reformation
was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popish
church were the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three last years, the state of there was
greatly altered., A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other
heads of religious houses, had, either from a sense of duty, or from
views of interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and, notwith-
Randing this change in their sentiments, they retained their ancient:
revenues. Almost the whole order of Bishops, and several of the
other dignitaries, fill adhered to the Romish fupertition : and
though debarred from every spiritual funCtion, continued to enjoy
the temporalities of their benefices. Some laymen, especially those
who had been aaive in promoting the Reformation, had, under
various pretences, and amidst the licence of civil wars, got into their
hands possessions, which belonged to the church. And thus before
any part of the ancient ecclefiaflical revenues could be applied
towards the maintenance of the Protcef:ant Ministers, many different
inlcitenls were to be adjutfed; meany claims to be examined ; and the
IprCudices and paflions of the two contending parties required the
al)plication of a delicate h:ind. After much contention, the ifllow-
i;i3; plan was iapproved by a majority of voices, and acquiclccd in
evcn Iby the Popili clergy themfclvcs. An cxat account of the

val tc

value of ecclcfiaflical benefices throughout the kingdom was ap- BooK IIr.
pointed to be taken. The present incumbents, to whatever party -6I
they adhered, were allowed to keep pofeffion: two thirds of thcir
whole revenue were reserved for their own use, the remainder was
annexed to the Crown; and out of that, the Q.een undertook to
aflign a sufficient maintenance for the Protestant clergy %.

As most of the Bishops and several of the other dignitaries were

fiill firmly attached to the Popilh religion, the extirpation of the
whole order, rather than an act of such extraordinary indulgence,
might have been expected from the zeal of the preachers, and from
the spirit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles obftruded the operation of such as were
purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, two
passions extremely opposite, concurred in determining the Pro-
teftant leaders to fall in with this plan, which deviated so mani-
feftly from the maxims, by which they had hitherto regulated their
conduc.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to ad without controul,

and to level all diftindions in the church, the immcnfe revenues
annexed to ecclefiatical dignities could not, with any colour of
juflice, have been retained by those in whose hands they now were;
but muff either have been distributcd among the Proteflant clergy,
who performed all rcligious officcs, or muPi have fallcn to the Qeccn,
from the bounty of whose ancellors, the greater part of them was
originally derived. The former fchcilnc, howevcer suitable to the re-
ligious spirit of many among the people, wavs attended with manli-

' Kelith, Append. 175. Klilo, 194.

tol l

BOOK III. fold danger. The Popish ecclefiaitics had acquired a share in the

56I anational property, which far exceeded the proportion that was con-

fiftent with the happiness of the kingdom; and the nobles were
determined to guard against this evil, by preventing the return of
those vast possessions into the hands of the church. Nor was the
latter, which exposed the .constitution to more imminent hazard,
to be avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed prerogative,
which the Scottish Kings possessed, was the object of jealousy to the
nobles. If they had allowed the Crown to seize the spoils of the
church, such an increase of power must have followed that accef-
sion of property, as would have raised the royal authority above
controul, and have rendered the most limited Prince in Europe the
most absolute and independent. The reign of Henry VIII. presented
a recent and alarming example of this nature. The wealth which
flowed in upon that Prince, from the suppression of the monafte-
ries, not only changed the maxims of his government, but the
temper of his mind; and he who had formerly submitted to his
Parliaments, and courted his people, ditated, from that time,
to the former, with intolerable insolence; and tyrannized over the
latter, with unprecedented severity: and if his policy had not been
extremely short-sightcd, if he .had not squandered what he had ac-
quired, with a profusion equlal to his rapaciousness, and which de-
featcd his ambition, he might have eftablifled defpotifin in Eng-
land, .on a balls so broad and flrong, as all the efforts of the sub-
jes would never have been able to fliake. In Scotland, where
the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion to the wealth
of the kingdom, the acquilition of church-lands would have been
of no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal to the arif-
:ocracy. The nobles, for this rcafon, guarded against such an in-

crease

create of the royal power, and thereby secured their own inde- BOOK III..
pendence.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for the interest of

their order. The re-uniting the possessions of the church to the
Crown, or the beflowing them on the Protestant clergy, vwould
have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of these revenues, and' to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their ecclefiaflical character. But
as the plan, which was proposed, gave f6me fanaion to their ufur-
pations, they promoted it with their utmost influence. The popish
ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a third of their revenues was
by no means agreeable to them, consented, under their present cir-
cumftances, to sacrifice a part of their poeflEions, in order to pur-
chafe the secure enjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming.
the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered whatever they could
retrieve-as so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were
men of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained hopes of
restoring the Popish religion, they wifled their own relations, ra-
tlier than the Crown, or the Proteflant clergy, to be enriched with
the spoils of the church. They connived, for this reason, at the
encroachments of the nobles; they even aided their avarice and vio-
lence; they dealt out the patrimony of the church among their own
relations,. andby granting s'us and perpetual Icafcs of lands and
tithes, gave, to the utmonf of their power, some colour of legal
poleflfion, to what was formerly mere ufulrpation. Many velliges
of fuich alienations still remain *. The nobles, with the concur-
rence of the incumbents, daily extended their encroachments, and
gla(lually strippcd the ecclesiastics of their richcft and imoft valu-

Keith, 507. Spots. 175.

able

BooKc III. able poflefions. Even that third part, which was given up in or-

6 I~' der to silence the clamours of the Protestant clergy, and to be some
I56I.

equivalent to the Crown for its claims, amounted to no confider-
able fum. The thirdr due by the more powerful nobles, especially
by such as had embraced the Reformation, were almost universally
remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent rentals; by estimating
the corn, and other payments in kind, at an under-value; and by
the connivance of collectors; greatly diminished the charge againflt
themselves *: and the nobles had much reason to be satisfied with
a device which, at so small expence, secured to them such vast
pofeffions.

The Prote- NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gainers by this new
ftant clery te
no gainers by regulation; they found it to be a more cafy matter to kindle zeal,

it. than to extinguish avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they

had swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all their
remonstrances. The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, the
Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders of the
Congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was called, to
modify their stipends. An hundred merks Scottish was the allow-
ance which their liberality afforded to the generality of Ministers.
To a few three hundred merks were granted 1. About twenty-
four thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole fum
allotted for the maintenance of a national church established by
law, and esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church of
God :1:. Even this fulm was paid with little exadnefs, and the Mi-
niftcrs were kept in the fame poverty and dependence as formerly.
* Keith, Append. 188. Spots. 183. *1 Knox, 301. :: Keith, Append. 188.

S TI-IET

THE gentleness of the Qrieen's administration, and the elegance Bool III.
of her court, had mitigated, in rome degree, the ferocity of the 156.

I562.
nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness and humanity; DiffetrfioR

among the

while, at the fame time, her presence and authority were a check nobegs.
to their faEtious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a Rate of order
and tranquillity `was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became remarkable for
the moif violent eruptions of intestine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a Mo-

narch could possess little authority, and exercise no extensive or ri-
gorous jurifdition. The interfering of interest, the unsettled itate
of property, the frequency of public commotions, and the fierce-
ness of their own manners, sowed, among the great families, the
feeds of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have
already observed, were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the Monarch, or ac-
knowledging his superior authority, assembled his own followers,
and invaded the lands of his rival in an hoPlile manner. Together
with his ellate and honours, every nobleman tranfinitted some
hereditary feud to his posterity, who were bound in honour to
adopt and to prosecute it with the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a dissention had fubfifled between the house of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
luring the late commotions ''. Both the Earl of Arran and Both-
well happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their followers.

K IC;th, 215.
VOL. L I i quarrclledi

BooK III. quarrelled frequently in the fireets 'of Edinburgh, and excited

-562J dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation of their
February friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but

.an unfortunate one to both these noblemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and with the utmost ter-

ror and confusion, confefied first to him, and then to the Prior of
St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direction of as-
fairs, Bothwell and his kinfinen the Hamiltons, had conspired to
murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the Queen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
supplanted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that place at
the helm, which he imagined to be due to himself, as sirs Prince
*of the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which
he had received from the Prior during the late commotions, was no
lcfs exasperated againfl him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy exified only in the fran-
tic and disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impossible,
amidst the contradiation of historians, and the defeeivenefs of re-
cords, positively to determine. Among men inflamed with resent-
ment, and impatient for revenge, rafl expressions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed; and on that founda-
tion, Arran's diflcmpcred fancy might rear the whole fuperRruc-
ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accuscd, denied their guilt
with the utmost confidence. But the known characers of the men,
and the violent spirit of the agc, added greatly to the prolalbility
.of the accusation, and abundantly juflify the conducd of the Qecen's

' Knox, 305.

Mini-

Mlinifters, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring- BOOK TII.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender the -6z
firong castle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time.
of his resigning the office of Regent..

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the Prior of St. An- Thle Earl of

IIunt! ''s en-
drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more mity to the

Queen's Mi- -

tragical events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one nilters.
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and who raised his
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great ihare in the confi-
d 'Ice of that generous Prince t. By his bounty, great acceflions
of wealth and power wera added to a family, already opulent and
powerful. On the death of that Monarch, Alexander the next
Earl, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties beyond
Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices at court; and re-
tiring to the north, where his eflate and influence lay, resided there,
in a kind of princely independence. The Chieftains in that part
of the kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dangerous,
neighbour. but were unable to prevent his encroachments. Some
of his rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued by open
force. His el-ate far exceeded that of any other subjer, and his
Jfiperiorities and jurifldi&ions extended over many of the northern
counties. With power and pofefltions Io ilnllenic, under two
long and feeble minorities, and amidlt: the shock oi civil commo-
tions, the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the nmol: elevated
hopcs. But happily for the Crown, ative and cntcrprling-.
spirit was not the ch:lraclcliflic of that fhmlily, and whatever oljci:
thcir anmbitio ni. might have in view, they clio ' ratlher to acltlire it
by political addlrcs, than to Icize it openly, a nll by florce oi a1i-ls.

Kniio 307, 308. IKcitlJ, 202. -1 CrtlW. Officers of St.dt, 5:;.

I i lI:

BOOK III. THE condu& of George the present Earl, during the late com-

156.^ motions, had been perfetly suitable to the charater of the family,

in that age; dubious, variable; and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he assisted the Queen
Regent in her attempts to crush them. When their affairs put on
a better aspeCt, he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by each of the con-
tending parties; both connived at his encroachments in the north;
and, by artifice and force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added every day to the
exorbitant power and wealth which he possessed.

HE obfcrved the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the greatest jealousy and concern, and confi-
dered him as a rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased the
mifunderfianding occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The Queen
having determined to reward the services of the Prior of St. An-
drew's, by creating him an Earl, ihe made choice of Mar, as the
place whence he should take his title; and, that he might be bet-
ter able to support his new honour, bestowed upon him, at the
February lo. fame time, the lands of that name. These were part of the royal

demcfies ', but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for feve-
ral years, to keep pofTeffion of themst. On this occasion, the Earl
not only complained, with some reason, of the loss which he sus-
tained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a for-
midable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might be

t Crawf. Peer. 297. t Buch. 334.

able

able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vassals to shake off BooK III.
his yoke. i62.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and confirm- June z7.

ed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and Lord
Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the fireets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with
armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dan-
geroufly wounded by Sir John. The magistrates seized both the
offenders, and the Queen commanded them to be ftridly confined.
Under any regular government, such a breach of public peace and
ol-der would expose the person offending, to certain puniflment.
At this time, some severity was necefary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from an insult, the most heinous which had been
offered to it, since her return into Scotland. But in an age accuf-
tomed to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her
power in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed an adc
of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each party began to con-
vene their vassals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf-
trate the decisions of justice %. Mean while, Gordon made his
escape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfiire, complained
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated; and as
all the Queen's adtions were, at this juncure, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the rcfcntment, which I-untly
had conceived against that nobleman.

AT the very time when there pafflons fermented, with the ut- AIgUlt I.
most violence, in the minds of the Earl of I-untly and his family,

ICeith, 223.

the

BOOK III. the Queen happened to set out on a progress into the northern parts

62 of the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and Mor-

ton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The presence of
the Queen, in a country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised, for many years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor--
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the Q(een was en--
tirely under the direcion of Mar, all her actions were more apt to
be misrepresented, andconftrued into injuries; and a thousand cir-
eumritances could not but occur to awaken Huntly's jcaloufy, to of-
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment.. Amidst the agi-
tations of so many violent passions, some eruption was unavoidable..

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a;

woman capable of executing the commission with. abundance of
dexterity, to sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their
Ion. But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should again
deliver himself into the hands ofjuftice, and rely on her clemency.
Gordon was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by the Queen
to enter himself prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promitfed like-
wife to obey that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was, at
that time, Governor of this fort. The Queen's fcverity, and the
place in which flic appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the
hatred of the Gordons againfl hin..
<t, tcmber . MIIEAN tiln, Sir John Cordon set out towar-s Stirlin,; but inl-

stead of performig'i; his promilt to the Qtcenl, made his cf5cic
from his guards, and returned to take the command of his follow-
S,'r, who were riling in arms, all over the nortll. TlclUc were de-

ftincd
5

Rlined to second and improve the blow, by which his father pro- BooK III.
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait- 156C
land, his principal adversarics. The time and place for perpetrat-
ing this horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the executing
of it was wonderfully prevented, by forne of those unforeseen acci-
dents, which so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to in-
timidate the hearts of affaflins '. His own house at Strathbogie
was the last and nmot convenient scene, appointed for committing
the intended violence. But, on her journey thither, the Qucen
heard of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refusing, in the
firfi transports of the indignation, to enter under her father's roof,
by that fortunate expreflion of her resentment, saved her Miniflers
from -unavoidable defrrution -.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipitated Talke rms

agalnft the

Huntly into open rebellion. As the Queen was entirely under the Caeen.
direction of his rivals, it was impossible to work their ruin, with-
out violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign. On her
arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer in the castle, by Hunt-
ly's order, Ihut the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge
in the town, which was open and defenceless; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers l:. The
utmost consternation seized the Qteen, who was attended by a
very slender train. She every moment expeced the approach of the
rebels, and some ships were already ordered into the river to fe-
cure her escape. The loyalty of the Mlonroes, Frazers, Mackin-
tofhcs, and some neighbouring clans, who took arms in her de-
fence, saved her from this danger. B3y their afliflancc, flc evenc

I Keith, 230. '1 Knox, 318. . Crawf. Officers of State, 87, 88.

folrccd

BOOK III. forced the castle to surrender, and inflicted on the Governor the

56. puniflhment which his insolence deserved.

THis open aa of disobedience was the occasion of a mea-

sure more galling to Huntly than any the Queen had hitherto
taken. Lord Erskine having pretended a right to the earl-
dom of Mar, Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame
time Mary conferred upon him the Title of Earl of Murray,
with the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been in the'
possession of the Earl of Huntly since the year I548 *. From
this he concluded that his family was devoted to deftruCion;
and dreading to be firipped, gradually, of those pofieffions,
which, in reward of their services, the gratitude of the Crown.
had beflowed on himself, or his ancestors, he no longer dif-
guised his intentions, but, in defiance of the Queen's procla-
mation, openly took arms. Instead of yielding those places
of strength, which Mary required him to surrender, his fol-
lowers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which the dispatched
to take possession of them t; and he himself, advancing with a
considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place the
Queen was now returned, filled her small court with conlter-
nation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom he could
confide :t. In order to form the appearance of an army, he
was obliged to call in the affiflance of the neighbouring Ba-
rons; but as most of there either' favoured Huntly's designs
or stood in awe of his power, from them no cordial or effec-
tual service could be expected.

* Crawf. Peer. 359. 1. Knox, 319. 1 Keith, 230.

WITHr
3

WITH these troops, however, Murray, who could gain nothing BOOK III.
by delay, marched briskly towards the enemy. He found them at -56.

i562.

Corrichie, polled to great advantage; he commanded his northern Oaober zg.
afolciates instantly to begin the attack; but on the first motion of
the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs; and Huntly's
followers, throwing aside their spears, and breaking their ranks,
drew their swords, and ruihed forward to the pursuit. It was He is defeated

by the Earl of

then, that Murray gave proof both of steady courage, and of pru- AMurlay.
dent conduct. He flood immoveable, on a rising ground, with
the finall, but trusty body of his adherents, who presenting their
spears to the enemy, received them with a determined resolution,
vwhich they little expected. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottiff spear. In every civil commo-
tion, the superiority of the latter has been evident, and has always
decided the contest. On this occasion, the irregular attack of
Huntly's troops was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion.
Before they recovered from the confusion occasioned by this un-
foreseen resistance, those who had begun the flight, willing to re-
gain their credit with the victorious party, fell upon them, and
compleated the rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely cor-
pulent, was trodden to death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John
and Adam, were taken, and Murray returned in triumph to Aber-
deen with his prisoners.

THE trial of men taken in actual rebellion againtf their Sove-

reign was extremely short. Three days after the battle, Sir Joln
Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. -Is brother Adam was par-
doned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been
privy to his father's designs, was seized in the iouth, and upon
trial found guilty of trcafon; but, throlugh the Queen's clemency,

VOL. I. K k the

1300o III. the punifhmrent was remitted. The first Parliament proceeded

* 2.62
- againit this great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and re-

duced their power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

As.

" This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the morl intricate and myf-

terious paflages in the Scottifli history. As it was a tranfa&ion purely domestic, and
in which the English were little interested, few original papers concerning it have been
found in Cecil's Colleclion, the great tforehoufe of evidence and information with
regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time, of destroying

lMurray, and of employing the power of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But
his account of this whole tranfaEtion appears to be so void of truth, and even of pro-
bability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Mary wanted power,
and seems to have had no inclination to commit any aa of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this matter, but
they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to the north was a scheme

concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the Earl of Huntly. i. Huntly had resided at
-court almost ever since the Queen's return. Keith, 198. Append. 175, &c. This
was the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack him in Aberdecnfhire,
the feat of lhis power, and in the midst of his vafrals, was a projcet equally absurd
and hazardous. 2. The Queen was not accompanied with a body of troops, capable
of attempting any thing against Iluntly by violence; her train was not more numerous,
than was ufial in times of grcatclt tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3. There remain two
original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one from Randolph the English Rcfi-
denrt, anl another fromk Maitland, both direcacd to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's
imcafires as notoriously treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated attempts to
iu! l:sinlatc MAluri:y, &c. No hint is given of any previous resolution, formed by
Ma\ry'vs MinificrsE, to ruin IhIntly and his family. I-ad any such design ever cxillcil,
it wv;is R111d .l ph's duty to have dircovered it; nor would Maitlandl have laboured to
to:!;cal it i;ro1n the Ig'nm'h L'cretary. cith, 229, 232.

II. To

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the rioft important event 3BOK IIT.

of this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narra- I '
tive, by taking notice of lesser transaCtions, which may now be
related with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous of en- An inrcrview

betwcen L'i-

tering into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with zabeth and
Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with for ro,
her, somewhere in the north of England. As this proposal could
not be rejeced with decency, the time, the place, and the cir-
cumfiances of the meeting were instantly agreed upon. But Eli-
zabeth was prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a ri-
val, who outshone herself, so far, in beauty, and gracefulness of
person; and who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of infinua-

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the Queen,

and her Ministers, seems to be no lets improbable. i. On the Queen's arrival in the
north, he laboured, in good earnef, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, first at Aberdeen, and then at Rothe-
may, whither he would not have ventured to come, had he harboured any such trea-
fonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3. His conduc was irresolute and wavering, like
that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one executing a con-
certed plan. 4. The most considerable persons of his Clan submitted to the Queen,
and found surety to obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previously
determined to rife in arms againit the Queen, or to fcize her Minflners, it is proballe
he would have imparted it to his principal followers, nor would they have delfrtcd
him in this manner.

For thefc rcafons we have, on the one hand, vindicated the Earl of Tnurrna

from any deliberate intention of ruining the liirnily (of Gordon; andl on the iliher
hall, we lhave imputed the violent conutlui of the l ;rl of Iluntly, to :, Ir'.'ri
lhart of rcfclntmlcn, without charging him wih) any ircn.Jit:ucJi lr (A1 :c-
ic'llion.

K Ik 2 tjuot

BoOKIII. tion and address. Under pretence of being confined to London, by

-I56 - tthe attention which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in

France, the put off the interview for that season ", and prevented
her subjects from feeing the Scottifih Queen, the charms of whose
appearance, and behaviour, flle envied, and had some reason to dread.

June 2. DURING this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In
DecemberzS. both there meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the po-

verty and dependence of the church; and many murmurs against
the negligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed to col-
le&t, and to distribute the small fund, appropriated for the mainte-
nance of preacherst. A petition, craving redress of their griev-
ances, was presented to the Queen; but without any effect. There
was no reason to expect that Mary would discover any forwardnefa
to grant the requests of such supplicants. And as her Ministers,
though all most zealous Proteflants, were themselves growing rich
on the inheritance of the church, they were equally regardless of
the indigence and demands of their brethren.

1 56 r. M AR Y had now continued above two years in a Rtate of widow-

Ncgocialons hood. Her gentle administration had secured the hearts of her sub-
witlh leard to
the SQucl's jccts, who were impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown

to dcfccnd in the right line from their ancient Monarchs. She her-
fclf was the most amiable woman of the age, and the fame of her
acconmplifmnents, together with the favourable circumflance of
her having one ]kingdom already in her pofleflion, and the proifec
of mnounting the throne of another, prompted many different
IPrinces to solicit an alliance so illuilrious. Scotland, by its fitu;a-
tion, tlrecw to much weight and power into-whatever s'cale it fell,

"- Ieitlh, 2 6. I 1
K ox, 311, 3?3.

tlhat

that all Europe waited' with solicitude for Mary's determination; BooKE IIL.
and no event in that age, excited fironger political fears and jea--- 6
loufies; none interested more deeply the passions of several Princes,.
or gave rife to more contradictory intrigues, than the marriage of
the Scottifll Queen.

TIHE Princes of the house of Aufiria remembered what vast Sheis folJiri-

projets the French, had founded on their former alliance with the edt Pricfc.r
Queen of Scots; and though the unexpeted death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered these from taking effect, yet if
Mary fliould again make choice of a husband among the French
Princes, the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted with
better luccefs..

fN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into a negocia- By the Arch-

tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, .-ho had proposed to marry the duke Charles,
Scottish Queen to the Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son,
The matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil, who, at that
time, attended the EleCtor Palatine, was commanded to inquire
into the charaCder and situation of the Archduke '-'

PHILIP II. though no less apprehnlfivc of M/ary's falling once y DIn C.n-

more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the 1os 01 O's1l.
acquisition of lo important a prize, and as his own inflltiable am-
bition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his am-
bafilador at the French court, to lolicit the Princcs of Lorrain in
Ibehalf of his son Don Carlos, at that timc, tlic heir of all the c.x-
tenlive dominions, lwhich belonged to the Spanilli monarchy''.

'- Mclv. 0i3, ('5. TK ith, 239. Sec Append. N VI1I.
: Caflclil. 461. Addit, ad . ;iJbor. 5ci, ?03.

CA. TJ1 ER I.li ;.

BOOK III. CATH ERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the mar.

563.' itiage of the Scottish Queen with any of the Austrian Princes, which
I563.

would have added so much to the power and pretensions of that

B)' the Duke ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain rendered
of Anjou.

her no less averse from an alliance, which by securing them the
proteaion of the Emperor or King of Spain, would give new bold-
ness to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the power
of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance: And
as she was afraid that there splendid proposals of the Austrian fa-
mily would dazzle the young Queen, {he instantly dispatched Caf-
telnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou,
the brother of her former husband, who soon after mounted the
throne of France .

Mar's dcli- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rivals.
bCninig a,- The Archduke had little to recommend him, but his high birth.

The example of Henry VIII. was a warning against contracing a
marriage with the brother of her former husband; nor could she
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to that
which she had formerly held in that kingdom. She litened, there-
fore, with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and the profpeE
of fuich vast power and dominions flattercd the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princcfs.

TIHREE fcveral circumfianccs however concurred to divert Mary
from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

Till, first of thece was the murder of her uncle the Duke of
,Guilc. The violence and ambition of that incblcman Ihad involved

i*: C;in,.lnnt, ,sii.

his

his country in a civil war; which was conducted with furious ani- BOOK IIL
mofity, and various success. At last the Duke laid siege to Orleans, 1-563.
the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and he had reduced that city
to the last extremity, when he was assassinated by the frantic zeal
of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. The
young Dule was a minor; and the Cardinal of Lorrain, though
subtle and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and enterprising cou-
rage, which rendered the ambition of his brother so formidable.
Catherine, instead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering the
pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying
tle one, and in disappointing the other. In this situation, and
without such a protector, it became necessary for Mary to contract
her views, and to proceed 'with caution; enld whatever prospect of
advantage might allure her, she could venture upon no dangerous
or doubtful measure.

THE second circumflance, which weighed with Mary, was the The vietwsof

Elizabeth.

opinion of the Queen of England. The marriage of the Scottish
Queen interested Eliza!;eth more deeply than any other Prince;
and she obferveall i -her deliberations concerning it with the most
anxious attention. She herself seems early to have formed a refo-
lution of living unimnarricd, and fie discovered no finall inclination
to iinpofe the famle law on the Queen of Scots. She had already
experienced what use might be nmade of Mary's power and prctcn-
sions, to invade heri dominions, and to diflurb her poflJllion of the
Crown. The dcath of Francis II. had happily (cl]ivc.rcd her frol
this cdangce-, which fhc determinled to gutrd agai;ni lor thle futilre,
with the utmofi care. As the rcfillcl amil,ition of thet Aubl-i.i
Princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons (of the Caitholic {liilcri--
tion, made her, in a particular manner, d c:(l their nci?;hbotlhootl,

the
7

BJooK III. fle infl-ru&ed Randolph to remonstrate, in the strongest terms,

! ---' againfl any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, that as she

herself would confider such a match to be a breach of the personal
fricndfliip, in which they were so happily united; so the Englifl
nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that confederacy which
now fubfifled between the two kingdoms: That, in order to pre-

l-rve their own religion and liberties, they would, in all probabi-
lity, take some ftep prejudicial to her right of succession, which, as
she well knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to invali-
date, and set aside. This threatening was accompanied with a
promise, but expressed in very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's
choice of a husband should prove agreeable to the Englifl nation,
Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine her title to
the succession, and, if well founded, command it to be publickly
recognized. She observed, however, a mysterious silence concern-
ing the person, on whom flhe wifled the choice of the Scottifl
'Queen to fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for some
future negociation. Mean while /he threw out some obscure hints,
that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be her
lafeft and mofl inoffensive choice *. An advice offered with such
an air of superiority and command, mortified, no doubt, the pride
of the Scottish Queen. But, under her present circumstances, ehe
was obliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign assist-
ance, and intent upon the Englifl fucceifion, the great objea of
her wishes and ambition, it became ncceffary, to court a rival, whom,
,without manifest imprudence, fle could not venture to offend.

The renti- TIIE inclination of her own fuibjeds was another, and not the
mernts o[ her
ownubjctsh. lcaft confidcrable circumiflance, which called for Mary's attention

* Kcith, 242, 245.

~~~5 ^at

at this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the fatal experi- BooK III.
ment of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great 563
Prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown should be strengthened by new domi-
nions, or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be stretched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her aid, to-
wards obftruting a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy
for them to seize the person of the Sovereign. By the assistance of
the English fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign
Prince to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an in-
considerable party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of
the Earl of Huntly, could give no obstruction to their designs.
To what violent extremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign
yoke might have been carried, is manifest from the tranfalions
both previous. and subsequent to the present period.

FOR there reasons, Mary laid afidc, at that time, all thoughts

of a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own am-
bition, in order to remove the jcaloufies of Elizabeth, and to
quiet the fears of her owvn subjects.

THE Parliament met this year, for the firfl time, since the A p.rlianient

Qeen's return into Scotland. Mary's adminifiration had hitherto leld, May z6.
been extremely popular. I-Icr mniinficrs )possessed the confidence
of the nation; and, by consequence, the proceedings of that afcm-
bly were conduced with pcrfctm unanimity. The grant of the earl-
dom of Murray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the

VOL. I. L 1 Earl

BoOK III. Earl of luntly, and several of his vassals and dependants were at-

tainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his
accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, was reversed*:
the aa of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the royal fanaion. But Mary, who had determined never to ratify
that treaty, took care that this fancion should not be deemed any
acknowledgment of its validity; she granted her consent merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who, on their knees, be-
fought her to allay the jealousies and apprehensions of her sub-
jeds, by such a gracious law t.

Nothing de- No attempt.was made, in this Parliament, to procure the Queen's
termined with
regard to re- assent to the laws establishing the Protestant religion. Her Mini-

ion. fters, though zealous Protestants themselves, were aware that this

could not be urged without manifest danger and imprudence. She
had consented, through their influence, to tolerate and protect the
reformed doctrine. They had even prevailed on her to imprison
and prosecute the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and Prior of Whit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclamation :. Mary,
however, was still passionately devoted to the Romish fuperfiition;
and though, from political motives, she had granted a temporary
protection to opinions, which she disapproved, there were no grounds
to hope that she would agree to eftablifli them for perpetuity.
The moderation of those who professed it, was the best method
for reconciling the Quecn to the Protestant religion. Time might
abate her bigotry. I-Ier prejudices might wear off gradually, and'
at lafl fl e might yield to the wiflhs of her people, what their
importunity or their violence could never have extorted. [Many

* Knox, 330. 1 Spoftw. i88. : IKeith, 239.

laws

laws of importance were to be proposed in Parliament; and to BOOK III.
defeat all'thefe, by fucha fruitless and ill-timed application to the 1563.
Q0ueen, would have been equally injurious to individuals, and
detrimental to the public.

THE zeal of the Protestant clergy was deaf to all these confi- Whic'ioffend

the clergy,

derations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no delay:
revere and inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances. The
leading men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of efcablifll-
ing religion by law, was not to be negleced. They pronounced
the moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to
gain the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox
solemnly renounced the friendihip of the Earl of Murray, as a
man devoted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as
to become regardless of those objects which he had hitherto
esteemed most sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of
Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at that period, con-
tinued above a year and an half *.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. There ecchocd more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning the
Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches
against those, who, from interested motives, had defcrted that cause,
which they once reckoned it their honour to fuipport. Thc people, Ad
inflamed by such vehcmcnt declamations, which were diaated by a tumiuir
;i zcal more finccrc than prudent, proceeded to rash and unljufi- acopl.g

v Knox, 33 r.

L1 iable

Boox III. fiable acs of violence. During the Queen's absence, on a pro-

156. grefs into the weft, mass continued to be celebrated in her chapel
Auguil. at Holy-rood-houfe. The multitude of those who openly resorted

thither, gave great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who,
being free from the restraint which the royal pretence imposed, as-
fembled in a riotous manner, interrupted the service, and filled such
as were present, with the utmost consternation. Two of the ring-
leaders in this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for their trial*.

Knox tried on KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of these persons laudable, and their
that account,
but acquitted. condut meritorious, considered them as sufferers in a good cause;

ber 8. and in order to screen them from danger, he issued circular letters,

requiring all who professed the true religion, or were concerned for
the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial,
that by their presence, they might comfort and assist their distressed
brethren -. One of there letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
aflemble the fubjets without the authority of the Sovereign, was
confirued to be treason, and a resolution was taken to prosecute
December 5. Knox for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily for him,

his judges were not only zealous Protestants, but the very men,
who, during the late commotions, had openly refitted, and set at de-
fiance the Queen's authority. It was under precedents, drawn
from their own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to shelter him-
self. Nor would it have been an easy matter for these Counsellors
to have found out a diftindion, by which they could censure him,
without condemning themselves. After a long hearing, he was
unanimously acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and Prcfident of
the Court of Session, a zealous Papist, heartily concurred with the

* Knox, 335. ' 1 Ibid. 236.

other

other Counsellors in this decision *; a remarkable fa&, which shows BOOK III.
the unsettled itate of government in that age; the low condition 563
to which regal authority was then funk; and the impunity with
which fubjeas might invade those rights of the Crown, which
are now held sacred.

THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued still to be the ob- i564.

je& of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while she Nwth regard to
wished to direct Mary, treated her with a disgustful reserve; though the Queen's

marriage.

she kept her without necessity, in a Rfate of fufpence; and hinted
often at the person, whom she destined to be her husband, without
directly mentioning his name; yet Mary framed all her actions to
express such a prudent refped for the English Queen, that foreign
Princes began to imagine the had given herself up implicitly to her
direcion t. The profpet of this union alarmed Catherine of Me-
dicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all along, in doing
ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon after the Duke of
Guise's death, ihe had put upon her a most mortifying indignity,
by stopping the payment of her dowry, by depriving her subjed
the Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by bellowing the
command of the Scottish Guards on a Frcnchman :; she resolved, ,
however, to prevent this dangerous conjunction of the Britifl
Queens. For this purpose, ihe now employed all her art to ap-
pease Mary , to whom flte had given so many causes of offence.
The arrears of her dowry were inltantly paid; more puncual re-
mittances were promiscd for the future ; and offers made, not only
to rcftorc, but to extend the privilcges of the Scottish nation in
France. It was cafy for Mary to )enetrate into the motives of this
sudden change; she well knew the clltralcr of her mother-in-

* Knox, 343. Keith, 248. : Id. 244.  Sec Appendix, NQ VIII.

law,

BooK III. law, and laid little firess upon professions of friendship, which

164. came from a Princess of such a false and unfeeling heart.

THE negociation with England, relative to the marriage, suffered
no interruption from this application of the French Queen. As
Mary, in compliance to her fubjeds, and prefied by the strongest
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was

March. obliged to break that unaccountable silence, which she had hither-

Elizabeth re-
commends to affeced. The secret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Ro-
Leicefterto bert Dudley, afterwards Earl' of Leicester, was declared to be the
her for a hus-
band. happy man, whom she had chosen to be the husband of a Queen,

courted by so many Princes %.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

choice of her Ministers; in distinguishing her favourites, those great
qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capacity for
business, their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to
which alone ihe attended, in chufing her Ministers; whereas
beauty and gracefulness of person, polished manners, and courtly
address, were the accompliflments on which she bestowed her
favour. She aded in the one cafe with the wisdom of a Qeen,
in the other, file discovered the weakness of a woman. To this
Leicester owed his grandeur. Though remarkable neither for
eminence in virtue, nor fupcriority of abilities, the Quecn's par-
tiality diftinguiflcd him on every occasion. She raiscd him to
the highefi honours, flhe bellowed on him the most important
elmployments, and manifclecd an affciot so dirproportionatc lo

" Keith, 251.

llii

his merit, that, in the opinion of that age,. it could be accounted BOOK II:.
for only by the power of planetary influence . 156

THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not well bear the. Mary offend--

ed at this.

first overture of a. match with a fubjeat. Her own rank, the
splendor of her former marriage, and the solicitations, at this
time, of so many powerful Princes, crouded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and difrefpetful Eliza-
beth's proposal was. She difTembled, however, with the English.
Resident; and though Ihe declared, in strong terms, what. a degra-
dation fhle would deem this alliance, which brought along with it
no advantage that could justify such neglet of her own dignity,
she mentioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms-
full of refpea t.

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wish that the proposal Elizabeth's

fiould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary iconmending
marks The had given of her own attachment to Leicester, and while him.
he was still in the very height of favour, it is not probable she could
think seriously of betlowing upon him another. 'Twas not her aim
to persuade, but only to amuse Mary :. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though solicited by her
fubjeds, and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe, she had
hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And, if at this time, the English Quecn could have
engaged Mary to liiten to her proposal in favour of Leicester, her
power over this creature of her own would have enabled her to
protradc the negociation at plealilre; and by keeping her rival un-
married, flle would have rendered the profpeL of her fucceflion
!ces acceptable to the Englifli.

* Camden, 5c9.

l Kith,
2525. Mclv. 104, roS.

L1C E ,STE R '3

BooK III. LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely delicate, and embar-

564. raffing. To gain possession of the most amiable woman of the

age, to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a subjed, much more considerable than him. He saw
all there advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
impression on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst
not venture on the most distant discovery of his sentiments, or
take any ftep towards facilitating his acquisition of objets so wor-
thy of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

she was at no pains to conceal *, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scot-
land. Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her resolution
to lead a tingle life, and his being born her own subjea, would have
hindered her from chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
and Leicciter might flatter himself, that the violence of her assec-
tion would at length triumph both over the maxims of policy, and
the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then,
to conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scottish Queen to
be a project for his deftruaion; and he imputed it to the malice of
Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him honour, in-
tended to ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Maryl-.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Qecen, who dreaded
its success; listened to by another, who was fccrctly determined

* Mclv. 93, 94. 1 Ibid. ioi.

againil

against it; and scarce desired by the man himself, whose interest Boo e III.
and reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could. 'I
not, under so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought to a
fortunate iiTue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to.
ad with equal dissimulation. The former, notwithstanding her
fears of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The
latter, though she began about this time to cast her cyes upon
another subjet of England, did not, at once, venture finally to
rejec Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts, Ainar cntel-

b

llj ~I~IIVIL Lvirrrrl ~ u rtain's th-,,,h

s

was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldest son of the Earl of Lennox. otCnr .,
That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re- Lord -D
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for
twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's mofl
dangerous rival in her claim upon the English fucceffon. She was
the daughter of Margaret, the eldest sifter of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Angus, whom that Queen married after the death of her
husband James IV. In that age, the right and order of succession
was not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almost every cafe that can possibly happen, have
at last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is
fuibjedc to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox,
though born of a second marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grandaughter of Margaret. This was not the only advantage
over Mlary which Lady Lennox cnjoyed. She was born in lng-
land, and by a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, " whoever is not born in England, or at lcaft

'VOl. I. M m of

BooxIII. of parents, who, at the time of his birth, were in the obedience

S.' of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the king-

dom ." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer, produced in a
treatise, which he published at this time, and endeavoured to apply
it to the right of succession to the Crown. In a private cause,
these pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubtful litiga-
tion; where a Crown was at stake, such nice disputes and subtleties
were to be avoided with the utmost care. If Darnly should happen
to contra& an alliance with any of the powerful families in Eng-
land, or should publickly profess the Protestant religion, these
plausible and popular topics might be so urged as to prove fatal to
the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

MA RY was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly
correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year 1562 t,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into custody by
Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret corref-
pondence with the Scottish Queen;

Elizabeth fe- FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,
cretly pleated
with this. which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, she entered

into a still closer connexion with the Earl of Lennox l:, and invited
him to return into Scotland. This fle endeavoured to conceal from
Elizabeth; but a tranfation of so much importance did not escape
ihe notice of that difccrning Princess. She observed, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly with her views,
concerning Scottifli affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of

* Carte, I-ifl. of Eng. vol. iii. 422. '1 Camrd. 389. I: Id, 396.

the

the Scottish Queen tfoop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub- BooK III.
je: to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her jealousy, '--56
or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and by means of
this pledge, she hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her own
hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which she
had planned out, if her recommendation of Leicester had been
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no subjea of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permission of both Sove-
reigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for
her licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together
with it, she gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and
cause to Mary's friendship and protection *. But, at the fame time,
as it was her manner to involve all her tranfacions with regard to
Scotland, in some degree of perplexity and contradiction; the
warned Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal
to herself, as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient ani-
nofity between him and the house of Hamilton.

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her

an angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a total interrup-
tion of all corrcfpondence between the two Queens l-. Mary was
not a little alarmed at this; fih both dreaded the effects of Eliza-
beth's resentment, and felt sensibly the disadvantage of being ex-
cluded from a free intercourse with England, where her ambarfa-
dors had, all along, carried on, with fomc success, secret negocia-

' Keith, 255, 268, -I Ibid. 253. Mclv. 83.

M m 2 tions

BooK III. tions, which increased the number of her partizans, and paved'

1c4. her way towards the throne. In order to remove the causes of

the present difficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of Eng-
land. He found it no difficult matter to bring about a reconcile-
ment; and soon re-eftablifled the appearance, but not the consid
dence of friendcliip, which was all that had subsisted, for some
time, between the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's professions of love to;

Mary, and Melvil's replies in name of his Mistress, were made in
the language of the warmest and moit cordial friendship. But what
Melvil truly observes, with refpe6 to Elizabeth, may be extended
without injustice to both Queens. " There was neither plain:
dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation,. envy and
scar ':."

ennox>: - .Lennox, however, in consequence of the licence which he had
IanJ. obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen, not

only with the rcif)cd due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a diflinguifhed familiarity, which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-.
mour of his ion's marriage to the Q!een began to spread over the
!kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him, as
the father of their future Master. The Duke of Chatelherault was
the first to take the alarm. He confidered Lennox, as the ancient
and hereditary enemy of the houfl of Ilamilton ; and, in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the Q0ieen in-
tcrpofcd her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and employed

'' M clvil, 1 4c,

al1

AIr her influence to bring about an accommodation of their differ- BooK III.
ences 5 4

I564,

THE powerful;family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re--

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendfllip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t..

AFTER these preliminary fleps, Mary ventured to call a meeting December;.

of Parliament. The aCt of forfeiture, pafled against Lennox in the
year x545, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the ho-
nours and estate of his ancestors .,

THE ecclesiastical tranfaaions of this year were not considerable. June 25.

Decem. 2;.

In the aflemblies of the church, the fame complaints of the increase Thie Clergy
of idolatry, the fame representations concerning the poverty of the ft,i(,: i '
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen made to zeal 01o
these, and her promises of redress, were more satisfying to the Pro-
teftants, than any they had hitherto obtained Jj. But, notwitli-
'tanding her declarations in their favour, they could not help har.-
bouring many suspicions concerning Mary's designs againfl tleir
religion. She had never once consented to hear any preacher of the
reformed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigotted at-.
tachment to the Romish faith. The genius of that fupcrllition,
averse at all times from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and
unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on the Continent repcated

e Kcitli, 259, Id. 26. Note (b). .: See Appendix, N. IX,

1 I'citl 533, 539.

;tfliuranccs,

BOOK IIL assurances of her resolution to re-establish the Catholic church*.

She had industriously avoided every opportunity of ratifying the
aCts of Parliament i56o, in favour of the Reformation. Even the
protection, which ever since her return, she had afforded the Pro-
teftant religion, was merely temporary, and declared by her own
proclamation to be of force, only " till she mhould take some final
order in the matter of religion t." The vigilant zeal of the
preachers was inattentive to none of these circumstances. The
coldness of their principal leaders, who were, at this time, entirely
devoted to the court, added to their jealousies and fears. These
they uttered to the people, in language which they esteemed suit-
able to the necessity of the times, and which the Queen reckoned
*disrespectful, and insolent. In a meeting of the General Assembly,
Maitland publickly accused Knox of teaching seditious doctrine,
concerning the right of fubjets to resist those Sovereigns, who tref-
pass against the duty which they owe to the people. Knox was
not backward to justify what he had taught. And upon this gene-
ral doctrine of refifance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate
in its application to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which
admirably displays the talents and character of both the disputants;
the acuteness of the former, embellished with learning, but prone
-to subtlety; the vigorous understanding of the latter, delighting in
bold sentiments, and superior to all fear T.

1565. Two years had already been consumed in fruitless negociations

Diflimul;aion .concerning the marriage of the Scottifl Quecn. Mary had full lei-
both of Eliza-
beth and Ma- sure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza-
ry, with re-
gard to h)r ,beth's proceedings, with refpce to that affair. But, in order to
marriagc. ft the rcal intentions of the Englifl Queen in a clear light, and

Cartc, vol. iii. 415. '1 Kcith, 504, 510. :t Knox, 349.

to

to ring her to some explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, BooK III.
at lait, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of 565
succession to the Crown of England were publickly acknowledged, February 5..
she was ready to yield to the solicitations of his Mistress in behalf
of Leicefier . Nothing could be farther than this from the mind:
and intention of Elizabeth. The right of succession was a mystery,
which, during her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched;
and unexplained. She had promised however, when she firit began
to interet herself in the marriage of the Scottiih Qieen, all that'
was now demanded. How to retreat with decency, how to elude
her former offer, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained perminlion to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrassment. From the time of Melvil's ernbaly, Lady Lennox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no
firanger to the ambitious hopes, with which that young nobleman
flattered himself. She had received repeated advices from her Mi-
nifters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour t. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his stirring
out of London. In the present conjuncture, however, nothing
could be of more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into
Scotland. She had already brought one actor upon the flage, who,
under her management, had, for a long time, anused the Scottifli
Q(ccn. She hoped, no less absolutely, to dire& the motions of
Darnly, who was likewise her fubjcQ; and again to involve Mary
in all the tedious intricacies of ncgociation. These motives dcter-
mined Elizabeth and her Minilters to yield to the solicitations of
Lady Lcnnox.

* Kcith, 269. -1 Id. 256, 261, 266.

X BBuT

BOOK III. -BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Such

~56.5- unexpeced events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at
Darillyariives some times really produced by that paflon. An affair, which had

been the objeEt of so many political intrigues, and had moved and
interested so many Princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking
of two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the first
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and gracefulness ofperfon,
lie furpanled all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in such
arts as add ease and elegance to external form, and which enable it

Gains the not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a
Qicen's heart.

temper, to feel the full power of these accomplishments. The im-
pression which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible, from the
February 13. time of their first interview. The whole business of the court was

to amuse, and entertain this illustrious guest*; and in all those
scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altogether fu-
perficial and showy, appeared to great advantage. His conquest of
the Queen's heart became compleat; and inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which had been
fug-gcfcd by considerations merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

incrcafc the violence of this pafflion. Soon after Darnly's arrival
in Scotland, flc, in return to that mcfnage, whereby Mary had fig-
nificd her willingncfs to accept of Leicester, gave an answer, in
such terms as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue -1. She promised, if the Scottifl Queen's marriage with Lei-
ccllcr fliould take place, to advance him to great honours; but
w'itl1 regard to her title to the Engliflh futcccfion, fhi would nei-
ther fuilcr any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit

I Knlox, 369. *- Keith, 2.o. Append. 158.

2 it

it to be publicly recognized, till she herself should declare her Boo III.
resolution never to marry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth's former --'J

1565.

promises, Mary had reason to exped every thing contained in this
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear, with patience,
such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery,
with which, under the veil of fiiendlhip, she had been io long
abused. She burst into tears of indignation, and expressed, with
the utmost bitterness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her '*.

THE natural effect of this indignation was to add to the imnc-

tuofity with which fie pursued her own fchelie. Blinded by re-
fentment, as well as by love, she observed no defedts in the man,
whom she had chosen; and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those paflions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Qteen, the canon law

made it neceifary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the
celebration of the marriage. For this purpose, the early set on
foot a negociation with the court of Rome -.

Sr4E was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the conflnt of The French
the French King and his mother. Havingo communicated her de- cotult ajlrov

of the matcial.

sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caflclnau
the French Ambaflador, fle employed him, as the imofl proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among othcr
argunment s to tlis purpofc, Cafcllnat mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, wllicli he rcprcflintcd to be l violent and deep-rooted,

* Keith, Append. 159. *1 Canmd. 3;6.
VoL. I. N nL that

BOOK III. that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match *.
"'-'"~ Nor were the French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's

paflion. Her pride would never stoop to an alliance with a subjec
of France. By this choice, they were delivered from the appre-
henfion of a match with any of the Austrian Princes, as well as
the danger of too close an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly
profefled the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigotted
schemes which that court had adopted.

Darnly dif- WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a
gslls several
of the nobles, measure which she had so much at heart; Darnly, and his father,

by their behaviour, were raising up enemies at home, to obftruc
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered no
great compass of abilities, or political wisdom; and appears to have
been a man of weak understanding, and violent passions. Darnly
was not superior to his father in understanding, and all his passions
were still more impetuous t. To these, he added that insolence,
which the advantage of external form, when accompanied with no
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the
Queen's favour, he began already to assume the haughtiness of a
King, and to put on that imperious air, which majelty itself can
scarce render tolerable.

particularly IT was by the advice, or at least with the content of Murray,
Murray . and his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland:l:; and

yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than,
he began to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who were
known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard to reli-
gion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery . Darnly, fiill

* Caflcln. 464. -1 Klciti, 272, 273. :1: Knox, 367. Kcith, 274.  Id. 272.

more

more imprudent, allowed some rash expreflions concerning those Boo IIlI.
favours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, 1565.
to escape him *.

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to encreafe the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

THE low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed him The life of

Rizio's fa-

in a flation, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- vour.
known to posterity. But what fortune called him to act, and
to susser in Scotland, obliges history to descend from its dignity,
and to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician
in Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe Ambaffa-
dor into Scotland, gained admission into the Queen's family, by
his skill in music. His servile condition had taught him supple-
ness of spirit, and insinuating manners. He quickly crept into the
Queen's favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at
that time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and consequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
pcetants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead most diretly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were obfcrvcd to have great influence over the Qecn,
and he grew to be confidcred, not only as a favourite, but as a
Minister. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, Vwhich always
attends lichl an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
lludicd, on the contrary, to ditllay the whole extent of his favour.

: lKeith, 274.

N In lie

BooK III. He affected to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in pub-

lic. He equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjeas, in rich-
ness of dress, and in the number of his attendants. He discovered,
in all his behaviour, that assuming iniolence, with which unme-
rited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with the utmost
indignation that the nobles beheld the power; it was with the ut-
moif difficulty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Qteen's presence they could not forbear
treating him with marks of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant
power alone, which exasperated the Scots. They confidered him,
and not without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protestant:
religion, and suspeCted that he held, for this purpose, a secret.
correspondence with the court of Rdne "*

Darnl7's con- IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of
nedion with
him. this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on his vanity,

and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was em-
ployed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, towards.
eflablilhing him more firmly in her affetions-t. But whatever.
benefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not counterbalance-
the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exposed, on.
account of his familiarity with such an upstart..

TIIouc ii Darnly daily made progrcfs in the Queen's affedions,
lhe conducted hlcrellf, however, with such prudent rcferve, as to
Impofc on Randolph the Englifli Refidcnt, a man othcrwife fhrevld
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that he
cetcrtained not the leafl suspicion of the intrigue which was carry-.

l uchan. 340. Mclv. 107. 1' Id. x Ir

i'g

ing on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish BooK III.
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly *. In the midst of his 5
security, Mary dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to
Elizabeth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage with Darnly.
This embassy was the first thing, which opened the eyes of
Randolphl

ELIZABETH affeced the greatest furprize at this sudden refolu- April 1S.

Elizabeth de-

tion of the Scottish Queen, but without reason. The train was daresagainlt
laid by herself, and she had no cause to wonder when it took es- trnrragen vlt
fedt. She expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation of the Darnb"1
match, in the strongest terms; and pretended to foresee many dan-
gers and inconveniencies arising from it, to both kingdoms. But
this, too, was mere affedation. M/ary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impossible she could make
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interest in Britain, which Elizabeth had so juflly dreaded, was en-
tirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
sessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident, from.all these circumstances, that Elizabeth's appre-
henfions of danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in all'
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more of
grimace than of reality '.

" Keith, 273, and Appcnd. 159.
-- Even the Hliforians of that age cknowvlcdge, that the marriage of the Scottifi.

Queen with a fulbjCl was fitrfromi being difrccable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373.
B3tchan. 339. Caflelnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigics of both thc Britifn courts, afrerts, upon grounds of pige:t prohability, that
the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work; Cafiln. 462. ,rnd that she rcj )icej
at the accomplifmllcnt of it, appears fromt the letters of her own Amb.ilnfdors.
KIcith, 280, 288.

's .. KT?,

BOOK IlL THERE were not wanting, however, political motives of much

- weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of
1565'

great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrud with a weakness
that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the elevation of her
charater. Besides, the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the
great object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her diaftif-
fadcion with Mary's condut, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the Englifl interest, and to encourage
fich of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly to
oppose it. The feeds of discord would, by this means, be scattered
through that kingdom. Intestine commotions might arise. Amidst
these, Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes, to which
the union of her people might have prompted her. Elizabeth
would become the umpire between the Scottish Queen and her
contending fubjeds. And England might look on, with security,
while a storm, which fle had raised, wafted the only kingdom,
which could possibly disturb its peace.
May I. IN prosecution of this scheme, ile laid before her Privy Coun-

cil the meflage from the Scottifl Queen, and consulted them with
regard to the anfwcr she flould return. Their dctcrmination, it
is easy to conceive, was perfedly conformable to her fccret views.
Tlcy drew up a remonflrance against the intended match, full of
the imaginary dangers, with which that event threatened the king-
domn '. Nor did fle think it cnough, to signify hcr difipplrolba-
tion of the mcafurc, either by Maitland, Mary's Amlballal(lor, or
by Randolphl, her own leidcnt in Scotland; in order to add more
dignity to the farce wlich sic chol}e to ad-, she appointed Sir Ni-

I Keith, 274. Scc Append. N0. X.

cliulOis

cholas Throgmorton her Ambassador Extraordinary. She corn- BooKIIr.
manded him to declare, in the strongest terms, her diffatisfa&ion t565'
with the ftep which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame Sends rnrog-

morton to ob-

time, to produce the determination of the Privy Council, as an flrui it.
evidence that the sentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prifo-
ner first in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower %.

INTELLIGENCE Of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival

of the English Ambassador. In the firt transports of her indig-
nation, Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eli-
zabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmor-
ton, to return instantly to the English court, and, in her name, to
declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so long to so
little purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on so grossly
by her artifices; she was now resolved to gratify her own incli-
nation, and to aik no other content, but that of her own sub--
jeds, in the choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual saga-
city, foresaw all the effects of such a rash and angry message, andl
ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mistress, by dif-
obeying her commands, than to be made the instrument of tearing
asunder, so violently, the few remaining ties, which Hill linked.
together the two Q(eens i-.

MARY herfclf soon became sensible of her error. She received:

the Englifll Ambassador with relpcd; juflificd her own conduct
with decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, ihc as-
fcEcd a wondcrfuil olicirttle to reconcile Elizabeth to the Ineafure;.
and even pretended, out of colmplaifince towards her, to put off

'* Keith, Append. i61. *I- Id. 16o.

the

BOOK IlL. the confuimmation of the marriage for some months . It is pro-

6
" bable, however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the

profpc& of gaining the content of her own fubjedts, were the
real motives of this delay.

Tirs content Mary laboured with the utmost induitry to obtain.

:rtl,-:,y's The Earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, whose con-
;velic on to
D.r i)!. currence was of the greatest importance; but (he had reason to fear

that it would not be procured without extreme difficulty. From
the time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray perceived that
the Queen's affeQions began gradually to be estranged from him.
Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, combined against
him. HIis ambitious spirit could not brook this diminution of his
power, which his former services had so little merited. He retired
into the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom he was
unable to contend . The return of the Earl of Bothwell his
avowed enemy, who had been accused of a design upon his life,
;,nl who had resided for some time in foreign countries, obliged
him to attend to his own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could
persuade him to a reconcilement with that nobleman. He in-
lifted on having him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by
his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not
app-ar in opposition to a man, who came to the place of trial, at-
tclllcid by 5000 of his followers on horfebacl. HIe was once
more confirained to leave the kingdom; but, by the Queen's coni-
mnandl, the lintence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appcar-
a.cc, wvas not pronounced against him :l:.

* Keith, Appendlix 278. -I Id. 272, 274. Append. 159.
[ Id. ibid 16o.

B rUT

MARY, sensible at the fame time of how much importance it BOOK III.

was, to gain a subjed so powerful and so popular as the Earl of I
Murray, invited him back to court, and received him with many 2Maiy 8.
demonstrations of respeCt and confidence. At last fle desired him
to set an example to her other fubjets by subscribing a paper, con-
taining a formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Mur-
ray had many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his afTent,
Darnly had not only undermined his credit with the Queen, but
discovered, on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person. By
consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an acceflion of dignity and power, as no man willingly bestows on
an enemy. Tile unhappy consequences which might follow upon
a breach with England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. I-Ie had always openly preferred a confederacy with Eng-
land, before the ancient alliance with France. By his means chiefly,
this change in the system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been established; and he could
not think of sacrificing, to a rafl and youthful paflion, an alliance
of so much utility to the kingdom; and which, he and the other
nobles were bound, by every obligation, to maintain . Nor was
the interest of religion forgotten on this occasion. Mary, though
surrounded by Proteflant Counfcllors, had found means to hold a
dangerous correfpondencc with foreign Catholics. She had even
courted the Pope's protection, who had sent her a subsidy of 8ooo
crowins . Though lMurray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle
the zeal of the Reformed clergy, and to set the OQCcn's coniduLa ill
the most favourable light, yet her obflinatc adherence to her own
religion could not fail of alarming him, and by her rciOlution to
marry a papifl, the only hope of reclaiming her, which remainledC,

'* K ith, 169. t Id. 295

. MC9lv. 114.
VoL. I. 0 o was

BOOK III. was for ever cut off. Each of these considerations had its influence-

on Murray, and all of them determined him to decline complying,
at that time, with the Queen's request.

My 14. THE convention of nobles which was assembled a few days
A (' onention
ofilhe nrbls after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen. Many
aplzr re, of
thei maiaie. of them, without hesitation, expressed their approbation of the

intended match; but as others were startled at the fame dangers
which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his example,
to refuse their content, another Convention was appointed at
Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concerning this matter ".

IEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition she had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclina-
tion, produced their usual effect on her heart, they confirmed her
passion, and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age
imputed an affeion, so excelfive, to the influence of witchcraft to
It was owing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible
power of youth and beauty, over a young and tender heart. Darnly
grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
and the applaufc of many among her fuiljeas, his natural haughti-
ncfs and insolence became insupportable, and he could no longer
bear advice, far lcfs contradiction. Lord Ruthven happening to be
the first pcrfon who informed him that Mary, in order to sooth
Elizabeth, had delayed, for some time, creating him Duke of Albany,
he, in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to flab him :1:

Keith, 233. KInox, 373. |I KIcith, 283. :l Ibid. Append. 16o.

; ,It

It required all Mary's attention to prevent his falling under that BooK III.
contempt, to which such behaviour deservedly exposed him. 1565.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address more re- A ,Iy' ad-

dreCs in ~;i.l-

markably displayed. Love sharpened her invention, and made her i.,g er l:ub-
fludy every method of gaining her fubjeds. Many of the nobles je>''
ihe won by her address, and more by her promises. On some she
bestowed lands, to others ihe gave new titles of honour '. She
even condescended to court the Protestant clergy; and having in-
vited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, fihe declared, in
strong terms, her resolution to protect their religion, expressed her
willingness to be present at a conference upon the points in doc-
trine which were disputed between the Protestants and Papists, and
went so far as to show some desire to hear such of their preachers,
as were most remarkable for moderation --. By these arts, the
Queen gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unless their jca-
lousy be raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the
actions of theii Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a train, of her
displeasure at the intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with
so much rigour; Ihe wrote to the Scottish Queen in such firong
terms; ihe recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son in such a per-.
emptory manner, and with such fevcre denunciations of her ven-
geance, if they should prelume to dilbbcy 1:; that all thcft cxprcl-
iions of aversion fully pcrfiiadcd them of her finccrity. This belicf
fortificd their fcruplcs with rct)ct to the match, and cncouLr.agcd

t KeIith, 283. ' 1 Knox, 37j. :1: Keith, 285, 286.

O o 2 tlem

BooK IlH. them to oppose it. They began with forming among themfelies.

bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they entered into a
secret correspondence with the English Resident, in order to secure
Elizabeth's afliftance, when it should become needful ;- they en-
deavoured to fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger, as
might counterbalance the influence of those arts, which the Queen
liad employed.

tchlemes of BESI DES these intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both
DaInlv and
MuriAy parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit-
ot'i eahr able to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,

which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate to
get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to assassinate him,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. Murray,. on his
part, derpairing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of
Argyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him
a prifoncr into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this Convention

might have been attended with consequences extremely tragical; but
both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
thoioc against whom they were formed. Murray, being warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court, who still favoured
his intcrefc, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary,
receiving intelligence of Murray's entcrprize, retired with the ut-
most expd(lition, along with Darnly, to tlhe other fide of Forth.
ConfLious, on both tidls, of guilt, and inflamed with lrcentmcnt,
it was imn)olibl they could either forget the violncc, which them-

KIcith, 289, 292, 2298.

fel cs

5

selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries intended against them. BOOK II].
From that moment, all hope of reconcilement was at an end, and .--'-
their mutual enmity burst out with every symptom of implacable
hatred .

ON

" The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given occasion to many disputes.

and much contradiction. Some deny that any design was formed against the life of
-Murray; others call in question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly. There
seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both; though the zeal and crediu-
lity of party-writers have added to each, many exaggerated circumflances. The
following arguments render it probable, that some violence was intended against
Murray..

I. This is positively asserted by Bichanan, 341. 2. The English Resident writes

to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a design was laid to murder him
at Perth, and describes the manner in which this plot was to have been executed.
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself conflantly and publickly affirmed, that such a
design was formed against his life. Keith, Ap. 1o8. And though he was called upon
by the Qu-een to bring legal evidence of his afertion, and a safe conduct offered him
while he came to court for that purpose. Ibid. Yet whoever confiders Murray's
situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court at that time, will scarce deem it
any proof of his guilt, that he did not chufe to risk his person on such security.
4. The furious pafflons of Darnly, the fieicenefs of his resentment, which scrupled at
no violence, and the manners of the age, render tlle imputation of such a crime liss
improbable.

II. That Murray and his alfociates had resolved to seize Darnly's person appears

with fli;l greater certainty ; i. Fiom the exprres teflimony of Mclvil, I 12. Although
Buchanan, p. 314, and Knox, p. 377, aflceC, without any rcafun, to rcprclcnt this
ias an idle rumour. 2. The quellin was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of
Berwicl would receive Lennox ,ndl his son, if licey were calricd prifo rncs to that
place? This plainly (hews, that tonlc such design was in h.,il, n a ndol alliph did
not discourage it by the ailfwcr whicih he gave. Kiitl, 290. 3. liCe precil)it;tioiu
with whiche tle QueeCn rclired, and the ie;ao il fie gave tor tlis fiuldic fli}athr, ail
mcntionced by Randolph. Keitl, 29 i. 4. A great .art of thc Scottilh noll::, :nnl

aniI(ng

BoOK III. ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her vassals by

--565 proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither in
I565.

Mary um-- arms, for the proteCtion of her person againfi her foreign and do-
moos her vas-
falsto take mesic enemies %. She was obeyed with all the promptness and
arsgayi alacrity, with which fubjeds run to defend a mild and popular ad-

ministration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great mea-

among there the Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the de-
sign, aftert the reality of the conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All these circumstances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both conspiracies.

But we may obfer\e how far this proof, though drawn from public records, falls
short, on both fides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in almost every circumstance.
The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly, are not more confifent. Melvil alleges,
that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner into England; the
proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fays, that they intended to
carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Cafile Campbell. The Lords, in
their declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been to murder Darnly
and his father, to confine the Queen in Lochleven during life, and to usurp the go-
vernment. To believe implicitly, whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly
to which Antiquaries are extremely prone. Ancient papers, however, often contain
nothing more than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the day. The declaration
of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the
very heat of falcion. Many of the things aflerted in it, are evidently false or cxag-
gerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitious as we can fuppofc, they
mult have had tome pretences, and plausible ones too, before they could venture to
imprison their Sovereign for life, and to fcize the reins of government; but, at that
time, the Q(2cen's condua had afforded no colourable excuse for proceeding to filch
extremitics. It is, likcwife, remarkable, that in all the proclamations againfl Murray,
of lwhich so many are publifled in Keith, Appendix 108, &c. neither the violent
attempt upon Darnly, nor that which he is allhgcd to have formed againfl Ihe
Quccn llcrlelf, are ever once mentioned.

* Keith, 298.

Mlic

sure to Murray, who had directed her administration with great BooK IIL.
prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obliterated 156
the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient of con-
tradiction, and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as ene-
mies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight of
her vengeance. For this purpose lhe summoned him to appear be- July 19,
fore her upon a short warning, to answer to such things as should
be laid to his charge'". At this very time, Murray, and the Lords
who adhered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to deliberate what
course they should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. But the
current of popular favour ran so firongly against them; and, not-
withstanding some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation
such a general disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter which so
nearly concerned her, that, without coming to any other conclusion,
than to implore the Queen of England's protection, they put an
end to their ineffectual consultations, and returned every man to his
own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness of her enemies,

the confluence of her subjeCts from all corners of the kingdom,
afforded Mary an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous situation, flie determined to bring
to a period, an affair, which had so long engrossed her heart, and
occupied her attention. On the 29th July, flhe married Lord Cclebratesler

1 1 arl ae wij,

Darnly. The ceremony wras performed in the Queen's chapel, jarrlaygewii
according to the rites of the Romifi church; the Pope's bull, dif-
penCing with their marriage, having bccn prcvioufly obtainced t-.
She ilued, at the anme time, proclamations, conferring the title of

'* Keith, Appcnd. o08. 1 Ihl. 307.

Kilng

BOOK III. King of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that henceforth

i;b(. all writs at law should run in the joint names of King and Queen *.

Nothing can be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's love, or
the weakneSs of her councils, than this last Rep. Whether {he had
any right to chufe a husband, without consent of Parliament, was,
in that age, a matter of some dispute t; that flie had no right to
confer upon him, by her private authority, the title and dignity of
King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise her husband to be the
Matter of her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis II.
indeed, bore the fame title. It was not, however, the gift of the
Queen, but of the nation; and the content of Parliament was ob-
tained, before he ventured to aflume it. Darnly's condition, as a
.subjed, rendered it still more necessary to have the concurrence of
the supreme Council in his favour. Such a violent and unprece-
dented stretch of prerogative, as 'the substituting a proclamation in
place of an aft of Parliament, might have justly alarmed the na-
tion. But the Queen poifeffed so entirely the confidence of her
fubjeCs, that, notwithitanding all the clamours of the malecon-
tents, no symptoms of general discontent appeared on that ac-
count.

EVEN aniidft that scene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vengeance
againlt the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days
after the marriage, Murray was again Summoned to court, under
the fcvereft penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour of
jultice took place, and he was declared an outlaw :. At the fame
time, the Qucen fct at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever fincc his
~' AndCer. I. 33. Sec Appcnd. No XI. I Buchan. 34I. ;1 IC(cith, 309, 310.

fathcr's

father's insurrection in the year 1562, had been detained a prisoner; BOOK III.
The recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con- k" 6

x365.

cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and she permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The first and last of these
were among the most powerful fubjets in the kingdom, and all
of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author of their own
sufferings. This common hatred became the foundation of the
ftriaeft union with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. Murray himself confidered this confederacy with
his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication than any mcafure
she had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms *. But the Marches

againll: Mur-
Queen having ordered her fubjeas to march against them, theywere ray and his

ay ociatnh.

driven to the last extremity. They found themselves unable to a ate
make head against the numerous forces, which Mary had assem-
bled; and fled into Argyllfhire, in expectation of aid from Eliza-
beth, to whom they had secretly dispatched a meflenger, in order
to implore her immediate assistance--.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embarrass Mary, by a Elilzheih in-

terpo'fis it)
new declaration of disgust at her conduct. She blamed both th'eir 'otlr.

'* After their fiuitlefsconfultation at Stirling, the Lords retired to their own houfces.

Keith, 30+. Murray was still at St. Andrew's on July 22. Keith 306. By the
places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the diffbrent counties, Augi fl 4,
it appears that the Queen's intention was to march into Fife, the county in which
Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents resided. Keith,
31o. Their flight into the weft, Keith, 312. prevented this expedition, and the
former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 3 o.

-l Keit', 312. KInox, 380.
VOL. L P p Iicr

BooK III. her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which the

5S
_ had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,

whom ihe still called her fubjeEts, to return into England; and at
the fame time, ihe warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour she represented to be not only innocent, but laudable.
This message, so mortifying to the pride of the Queen, and so full
of contempt for her husband, was rendered still more insupportable,
by the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the person
who delivered it *. Mary vindicated her own conduc with
warmth, but with great strength of reason; and rejeced the inter-
ceffilon in behalf of Murray, not without signs of resentment at
Elizabeth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal government
of her kingdomt.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the least the ardour,,

with which she pursued Murray and his adherents T. They now
appeared openly in arms; and having received a small supply
in money from Elizabeth , were endeavouring to raise their fol-
lowers in the western counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered
them from assembling in any considerable body. All her military
operations, at that time, were concerted with wisdom, executed
with vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage
her troops, flhe herfclf marched along with them, rode with loaded

" Camd. 398. -ij Keith, Append. 99.

:1: The molt confideralle perrons who joined Murray, were the Duke of Chatel-

heinalt, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothcs; Lord Boyd and Ochiltrcc; the
L.aird, of (;raingc, Cultinghamhcad, Balcomic, Calmylic, Lawers, Bar, Drcghorn,
PitanJow/, Comptrollcr, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

 ;Knox, 380.

pi ols,

pistols *, and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for- BooKIIt'
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible re-
solution, which, together with their superiority in number, de-
terred the malecontents from facing them in the field; but having
artfully pasted the Queen's army, they marched with great rapi-
dity to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of
that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them to-remain long Augurt 31.
unmolested; and, on her approach, they were forced to abandon
that place, and retire in confusion towards the western borders t.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had taken, They are oh.-

Mary employed that interval in providing for the security of the iet'o' Englla
counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confider-
able Barons in those shires, which she most fufpeaed, to join in as-
fociations for her defence $. Having thus left all the country be-
hind her in tranquillity, Ihe, with an army I8,ooo itrong, marched
towards Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During their re-
treat, they had sent letters to the Queen, from almost every place
where they halted, full of submission, and containing various over-
tures towards an accommodation. But Mary, who determined not
to let flip such a favourable opportunity of crushing the mutinous
spirit of her fubjedcs, rejected them with disdain. As ile ad-
vanced, the malecontents retired: and having received no cffecual
aid from Elizabeth , they despaired of any other means of safety, Oaober 20.
fled into England, and put themselves under the protection of the
Earl of Bedford, XVarden of the marches.

* Keith, Append. 16+. [ Id. 315 . Append. 113.
 Sue Appcndix, No. XII. XIIT.

Pp a NoTlINc;,

looK I[t. No T ING, which Bedford's personal friendship for Murray could

' -0 supply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But Eli-

'I !ey mne: zabeth herself treated them with extreme neglect. She had fully
\\ h mlil cx-
Se-r,' lii gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such discord and
tr'atiment
fro,'l liz.- jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long dif-

b-t. tra~c and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to save

appearanccs, and to jutfify herself to the Mlinifters of France and
Spain, who accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland, by
her intrigues. The expedient she contrived for her vindication3
firong'ly displays her own character, and the wretched condition of
exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign Prince.. Murray,
and Hamilton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other
fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, inflead of meeting with that wel-
come reception which was due to nen, who, out of confidence in
her promises, had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even
obtain the favour of an audience, until they had meanly consented
to acknowledge, in the presence of the French and Spanish Amr
baffadors, that Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to take
arms. No sooner did they make this declaration, than she astonished,
them with this reply, " You have declared the truth ;I am far,
from ictting an example of rebellion to my own fubjea.s, by counr
tcnancing those who rebel against their lawful Prince.. The trea-
son of which you have been guilty, is detestable; andas traitors I,
banifhl you from my pretence '." Notwithstanding this scene of
farce and of falsehood, so dishonourable to all the persons vwho acted
a part in it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to
reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly with money and
renewcd her interccflion with the Scottifi Quecn in their favourl-.

Mclvil, 12. 1I lnox, 38q.

Ti E

THE advantage file had gained over them did. not satisfy Mary; BOOK III.

ihe resolved to follow the blow, and. to prevent a party, which 1565
fle dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, she called a meeting of Parliament; and in order that a
sentence of'forfeiture might be legally pronounced: against the ba-
nifed' Lords, she summoned them, by public proclamation,, to
appear. before it.*.

THE Duke of Chatelherault,. on his humble application, ob- December ,..

tained a separate pardon; but not without difficulty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king-
dom, and to reside for. tome time in France t.

THE numerous. forces which Mary brought into the field,. the

vigour with which the aQed, and the length of time she kept
them in arms, resemble the efforts of a Prince with revenues. much
more considerable than those which she poffefied. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at small charge.
The vassal followed his superior, and the superior attended the
Monarch, at his own expence. Six hundred horsemen, however,
and three companies of foot, besides her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge, together with.
the deburfements occasioncd by her marriage, exhausted a trea-
fury, which was far fiom being rich. In this exige:ny many
devices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines were levied on.
the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were sus-
pedced of favouring the malecontents.. An unusual tax was irn-
poscd on the burroughs throughout the kingdom ; and a great
fim was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.
This unprecedented cxaaion alarmed the citizens. They had rc-

* Keitl, 320. + KIox, 389.

courte

BOOKIII. course to delays, and started difficulties, in order to avoid it. These

56.S Mary construed to be aCts of avowed disobedience, and inifantly

committed several of them to prison. But this severity did not sub-
due the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the
inhabitants. The Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city,
the fJperiority of the town of Leith, by which .she obtained a
considerable fum of money %. The thirds of ecclesiastical bene-
sices proved another source, whence the Queen derived some sup-
ply. About this time, we find the Protestant clergy complaining
more bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is pro-
bable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which was appro-
priated for their maintenance t.
Church as- THE assemblies of the church were not unconcerned fpe&ators

air. of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting June 24,

several of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem to have
had great influence on their decisions. The high firain in which
the Assembly addressed the Queen, can be imputed only to those
fears and jealousies, with regard to religion, which they endea-
voured to infuse into the nation. The Afiembly complained with
some bitterness, of the stop which had been put to the progress
of the Reformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland; they re-
quired not only the total fupprefiion of the Popish worship through-
out the kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and be-
fides the legal cflablifhment of the Protestant religion, they de-
manded that Mary herself flould publicly embrace it. The Q0ccne
after some dclibcration, replied, that neither her confciencc, nor
her intcrcfl, would permit her to take fich a ftcp. The former
would for ever reproach her for a change, which proceeded from

K Inox, 383, 386. j1 Maitl. Hist. of Edinburgh, 27.

7 0no

no inward conviction; the latter would susser by the offence, BOOK III.
which her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and her -65
other allies on the continent I.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the Queen's

affairs, during this year, began to work some change in favour of
her religion. The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly
attended inafs; she hereilf afforded the Catholics a more avowed
proteEtion than formerly; and, by her permission, some of the
ancient Monks ventured to preach publicly to the people .

' Knox, 374, 376.- t Id. 389, 390

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK IV.

THE
T H E
HI S TOR Y

F
S COTLAND.

BOOK IV.
BooKxlV. A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament ap-

- , proached, Mary and her Ministers were employed in deli-

i566. p

Mary's deli- berating concerning the course which it was most proper to
beran tnscon" hold with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted
exiled nobles. her to set no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecontents

had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her interest conspired with
her passions in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a
party, whose friendship she had been obliged to court, while flte
held their principles in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached
to a rival, whom ihe had good reason both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty considerations might be

urged. The noblemen, whofc fate was in fufpencc, were among the
niofl powerful fubjcds in the kingdom; their wealth great, their
connections cxtenfivc, and their adherents numerous. They were

noy

now at mercy, the objecs of companion, and suing for pardon with 1BooIc IV.
the most humble fbmiffion. ' ---

IN those circumntances, an aC of clemency would exalt the
Queen's character, and appear no less splendid among forcigners,
than acceptable to her own fubjeds. Mary herself, though- highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives,
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who
had been members of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fu'erei s; nor neglect-
ful of their fafcty, which they esteemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pofleffed the Queen's con-
fidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray having slooped
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fcur-
ing his protection againif the King, whose displeasure he lad lately
incurred, seconded the interceiTions of his other friends, with the
whole of his influence -. The interposition of Sir Nicholas Throg-
morton, who had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotland,
in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all these, and
attended with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to Cecil,
had embarked deeply in all the intrigues vhich were carried on at
the Englifhi court, in order to undermine the power and credit of
that Minifier. I-Ie cfpoulfd, for this reafoln, the cause of the
Scottish Qucen, towards wlhof title and pretensions the otlier was
known to bear little favour ; and ventured in the prcfent critical
juncture, to write a letter to Mary, containing!' the Inofl litltary
adviccs with regard to her condliic.. I-I recommendcc the pardon-

VOclvil,

1. 5.
'o L. I. Qq ; i

BooK IV. ing of the Earl of Murray and his associates, as a measure no less

r1566. prudent than popular. An aCtion of this nature, fays he, the pure

effec of your Majesty's generosity, will spread the fame of your
lenity and moderation, and engage the English to look towards.
your acceflion to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with
desire. By the fame means, a perfect harmony will be reflored
among your own fubjeas, who, if any rupture should happen with;
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of inspiring .

She resolVes THESE prudent remonfirances of Throgmorton, to which his;
to treat them
with ilc- reputation _for wisdom, and known attachment to the Queen,
minctcy. added great authority, made a deep impression on her spirit. Her-

courtiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed on her,.
notwithltanding the King's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her
own private resentment to the intercession of her subje&s, and the
wifhcs of her friends -. With this view, the Parliament, which
had been called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogued to
the 7th of April T; and in the mean time, she was busy in confi--
dering the manner and form in which she should extend her favour
to the Lords who were under disgrace.

TI d:v'crItc TnOUGI-I Mary discovercd, on this occasion, a mind naturally
t'mom thbi lc-
holuli',n by prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, she wanted, how-
loe (Iticjta-

t ..l.s evcr, firm nets to rclift the influence, which was fatally emn ployed to

I.cc, cyl ., disappoint the efl-'cs of this amniable disposition. About this time,
her eal lor
I'opeiy. and at no great diflance from each other, two envoys arrived from

lctltriry 3. the French King. Tle former wats intrulled withi iatters of enre

" Mclv. l. 1 -1. Id. 125. I G(ood. vol. i. 224.

cereImony

ceremony alone; he congratulated the Queen on her marriage, Boo KIV,
and inverted the King with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael. I
The inftruaions of the latter related to matters of more importance,
and produced greater effea-s '.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter the Queen of

Spain had been often proposed; and after many obstacles arising
from the opposition of political interest, was at last appointed at
Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the Duke of
Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occupation of both courts,
a scheme was formed, and measures concerted, for exterminating
the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in the low countries, and
for suppressing the Reformation throughout all Europc-'. The
active policy of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so suitable to the
genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial to their owna
order.

IT was an account of this holy league which the second French

envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the
name of the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to
reflore the leaders of the Protcflants in her kingdom to power and
favour, at the very time when the catholic Princes were combined
to deflroy that Ict, in all the countries of Il:urope 1:.

Po prRY is a fpecics of falfl rcli'ion, relmarkable flothe ic 1on1;

pofiCfioll it takes of the heart. (Contried by men oi deep(1 in l;illt:
into the ]lumnan ciharaclcr, and il r iillovcd by thle e;rience and

Kecilh, 325. A7ppc .ld. 167. 1' Timan.l lib. 37. Al clv. 12(0.

^() q o2ldbrvation

BOOK IV. observation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to a degree of

i566. perfection, which no former system of superstition had ever at-

tained. There is no power in the underitanding, and no passion
in the heart, to which it does not present objects, adapted to rouse,
and to interest them. Neither the love of pleafuire, which, at that
time, prevailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition
which occupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the do-
minion of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers, were agitated with
that furious and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as
peculiar to ecclcfiatics;. and Kings and Ministers thought themselves
bound, in conscience, to extirpate the Protefrant doctrine. Mary
hcrfelf was deeply tintured with all the prejudices of Popery; a
passionate attachment to that superstition is visible in every part of
her charaacr, and runs through all the scenes of her life: ihe was
dcvotcd, too, with the utmost fubmiflion, to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to liften
to all their advices, with a filial respect. The profped of restoring
the public cxercife of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing lwith her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, whom the present situation of her affairs in England made
it nccefllary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confider.-
tions which had formerly weighed with her. She instantly joined
the confederacy, which had been formed for the dclnrution of' the
Proteflants, and altered the whole plan of her condut, with re-
gard to Murray and his adherents !

To this fatal rcfolution may l)e imputed all the fulbfcquent ca-

lamities of Mary's life. Ever lilce her return into Scotland, lfr--
tune may be fitid to have been prlopitious to her, rather thani advcrl;:;
and if her proficrity did not riec to any great heiglht, it had, liow--

* Sec Appendix, N' X[V.

B'VCr,

ever, suffered no considerable interruption. A thick and fettled BooK IV.
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real en- i566'
joyment, covers the remainder of her days.

THE effeEs of the new fyflem, which Mary had adopted, were A Parliament

soon visible. The time of prorogation of Parliament was short- called t atx-
ened; and by a new proclamation, the loth of March was fixed iled nobles,
for its meeting-*. Mary resolved, without any further delay, to
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the fame time,
determined to take some fleps towards the re-eltablifhment of the
Romish religion in Scotland '. The Lords of the articles were
chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which was to come before
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Queen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin of Murray and
his party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the Reformed
Church imminent, when an event unexpectedly happened, which.

*' Keith, 326;

+ It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the Queen with the

tecfign of re-eflabliihing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, alrerts that the
altars, which should have been erecqed in the church of St. Giles, were already pro-
vided, 394. I. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbilhop of Glasgow her Ambaf-
fldor in France, acknowledges, " that in that Parliament, she intended to have done
fime good, with repect to reftorig the old religion." Keith, 331. 2. The Spi-
ritual Lords, i. e. the Fopifl ecclesiastics, had, by her authority, resumcd their ancient
place in that aflcnilily, ilbid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bayonne, Keitlh,
Append. 167. 4. She ..llowed mais to he cekbrated in diff'rent parts of the. kingdom,
ibid. andl dcclarcd that flhe would have nial; fi'rc for all men who would hcear it,
Good. vol. i. ;74. 5. Blackwood, who was iuriihedl by the Archbiflop of Gla;gowv
with materi.ls t,,ir wrilig his iJarc'.e d ji:/a;r',, affirms that the Quiren iiitended to
have procured, in this Parliament, if lnt the re-cnflalinfmclnt of the Catholic religion,
at leaftl Ibilchig for the cafe of Catholics. Jcbb, vol. ii. 204.

.Givcdl.

BooK IV. saved both. If we regard either the barbarity of that age, when
'-- --' such adls of violence were common, or the mean condition of the

i566.

And prevent- unhappy person who suffered, the event is little remarkable; but

iacy agait if we reflect upon the circumstances with which it was attended,
Rizio. or upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely

memorable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced
with great care.

Darnly lorcs DARNLY'S external accomplilliments had excited that sudden
tle Qie"es and violent passion which raised him to the throne. But the qua-

lities of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his person.
Of a weak understanding, and without experience, conceited at
the fame time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary
success entirely to his distinguished merit. All the Queen's favour
made no impression on such a temper. All her gentleness could
not bridle his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her atten-
tion to place about him persons capable of directing his conduc,
could not preserve him from rash and imprudent actions *. Fond
of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices of youth,
he became, by degrees, carclefs of her person, and a stranger to her
company. To a woman, and a Queen, such behaviour was into-
lcrable. The lower ihe had stoopcd, in order to raise him, his
behaviour appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And in
proportion to tlhe frcngtll of her first aflfccion, was the violence
with which her disappointcd paflion now operated. A few months
after the marriage, their domeflic quarrels began to be obfcrvcd.
Thel extravaganc of Darnly's amlbiiion gave rife to tlich. Inltcad
of being satisficd with a flirc in the adminifiration of governmcnr,
or with the title of KIil, lich lMa, by an unpr eccedcnted

'* Good. vol. i. 122.

6 Ilhrctch

ffretch of power, had conferred on him, he demanded the Crown BooItIV.
Matrimonial with most infolenr importunity *'. And though -166
Mary alleged that this gift was beyond her power, and that the
authority of Parliament muit be interposed to beltow it, he wanted
either underitanding to comprehend, or temper to admit so jut a.
defence; and often renewed and urged his request.

RIZIO, whom the King had at first taken into great confidence, SuTpeas-Ri-

zio to be the-

did not humour him in these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's caufeofi ,.
displeasure; and as it was impossible for Mary to behave towards
her husband with the fame affection, which diflinguifhed the first
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduct confirmed and strengthened
there fuipicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity, and
admitted him to a share in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office the had lately betlowed upon him, gave
him any title. He was perpetually in her pretence, intermeddlcd
in every business, and, together with a few favourites, was the
companion of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit of
Darnly could not bear the intrusion of such an upstart; and impa-
tient of any delay, and unrellrained by any fcruplc, he inflantly
resolvcd to get rid of himn by violence.

AT the faim time, another design, which took its rife from very Rizio !ited
different motivcs, was carrying on againfl tile life of Rizio. Mlor- (b)'ti'. f' iids

(4, tixcijcd

ton, Ruthven, Lindlay, andl Maitlaii(, w\cre the contrivers of it. noLILS.
'L all formcr commlotions they had been Atridly unitcd withl Mur-

' Kdith, 329. Knox, 404.

ray,.

BooK IV. ray, though in the late infurreEcion they had deserted him for

566 various reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,

and during the minority of the present Earl, ated as Chief of the
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw that Murray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himself necessary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expectations. The
King's headstrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The
Queen could not help diftruffing men who had been so long and so
intimately conneced with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to
such Counsellors as complied with all her inclinations. The return
of that nobleman and his followers was therefore the only event
which could reflore Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For this reason, no-
thing could be more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray with all his
intcrcft, was now the nmot active instrument in promoting the mea-
furcs which were concerted for the ruin of that nobleman. This
officious zeal conplcated the difgufl which they had conccivcd
;ua;ninft lilm, andl inspircd them with thoughts of vengeance, in
Lto wife fuiitablc to juficc, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WIIIL1

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the King corn- BooK IV.
municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, I566
and implored his affiflance, and that of his friends, towards the They com-

bine in order

execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to to murder
them than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages they hi
would reap, by the concurrence of such an associate. Their own
private revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an at of
obedience to the King; and they did not despair of obtaining the
restoration of their banilhed friends, and security for the Protestant
religion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than rash, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every possible precaution for their own safety. They did not in the
mean time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man of that intriguing age, in all the arts of in-
finuation and address, took the young Prince underhis management.
He wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to obtain the Ma-
trimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's credit with the QOeen to
be the chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand. This
minion, alone, he said, poffefled her confidence; and out of com-
plaifance to him, her fubjets, her nobility, and even her husband,
were excluded from any participation of her fccret councils. Under
the appearance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated, and
the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of quite a different and
of a very criminal nature might be concealed *". Such various and

complicated

Of all our hiflorians, Buchlanan alone avowedly accufrs Mary of a criminal

love for Rizio, 340, 344. Knox nightly insinuates that such a lufticion was
entcrtailned, 391. M\clvil, in a converlhition with tlh Q(1ee,, intimates that lie
was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to miiconfit uLion, l o.

VOL. I. R r 'lihe

BooK- IV; complicated :pafions raged'in the King's bofonm with the-utmofs

i .66. fury. He became more-impatient than ever of'any delay, and even

threatened to strike the- intended blow-with his own hand. At lafl,
preliminaries were fettled on both-fides,. and.articles for their mu-
tual feeurity- agreed upon-. The- King engaged to prevent the
attainder-of the- banished Lordg, to conefnt to their return into
Scotland, to obtain for.them an ample rem-iffion--of-all their 'crimes,.
and to support to the u:tmost of his power, the' religion which was
now eftabliffhed in the kingdomn. On their parts, they-undertook
to procure the Crown Matrimonial for Henry, to :secure- his right
of succession, if the Queen should die before him, and to defend
that right, to the uttermofti against whatever person should pre-
fume to. di:spute it; and if either Rizio, or any other person,
should happen to be killed in prosecuting of the design, the. King;

The King himrfelf seems, both by Melvil's account, and' by his expostulation with,
the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to these suspicions, Melv..
127. Keith, Append. I23, 124. That the King's furpicions were firong, is like-
wife evident from the paper published Append. N XV. But, in opposition to there
suspicions, and they are nothing more,.we may observe that Raulet the Queen's French.
Secretary was dismissed from:her.fervice, and Rizio-advanced to that-office in Decem-
ber 1564, Keith- 268. It was in. consequence of this preferment, that he acquired;
his great credit with the Queen, Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two
months after, Keith, 269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a paflion,
which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this passion,
and promoted the marriage with all his intereft'-Melv. in r. During some months
after the marriage, the Queen's fondness for Darnly continued. She soon proved
with child. From this enumeration ofcircumftances, it appears almost impofilble that
the Queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could
carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph the Eng-
lifli Rcfident, a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults,
and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing,
criminal, is in itself a fuflicicnt vindication of her innocence.

promilcd'

promised to acknowledge hinmfelf to be the author of the enter- BOOK IV.
prize, aad -to pcoted those who were embarked in it .

NOTHING .now remained but to concert the plan of operation, Perpetrate

that rime irn

to chufe the actors, and to aflign them their parts in perpetrating the Qjcniis
this detestable crime. Every circumstance here paints and charac- palace.
terizes the manners and men of that age, and fills us with horror
at both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was the
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth month
of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been seized
elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching
Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of
Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
dired an enterprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had
been confined to his bed for three months, by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was Rill so feeble that he could scarce walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was entrusted with the
executive part; and while he himself needed to be supported by
two men, he came abroad to commit a murder in the pretence of
his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palace

with an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting with
any resistance, seized all the gates. \hile the Qpcen was at fuppcr
with the Countcfs of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domcflics, the King
suddenly entered the apartment, by a private palfagc. At his back,
was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that ghaflly and

* Good. vol. i. z66.

R r 2 horrid

BOOK IV. horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three or four

rt 5 of his most trusty accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-

pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio instantly appre-
hended that he was the vidtim at whom the blow was aimed; and
in the utmofi consternation retired behind the Queen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might
prove some protection to him. The conspirators had proceeded too
far to be refirained by any consideration of that kind. Numbers of
armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger,
and with a furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he had occupied too
long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threatenings, to
save her favourite. But, notwithitanding all these, he was torn
from her by violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his life,
piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds .

ATHOL, H-untly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queen

who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durst not shed the
noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a firanger. Some of
them were difmiflid, and others made their escape.

They confine THIE conspirators, in the mean time, kept possession of the pa-
til Quccn lace, and guarded the Qceen with the utmoit care. A proclama-
he'rself.

tion was publiflicd by the King, prohibiting the parliament to meet
on the day appointed; and mcafures were taken by him for pre-

 Sec Appendix, NO XV.

venting

309

venting any tumult in the city-. Murray, Rothes, and their foI- BOOK IV'
lowers being informed of every ftep taken against Rizio, arrived 566"
at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received both
by the King and Queen. By the former, on account of the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
latter, because she hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power she still felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded
any crime she could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on them, (he became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en-
gaged him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and
Ruthven into her presence, and to grant them the promise of par-
don in whatever terms they should deem necessary for their own:
security.

THE King, mean while, flood astonished at the boldness andt

success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course to hold.
The Queen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She But she gain :

he Ki]t/% anii

employed all her art to disengage him from his new associates. His ninkcs .lLr
consciousness of the insult which he had offered to so illultrious a
benefadrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and complai-
fance. In spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the
Q(cen's artifices, flc prevailed on him to difinifs the guards which
the conspirators had placed on her person; and that fame night lie

K cith, Appendix, 126.

nmade

BoolKIV. made his escape along with her, attended by tbhree perflons oly,

X I .and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of thi.ir flight :had been
"I566.
Maich i . communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and they were quickly

joined by them, and several other of the nobles. Bothwell's
estate lay in that corner of the kingdom, and his followvers crouded
to their Chief, in such numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to
set the power of the conspirators at defiance.

IT reconc;led THIS sudden flight filled them with inexprelirble conflernation.
to the exilcd
,nbble.. They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it now appeared from.

the Queen's conducE, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
nife, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the accomplifliment of it; but their messenger
was detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards Edin-
burgh, at the head of 8000 men, talked in the highest strain of re-
fentment and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time, to
separate Murray and his associates from the conspirators againit
Rizio. Sensible that the union of these parties would form a con-
federacy, which might prove formidable to the crown, she expref-
fed great willingness to receive the former into favour; towards
the latter, she declared herself inexorable. Murray and his fol-
lowers were no less willing to accept of pardon, on her own terms.
The conspirators againfl Rizio, deprived of every refourcc, and

Manrch io. incapable of resistance, fled precipitately to Ncwcaflle, having
'1'ec coifpira-
tors asninft thus changed situations with Murray and his party, who left that

'l fld. i'10 place a few days beforc.

No man so remarkable for wif'ilon, and even for cunning, as the
Earl of Morton, ever cngagcd in a more unfortunate enterprizc.

D)cfirtcl

Deserted: basely by the King, who now denied his knowledge of BOOK IV.
the conspiracy by public proclamations, and abandoned ungene- i56-6.-
roufly by Murray anid his party *, he was obliged to fly from his
native country, to resign the highest office, and to part with one
of the most opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON hei return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed against

those concerned in the murder of'Rizio, With the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it must be observed, that
only two persons, and these of no considerable rank, suffered for
this. crime't.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance, which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confede-
racy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was affai~nation, the preserving of the Reformed Church is,
nevertheless, one of the most considerable articles; and the fame
men who were preparing to violate one of the firfi duties of mora-
lity, affeeed the hlghefl regard for religion. History relates these
extravagancies of the human mind, without pretending to justify,
or even to account for them; and regulating her own opinions by
the eternal and immutable laws of jullice and of virtue, points ouC
such inconsistencies, as features of the age which she describes, and.
records them for the inftrudion of ages to come.

As this is the fccond inflance of deliberate aflaflination which An acc(o,,,t

has occurred, and as we shall hercafter meet with many other in- fhi fllq,'.rCy
flances of the fame crimc, the causes which gave rife to a pracd:ice to"sil th!at
so {hocking to humanity, deserve our particular attention. Rcfcnt-
mcnt is, for obvious and wife rcafons, one of the firongcfl palfions
in the huuman mind. The natural demand of tllis palfion is, that

* Mclv. 130. -\ Keitl, Appendix 130, 334.

the:

BOOK IV. the person who feels the injury should himself inflict the vengeance

-- -' due on that account. The permitting this, however, would have

been deftruAive to society; and punishment would have known
no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this reason, in
the very infancy of the social slate, the sword was taken out of pri-
vate hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But, at first, while
laws aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the principle of
revenge. The earliest and moit simple punishment for crimes was
retaliation; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former institution. In both these, the gratifica-
tion of private revenge was the object of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to pursue, to exaa,
or to remit the punishment. While laws allowed such full scope
to the revenge of one party, the interests of the other were not
negleaed. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjustly accused, the person
to whom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge hisadverfary
to single combat, and on obtaining the victory, vindicated his own
honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Juflice had fcldom occasion to use
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The passion
of revenge was nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind became habituated
to blood, not only in times of war; but of peace; and from this,
as well as other caucfs, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it ncceflauy to dif-
courage the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of compcnlla-
tions in criminal cafes; and to think of lomne milder method of ter-
iniating difputcs concerning civil rights. The punifhnmcnts for

crimics

crimes became more severe, and the regulations concerning pro- BooK IV.
perty more fixed; but the Princes, whose province it was to inflict
the one, and to enforce the other, possessed little power. Great
offenders despised their authority; smaller ones iheltered them-
selves under the jurifidision of those, from whose protetion they
expected impunity. The administration ofjuRtice was extremely
feeble and dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a Chief-
tain, or even of his vassals, often excited rebellions and civil wars.
To nobles haughty and independent, among whom the causes of
discord were many and unavoidable, who were quick in discerning
an injury, and impatient to revenge it; who eftecmed it infamous
to submit to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who confi-
dered the right of punishing those who had injured them, as a pri-
vilege of their order, and a mark of independence; such flow pro-
ceedings were extremely unfatisfaaory. The blood of their adver-
fary was, in their opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not shed, their revenge was difap-
pointed, their courage became fufpeded, and a fiain was left on
their honour. That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the
Mlagif-rate could not inflic, their own could easily execute; under
governments so feeble, men affimed, as in a state of nature, the
right of judging, and redressing their own wrongs. And thus
assassination, a crime of all others the most deilructivc to focicty,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed lonourable.

THE history of Europe, during- the :i4th and i 5th centuries

abounds with doetcflable inftanccs of this crime. It prcvx;ilcdl clicly
among the French and Scots, betwecn whoml there was a c(loi'
intcrcotiric at that time, and a filpriilin rcIzImb;ancc in tllhir n:a-
tional characlrs. In 1407, the only brother of the KIinig o F;rance

VOL. I. S f Wis

BooJ IV. was murdered publickly in the streets of Paris; and, so far was

c G6. this horrible adion from meeting with proper punishment, that an

eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in defence of it before the
Peers of France, and avowedly to maintain the lawfulness of affaf-
fination. In 1417, it required all the eloquence and authority of
the famous Gerfon, to prevail on the Council of Conflance to con-
demn this proposition, ( That there are some cafes in which afaf-
fination is a virtue more meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire,
and more meritorious in a King than in a Knight %. The number
of eminent persons who were murdered in France and Scotland, on
account either of private or political, or religious qu rrels, during
the I5th and i6th centuries, is almost incredible. Even after those
causes, which firit gave rife to this barbarous pracice, were re-
moved; after the jurisdiction of magifirates, and the authority of
laws were better established, and become more universal; after the
progress of learning and philosophy had polished the manners, and
humanized the minds of men, this crime continued in some degree.
It was towards the close of the 17th century before it disappeared
in France. The additional vigour, which the royal authority ac-
quired by the accession of James VI. to the throne of England,
seems to have put a stop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national cuflom, both on the

understanding and on the heart, and how far it may go towards
perverting or cxtinguifhing moral principles of the greatest import-
ance, is remarkable. The authors of those ages have perfectly im-
bibed the fentimcnts of their cotemporaries, with regard to aftafli-
nation; and they, who had Icifure to reflet, and to judge, appear
to be no more flhockced at this crime, than the persons, who com-

* I,'Enfm.nt. Ilif. Conc. de ConIt.

8 meitted

mitted it during the beat and impetuosity of passion. Buchanan BOOK IV.
relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without '- -'
expressing those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-
dignation which became an historian *. Knox, whose mind was
fiercer and more unpolilhed, talks of the death of Beatoun, and of
the Duke of Guise, not only without censure, but with the utmost
exultation t. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross mentions the
assassination of the Earl of Murray with some degree of applause $.
Blackwood dwells upon it, with the most indecent triumph, and
ascribes it directly to the hand of God 1I. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal actor in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
some short time before his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expression of regret, or one symptom of compunc-
tion for a crime no less dishonourable, than barbarous '*M. Morton,
equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame sentiments
concerning it; and in bis last moments, neither he himself, nor
the Ministers who attended him, seem to have confidered it as ani
action which called for repentance; even then he talks of David's
fJlaughter as coolly as if it had been an innocent or commendable
deed -t. The vices of another age astonish and shock us; the
vices of our own become familiar, and excite little horror. I return
from this digression to the course of the history.

THE charm, which had at first attached the Queen to Darnly, The Queen's
and held them for some time in an happy union, was now entirely h'atre to

1Darnly in-

dissolved; and love no longer covering his follies and vices with crc"af:.
its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full dimension and
deformity :-:::. Though Henry publiflcd a declaration, disclaiming

D Buchan. 295, 345. -1 Knox, 334. :1: Andcrf. 3. 8.,.
11 Jcbb. 2. 263. C* Keith, Append. i9. '.|. ' Crawf. Mem. Aippcnd.

:t Sec Appendix, N" XVI.

S f s any

BooK IV. any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was fully

' - convinced, that he was not only accessory to the contrivance, but

to the commission of that odious crime *. That very power, which,
with liberal and unfufpicious fondness, she had conferred upon
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to limit her prero-
gative, and to endanger her person. Such an outrage, it was im-
possible any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold civilities, secret
distrust, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of
afferion and confidence. The Queen's favours were no longer con-
veyed through his hands. The crowd of expetants ceased to court
his patronage, which they found to avail so little. Among the
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others complained of his
perfidiousness; and all of them despised the weakners of his under-
standing, and the inconstancy of his heart. The people themselves-
observed some parts of his condut, which little suited the dignity
of a King. Addided to drunkenness, beyond what the manners
of that age could bear, and indulging irregular passions, which
even the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by his inde-
cent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the utmost; and the pas-
sions which it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes, both in
public and in private t. Her avcrsion for him increased every day,
and could be no longer concealed. I-e was often absent from
court, appeared there with little fplcndor, and was trufled with no
power. Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to please the
Qccn, who favoured Morton and his associates, or who adhered
to the houfc of Hamilton; he was left almost alone in a neglceedt
and unpitied folitudc :1:.

'l,. rice of AnoU r this time, a new favourite grew into great credit with the
oii.'.Clrls fa- Occn, and soon gaincd an afccnd(lnt over her heart, which cncou-

* Kcith, 350. 1 Ibid. 3 9' l Mclv. I31, &c.

raged

I

raged his enterprising genius to form designs that proved fatal to BooK IV.
himself, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfortunes. i566
This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and by his extensive possessions and numerous vassals, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that
turbulent age, when so many vast projets were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to action, no man's ambition was
more daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or more
singular expedients for obtaining power. When almost every per-
son of diftindion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant,
had joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous encroach-
ments of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though
an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and aded with
vigour on her fide. The success which attended the arms of the
Congregation having obliged him to retire into France, he was
taken into the Queen's service, and continued with her till the
time of her return into Scotland . From that period, every ftep
of his conduct towards Mary was remarkably dutiful; and amidst
all the fliftings of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding any
course which could be offensive to her. When Murray's proceed-
ings with regard to her marriage gave umbrage to the QOeen, ihe
recalled Bothwell from that banishment into which she had with
reludtance driven him, and confidercd his zeal and abilities as the
most powerful supports of her authority. When the conspirators
againfl Rizio seized her person, he became the chief inftrumcnt
of rccovcring her liberty, and servcd her, on that occasion, witl
so much fidelity and fliccefs, as made the deepest iMnaprefiion on
her mind, and greatly increaicd the confidence i-v-llh I!: ha:id hi-
therto placed in hinm l. IHer gratitude loadel him wkLh marks of

* Andcrfon, . . 0. ' Ibid. I,. 92, 93.

her

BOOK IV. her bounty; ihe raised him to offices of profit and of trust, and

.-66.- transacted no matter of importance without his advice . By com-

plaifance and assiduity, he confirmed and fortified there dispositions
of the Queen in his favour, and insensibly paved the way towards
that vast project, which his immoderate ambition had perhaps al-
ready conceived, and which, in spite of many difficulties, and at
the expence of many crimes, he at last accomplished.

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed imprudent
to expose her person, at that time, to the insults ihe might susser
in a kingdom torn by fations, and prone to mutiny. For this
reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her residence in
the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom, and
the most proper place for the security of her person t. In order
to render this security more perfect, Mary laboured to extinguifl
the domestic feuds which divided some of the principal nobles.
Murray and Argyll were exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell,
by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her authority
and entreaties, effected a reconcilement among them, and drew
from them a promise to bury their discords in everlasting oblivion.
This reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that fle made it
the condition on which ihe again received Murray into favour j.

Tilth of ON the I9th of June, Mary was delivered of her only son James,
*I'"n's V' a Prince whose birth was happy for the whole island, and unfor-

tunate to her alone. His accession to the throne of England united

* Mclvil, 133. Knox, 396. 1' Keith, 335S

:1 Ibid. 336. Appcndix, 139.

the

the two divided.kingdoms in one mighty.monarchy, and efta- BooK1V.
blifhed the power of Great Britain on a firm foundation. While 1566

1566.

ihe, torn early from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was never
allowed to indulge those tender passions, nor to taste those joys
which fill the heart of a mother.

MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with an account of

this event. It struck Elizabeth, at first, in a sensible manner; and
the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired by the
birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before Melvil was
admitted to audience, the had so far recovered the command of her-
self, as to receive him not only with decency, but with excessive
cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation which Mary
gave her to ifand godmother to her son *.

As Mary loved.fplendor and magnificence, she resolved to cele-

brate the baptism of the young Prince with great pomp; and for
that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the French King,
and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former husband.

THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- The Queec

ontinues to

timents with refpe& to the King --. The death of Rizio, and the tre.,t lDarly
countenance he had given to an action so insolent and unjustifiable, fVithl ndit
were still fresh in her memory. She was frequently pensive and n"cle1-
dejected 1:. And though Henry fomctimcs attended at court, and
accompanied her in her progresses through different parts of the
kingdom, he met with little reverence from the nobles, while Mary
treated him with the grcatcfl refcrve, and did not flffer him to
poflefs any authority II. The breach betwccn them became cvery

* Mclv. 138. Se

Sec Append. N" XVII. :. Ibid. 143.
11 Kcith, 350. Mclv. 132.

day

BOOK IV. day more apparent*. Attempts were made toward a reconcilc-

~66. ment, particularly by Caftelnau the French Ambassador; but after

such a violent rupture, it was found no easy matter to bind the nup-
tial knot anew; and though he prevailed on the King and Queen
to pass two nights together t, we may, with great probability,
pronounce this appearance of union, to which Caftelnau trufled,
not to have been sincere; we know with certainty that it was not
lasting.

Her attach- BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime confident.
rnment to Both-
well increases. Without his participation, no business was concluded, and no favour

beflowed. Together with this ascendant over her councils, Both-
well, if we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired no
less sway over her heart. But at what precise time, this ambitious
Lord first allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the place of
that duty and respect which a fubje& owes his Sovereign; or when
Mary, instead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a passion of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.
Such delicate transitions of passion can be discerned only by those,
who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and who can view
the secret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble station allowed them only a diflant access to the Queen and
her favourite. And the ardor of their zeal, and the violence of
their prejudices, render their opinions rafi, precipitate, and inaccu-
rate. It is by the clefccs of this reciprocal paflion, rather than by
their accounts of it, that fiibiequent hiflorians can judge of its reality.

An) ViNTUROUS as Bothwcll's p'roijct to gain the Queen may
appear, it was formed and carried on under very favourable circum-

KeLith, Append. 69. [1 Ibid.

flances.

fiances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She poifeiied great BooK IV.
sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost tenderness s -ir

i.566'

of affetion. She had placed her love on a very unworthy obje:t,
who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with neglect,
with insolence, and with brutality. All these the felt, and resented.
In this situation the attention and complaisance of a man, who
had vindicated her authority, and protected her person; who en-
tered into all her views, who soothed all her passions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design, and re-
commending his paflion *, could scarce fail of making an impref-
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and accuf- The Ki,g

tomed to command, could not bear the contempt under which he t,,' ,cv
had now fallen, and the slate of insignificance to which he saw him- cot!ll(.
self reduced. But in a country, where he was universally hated or
delpifed, he could never hope to form a party, which would
second any attempt he might make to recover power. He ad-
drefred himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France
and Spain, with many profeiflons of his own zeal for the Catho-
lic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Queen for ne-
gleting to promote that intercf tt: And soon after, he took a
resolution, equally wild and dcfperatc, of embarking on board a
flip, which he had provided, and of flying into foreign parts. It
is almost impossible to form any fatisfat'ory conjettule concerning
the motives which influence a capricious and irregular mind. He
hoped, perhaps, to recommend himiflf to the Catholic Princes on
the continent, by his zcal for religion, and that they would em-
ploy their intcl-eft towards rciii'lating hlimi in the poffrelion of that
power which he had oflt. Perhaps, he cxpcl)cd nothing more than

* Andecr. i. 93, 94. 't Knox, 399.
VOL. I. T t the

BoOK IV. the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now fallen.

56 among firangers, who had never been -witnefies of his former

prosperity.

Iliscapricious IHE communicated his design to the Frencli Ambassador Le Croc,
behaviour.

and to his father the Earl of Lennox. They both endeavoured to
dissuade him from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Qteen's confidence, and who,.
about this time, was seldom at court, infiantly communicated the
matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accompany
the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was likewise absent from
court. He arrived there, however, on the fame day she received
the account of his intended flight. But he was more than usually
wayward and peevish; and scrupling to enter the palace unless cer-
tain Lords who attended the Queen were difminied, Mary was
obliged to meet him without the gates. At last he suffered her to
conduc him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to draw
from him the reasons of the strange resolution which he had taken,
and to divert him from it. In spite, however, of all her arguments
and entreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the
Privy Council, by her direrion, expoftculated with him on the fame
head. He persisted, notwithstanding, in his sullenness and oblli-
nacy; and neither deigned to explain the motives of his condudt,
nor signified any intention of altering it. As he left tle apart-
lment, he turned towards the Qucen, and told her that flle Ihould
not fcec his tfce again, for a long time. A few days after he wrote
to Mlary, and mentioned two things as grounds of his digull.
She hcrfelf, lhe said, no longer admlitted him into any confidence,
and haid deprived him of all power; and the nobles, after her cx-
ample, treated him with open negled, lo that lhe appeared in
every place without the dignity and lilcendor of a King.

NoT rlIN

NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary than this intended BooKIV.

flight of the King's, which would have spread the infamy of their I566
domestic quarrel all over Europe. Companion for a Monarch who Maary endea-

vours to pre-
would then appear to be forced into exile by her neglect and ill vent ilisin-

-tended sigh:.

usage, might have disposed mankind to entertain sentiments con-
cerning the causes of their discord, little to her advantage. In
order, therefore, to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to screen
her reputation from any censure with which Darnly might endea-
vour to load it, the Privy council transmitted a narrative of this
whole tranfadion, both to the King, and to the Queen Mother
of France. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's conduac
in the mofl favourable point of light -.

ABouT this time, the licence of the borderers called for rcdrefs,

and Mary resolving to hold a court of juflice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of several adjacent counties were fuimmoned to attend
their sovereign in arms, according to cuflom t-1. Bothwell was,
at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches, an office,
among the molt important in the kingdom; and though usually
divided into three diftin& governments, belftowed by the Queen's
favour upon him alone. In order to display his own valour and
activity in the discharge of this trufl, he attempted to fe ize a gang
of banditti, who lurking among the marcelcs of Liddefdalc, in fcflcd
the refl of the country. But while lie was laying holl of one of
those dcfperado's, hle was wounded by him in Ieveral places, so that oao'.cr if,
hiis follo s were obliged to carry himn to Hernitage cafllc. Mary
inflantly flew thither, vwith an impn)atience whiich firongly marks the
anxicty of a lover, butllittle suitcd tlhe dignity of a Q( en :1:. Find-

ing

:: Keith, 345, 3.17. I lbid. 353. (Good. vol. i. 302.

-J: 'The dinf.lcc be tvrcn Jhcdbl)rgle :w l Ilcrritagc is 8 Scottif milles, through a

country allltfl i'ini';:',tblc'. 'Tihl Ic;ia nl of the yea r
was Car advanccd. lothwl cll

'' t ' frccni3

Boo K IV. ing that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom, ihe
-;1667^ returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a jour-

ney, added to the anguish of mind she had suffered on Bothwell's
account, threw her next morning into a violent fever *. Her life
was despaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her contfitution
resifted the malignity of her disease. During the continuance of
the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never came
Novembcr 5. near Jedburgh t; and when he afterwards thought fit to make his

appearance there, he met with such a cold reception, as did not en-
courage him to make any long flay :. Mary soon recovered strength
enough to return along the eaflern borders to Dunhar.

WHILE she resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithflanding her promise, and even
proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged
Morton and his aflociates to remain in England 11. Mary, on the
other hand, afforded her proteeQion to several English fugitives.
Each Queen watched the motions of the otherwith a jealous atten-
tion, and secretly countenanced the pracices, which were carrying
on, to diflurb the administration of her rival..

seems to have been wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man,
rather than in any open infurredion of the borderers. It does not appear that
the Qieen was attended thither by any considerable train. Had any military ope-
ration been neceflary, as is supposed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been ex-
tremely improper to rifque the Queen's person in an expedition againat thieves. So
soon as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, lhe inflantly returned; and
after this we hear no more of the infurrceUion, nor have we any proof that the rioters
took refuge in England. No other reason but that which we have produced, feme
sufficient to account for the Queen's conduct.

* Keith, 351, 352. ' I Ibid. Append. 133,
:t Knox, 400. II Cald. vol. ii. 15.

So rk

FOR this purpose Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, and her BOOK IV.

other emissaries, were extremely ative and successful. We may 1566
impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which The Englilh

Parliament
appeared in the Parliament of England, and which raised a storm favours Ma-

ry's pre:en-

that threatened Elizabeth's domestic tranquillity, more than any finstoe the
other event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity to ucccfi
allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, without discovering

the least intention to marry. A violent distemper, with which
She had lately been seized, having endangered hei life, and alarmed
the nation with the profped of all those calamities which are oc-
cafioned by a disputed and dubious succession; a motion was made,
and eagerly listened to in both houses, for addressing the Queen, to
provide against any such danger in times to come, either by fig-
nifying her own resolution to marry, or by consenting to an aft
establishing the order of fucceflion to the Crown '. Her love to her
fubjeats, her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, it was
pretended, not only called upon, but obliged her to take one of
there Steps. The insuperable aversion which the had all along dli-
covered for marriage, made it improbable that she would chufe the
former; and if she complied with the latter request, no title to the
Crown could, with any colour ofjuftice, be let in opposition to that
of the Scottiml Queen. Elizabeth was Iagacious enough to iec the
remotcft confcquences of this motion, and obfcrvcd them with the
greatest anxiety. Mary, by refuting bt often to ratify the treaty
of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a dceign of embracing the
first promising opportunity for prorccuting her right to the Engliih
Crown; and by her fecrct ncgociations, she had gained many to fa-
vour her title-t'. All the Roman Catholics ardently wishcd for her

* D'Ewcs Journ. of P'a,:. c05. f Mclv. 136.

fuccefion.

BooK IV. succession. Her gentleness and humanity had removed many of

1566. those apprehensions which the Protestants entertained-on account

of her religion. The court fation, which envied the power of
Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest the administration out of his
hands, advanced the pretensions of the Scottish Queen in oppo-
fition to him. The union of the two kingdoms was a defireable
object to all wife men in both nations; and the birth of the young
Prince was a security for the continuance of this blessing, and gave
hopes of its perpetuity.

Elizabeth's UNDER there circumstances, and while the nation was in such a
phat ccoint. temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have been

highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled ilate of
the succession left much in her power. Her resentment alone might
have gone far towards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained and over-
awed the ambition of the Scottish Queen. But if this check flould
be removed by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary would
be at full liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to adc with-
out fear or reserve. Her partizans were already meditating fchemcs
for infurredtions in different parts of the kingdom * ; and an aa of
Parliament, recognizing the rights of that Princess, whoef prcten-
lions they favoured, would have been nothing less than a iignal to
arms; and, notwithstanding Elizabeth's juPt title to the affctions
of her fubjeds, might have flaken and endangcred her throne.

hMary enei:c:- WIILE this matter remained in fufpcncc in both houfcs, an ac-
l,(ve li,,i op- count of it was transmittcd to Mar y

)y Mclvil her Aml)afflaor. A;
I' uiyily. lhce did not want advocates for hcr right, eVCe almong tihofc who

were near Elizabeth's person, lie cndcavourcd to cultivate the dll-

* Mclv. 17.

p)ofilliin

position which appeared towards fettling the right of fuccefflon in BOOK IV.
her favour, by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. She 566'
expressed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which she
ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their Sovereign, in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity with
England, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther.than should be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the
fame time, as her right of fuccefion was undoubted, she hoped it
would be examined with candour, and judged of with impartiality.
The nobles who attended her wrote to the English Privy Council
in the fame strain . Mary artfully gave thele letters the air of
being nothing more than a declaration of her own, and of her sub--
jeds gratitude towards Elizabeth. But as the could not be igno-
rant of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth observed the pro-
ceedings of Parliament, a ftep so uncommon as this, of one Prince's
entering into public correlpondence with the Privy Counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise construed than as taken with an in-
tention to encourage the spirit which had already been raised among
the English. In this light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth
herIelf'1-. But the disposition of her people rendering it ncceflhry
to treat Mary's person with great decency, and her title with mucl
regard, flhe mentioned it to her only in the foftcfl language.

NOTIIING(, Ihowever, could be a more cruel mortification to a lii ,,i

lPinccis of Elizabetl's chlaradcr, than the temper whliclh bothll r"iI*8l
lhoufcs of Parliament discovered on this occasion. Sle bent all her lict
policy to defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing the iirl
Ihcat of their zeal to evaporate, she called into her pref-lncc a cer-
tain number of each hounfc. Slie soothed and carefced them ; the
threatened and promifled; lhe remitted ilbfidies which were due;

' Kcitl, 3541. Append. 136. [ Icith, 357

and

B3oo IV. and refused those which were offered; and in the end prevailed to

566. have this formidable motion put off for that session. Happily for

her, the conduCt of the Scottifl Queen, and the misfortunes
which besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion, in any
future Parliament *.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation of impartiality,

and that she might not drive Mary into any desperate measure,
she committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had published
something derogatory to the right of the Scottish line t; and fig-
nified her displeasure against a member of the house of Commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at Mary T.

An extraordi- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to pro-
nayl flep cf mote the interest of that religion which she professed. The re-
Mary's in fa-
vour of Popc- efablifhment of the Romish doctrine seems to have been her

ry. favourite pafion; and though the design was concealed with

care, and conducted with caution, she pursued it with a perse-
vering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay aside somewhat of
her usual reserve; and the aid which lhe expeaed from the Popifli
Princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encou-
raged her to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper of the
nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a
secret correspondence with the court of Rome, ihe now resolved to
allow a Nuncio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the per-
son on whom Pius V. conferred this office, and along with him he
fcnt the Occn a prcfcnt of 2o,ooo crowns . It is not the cha-
radcr of the Papal court, to open its trcafilry upon diflant or iinagi-

' D'Ewcs Journ. 104-- 30. Carnd. 399. Mdcv. 119. Haynes 446.

Camed. 401. : I-ayncs, 449.  Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. 325.

nary

nary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no BooK IV.
other, than to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Ro- 1--66
mifh fee. Thus Mary herself underitood it; and in her answer to
a letter which she received from the Pope, after expressing her
grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality, Ihe promises that
Ihe would bend her whole strength towards the re-establishment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that ihe would receive the Nun-
cio with every poflible demonstration of respect, and concur, with
the utmost vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour
of God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that she would ce-
lebrate the baptism of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, hoping that her fubjeds would be
taught, by this example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and that
she would be careful to instil early into her son the principles of
a sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith '. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over one of
his attendants with part of the money, the Queen did not think the
jundure proper for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to iend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, againit the time of the Prince's
baptifin, and as it would have been improper to offend her, flch
wifely contrived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris t. The convuliions into which the kingdom was thrown loon
after, made it impossible for him to pursue his journey any farther.

Ar the very tinme that MIary was fccrctly carrying on thelc nc-

gociations for subverting the Reformed church, fle did not Icruple
publickly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its M1illi-
lers a more ccrtain and coIort.i'ble filclnc:. Duin- l thlis

Co
C i. Si Vit;i M a.irix : 1ap. J:lhb, ivoli.
ii. 51. l ci Appe , 5.

1 Kciili, 561, 5('.. Kniox, 401.
V\OL. . _I11 , vyer,

PooK IV. year, she issued several proclamations and acts of council for that

G -L rpurpofe, and readily approved of every scheme which was proposed

for the more effecual payment of their flipcnds. This part of her
conduct does little honour to Mary's integrity; and though jufified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falsehood and deceit
among the neceflary arts of government, and even authorised by
the pernicious casuistry of the Romifl Church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of duties,
such dissimulation, however, mull be numbered among those ble-
mifhes which never slain a truly great and generous character.

December. As neither the French nor Piedmontefe AmbasTadors were yet
for th Kiong arrived, the baptifin of the Prince was put off from time to time.
excessive. Mean while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar . Such a re-

tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
Her aversion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and was
become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to that
gaiety of spirit, which was natural to her. The rashness and levity
of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and obflinacy, filled
her with shame and with despair. A variety of passions preyed at
once on a mind, all whose fenfltions were exquisite, and all its
emotions strong, and often extorted from her, the last wish of the
unfortunate, that life itcflf would come to an end 1.

A d!iol cebe- InURllRAY and Maitland observed all those workings of passion
v, ~n,,'- in the lbrcail of the Queen, and conceivcd hopes of turning them to

the advantage of their ancient afiociates, Mnlrton, and the other
confi irators a Riainlt i-/.io. They were ltill in Ijaniifmcnt, and the
Q(ccn's rcfcilntlmct agailnf thlie continued unabated. lMurray and

e Kcitli, 355. -1 Ibid. P'rcf. vii.

the

the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that her inclination to BooK IV.
be separated from Darnly would surmount this deep-rooted aver-
sion, and that the hopes of an event so dclireable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rca-
sons, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a fentcnce of di-
vorce. This sentence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this fcr-
vice, they pr'>pofed to stipulate with the Queen to grant a par-
don to MIorton and his followers. The design was first of all
communicated to Argyll, who, as well as Murray, owed his re-
turn into Scotland to the conspiracy against Rizio. Huntly and
Bothwell, who at that time directed all Mary's councils, were like-
wife admitted into the concert. They joined together in making
the overture to the Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo-
quence '. But Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliver-
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to al-
lure her, had nevertheless good reasons for rejecing the method,
by which they proposed to accomplifll it. The birth of her son
had greatly strengthened her claim upon the Englifi fucceflion, and
encouraged the abettors of it to appear with greater boldness, and
to ac with more vigour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
her husband, without throwing tome imputation on her son. This
might open a new clifpute witlh regard to the fuicccflion, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Miniflcrs to call in question
the Prince's legitimacy, or at leafn to fuijea it to all the delays and
cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of tliclc inconvcnicncies
weighed wlith MIary, and determined her, rather to cldure her
hard fatc, than to lek relief by vcnturingl on flcli a dangerous
experiimenlt.

*' Andicr. vol iv. Part ii. 188.

*1 J 11 "' TI I :

BooK IV. THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the Englifli

- and French Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling,
i$66.

to celebrate the baptism of her bon. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
suitable to her own dignity, and the refped with which she as-
sected, at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great prepara-
tions had been made by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by
her on this occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly known
Dccem. 17. in Scotland. The ceremony itself was performed according to the

rites of the Romish Church. But neither Bedford, nor any of the
Scottish nobles who profeflcd the Proteflant religion, entered within
the gates of the chapel"'. The fpiriti f that age, firm and uncomn-
plying, would not, upon any inducement, condescend to witness
an action, which it esteemed idolatrous.

The :n'. s HENRY'S behaviour, at this junlure, perfecly discovers the
hlvlr t l excefl of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chose to reside
P,'iu oft le at Stirling, but confined himself to his own apartment; and a's the

Oleen diftrufled every nobleman who ventured to converse with
him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing could be more fin-
gular, or was less expected, than his chuting to appear in a man-
ner, that both published the contempt under which he had fallen,
.and, by exposing the Queen's domeflic unhappineis to tlhe obter-
vatlinol of so many foreigners, looked like a ftep taken on purpofic
to nlortiyf and to offend her. lMary felt this insult fenlibly; and
notwithlllanding all hlr efforts to aflume the gaiety which sluitcd
the occasion, and which was ncccflary for the polite reception it-
her guelis, tlhe was formctimes obliged to retire, in order to be at
liberty to indulge her sorrow, and give vent to her tears J'. Tlhe

w Keith, 360. 1- Ibid. Picf. vii.

King

King still persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and BooK IV.
daily threatened to put it in execution '. 'i6

$66.
THI E ceremony of witnefling the Prince's baptifin was not the sole E!izabe:h en-

deas ours to
business of Bedford's embafly. His inftrudions contained an over- accomirodale

her differenccs

ture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguiShing those jea- hrdifa
lousics which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. The
treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned, was the
principal occasion of there. The spirit however which had risen
to such a height in the late Parliament, the power of the party
which favoured the Scottish QCeen's title, the numnber and activity
of her agents in different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza-

? Camden affims, 40r. that Dedford was commanded by Elizabeth not to give

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indignity, not to be born, either by M'ary
or her hufliand, it hath been anerted to be the cause of the King's absence from the
ceremony of his son's b.ptifin. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, I. No fch thing is
to be found among Bedford's inftruftions, the original of which still remains. Keiith
356. 2. Bedford's advice to the Queen by lMelvil is utterly inconfiflent with Cam-
den's assertion. Melv. 153. IMelvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's infiric-
tions to Sir Henry Norrij, where he affirms that flie commanded Bedford to employ
his bess offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which he had attcmpted
to no purpose. Digge's Compl. Ainbaf p.

p 3. A paper published Append. N XVII.

proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's ab-
fence, but without giving that rcafon for it, which has been founded on Camden's
words, though, it that had bccn the real one, he would scarce have failed to mention it.
Ilis account of this matter is that which I have followed. Keith, Prcf. vii. 4. [le
informs his court, th.it on account of the difference bctwixt the King and the Queen,
he had rcfufed to hold any futller correil'ondence with the foirmir, though he
appears, in many inflances, to ha.ve been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As the
King was not prcfent at tile baptifin, he teems to have been excluded fiom iany
ihare in the ordliary ;(mnillifirationl of bufineis. Two ails of Privy Council, one oni
the 20th, and the othic on the 2 1 f of December, are found in Keith, 562. I'heyc
bolh run in the Qleen's name alone. The King ('tems not to have been lrclciit.
This could not be owing to JLlizabcthl's inflirullions to LBedford.

belli,

BOOK IV. beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the ambi-

---66-.a guous and artful expressions in that treaty might afford her. No-

thing was now demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title to
the Crown of England during Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her
posterity; who, on the other hand, engaged to take no tlep,
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the succession ''.

MARY could not, with decency, reject a proposition so equi-

table; she inlifted, however, that Elizabeth should order the right
upon which she claimed to be legally examined, and publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the teflament of Henry VI1i. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldest sifter the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of succession,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. Ma-
ry's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this testa-
ment, which they so justly conceived to be injurious to their Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery; and on different occasions had urged
Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered considerably
by gaining this point. The original teflament is still extant, and
not the least doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and au-
thenticity. But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to
set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing
more, than to keep the queflion concerning the succession perplexed
and undecided, and by industriously eluding this request, ile did
real service to Mary's caufe'-l.

A Frl:v days after tle lapltiin of the Prince, Morton and all

the other eonflirailtors againfl lRizio obtained their pardon, and leave
to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued incx-
orable to every inlrcaty in their behalf', )iclded at lal to the folici-

* Keith, 356. -I Ibid. 36i, 358. Note (c.) Murdin, 3,S.

i tations

tations of Bothweell :. He could hopefor no success inthofe bold BooK IV.
designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, without draw- 15

566'

ing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his aflociates, of vwhich they had good reason to dcfpair, hc cx-
pcaed to secure a band of faithful and determined adherents.

Ts E King fiill remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm
given him, by the rumour of a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison j, was the occasion of his leaving that place in
an abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

Two Affcmblies of the Church were held during this ycar. New .ne -;.

complaints were made, and upon. good grounds, of the poverty 'JC; 2''
and contempt under which the Protefiant clergy were fuifered to a-'
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their fubfilnencc was,
they had not received the Icall part of wha.t was due for the pre-
ceding year $. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to
susser every thing for a good cause, could have persuaded men to
adhere to a church, so indigent and so negleELcd. The cxtraordi-
nary expences occasioned by the Prince's baptiiin, had exhaiufed
the Queen's trcafuiry, and the fumns appropriated for tlhe fbil)licnce
of the clergy were diverted into other chaineils. The QccIn w-as
therefore obliged to prevent tlie jtzrf remonfiranccs of the ailflnlly
by falling on some new method fbr the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, isome Itretch towards munificence might
have been cxpcctd in an afliginenClt which was made with an in-
tention of Ioothingl and llcncing tile clergy. lBut 1)th the QeCCen
and the nobles hiled iall the riches of the ch urch lwhich 111cy had1
fcized. A fini, lwich, at tile higllcll collmputlltion, can fIcarce lb

* Good. vol, i. .o1. MIclv. -5
. Keith, Plf. viii. j l;. 562.

1't(1(1t(

BOOK IV. reckoned equal to 9000/. sterling *, was deemed sufficient for the

XS66. maintenance of a whole national church, by men who had lately

seen single monasteries possesed of revenues far superior in value.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances which asseted

themselves alone, with aflonifhing patience; but wherever the Re-
formed Religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to be
alarmed, and to proclaim in the loudest manner, their apprehen-
sions of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given thmn, a
short time before the meeting of the Assembly. The usurped and
oppreflive jurifdicdion of the spiritual courts had been abolitlIed by
the Parliament 1560, and Commiffaries were appointed to hear and
determine the causes which formerly came under their cognizance t.
Among the few aas of that Parliament, to which Mary had paid
any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the
Commiffaries, and had given them inftru&ions for dire(cing their
proceedings :, which are frill of great authority in that court. From
that time these judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercise
of their funaion, when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclama-
tion, refloriing the Archbifllop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurif-
dition, and depriving the Commiffaries of all authority j.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered the Queen not

unwilling to ven ture upon this rafl action. She had been contriving,
ior ibme time, how to rc-cfiablifh the Popifi religion ; and the re-
floring the ancient ccclcfiaftics to their former jurifdiaion, liecmcd to
be a confidcrble flC ticowl rs that end. The motive which prompt-
ed Bothwcll, to vliofc influence over the Queen this andion mufl be
chicly ilmputcl , was fiill more criminal. I-is cntcrprllifn allbi-
tion had all-c;(ay formed lihat bold dcli;ln, which lie tion lput in cxc-
* Kcith, G62. 'I I., 152. :1: Id. 25'. 1i Knox, -03.  [. ii.l

CltiOi,

cution, and the use which we shall hereafter find him making of that Boo K IV.
authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics regained, discovers the rea- 1566
sons of his present condut, in contributing to revive their power.
The Protestant clergy were not unconcerned fpeftators of an event,
which threatened their religion with unavoidable deftruaion; but
as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen
herself, they addressed a remonfirance to the whole body of the Pro-
teftant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the dan-
ger to which it was exposed, at that time, seemed to require ". What
effects this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have
no opportunity ofjudging, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he The King

falls tick at

could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous dillemper. Glasgow.
The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and in 1 567
that age it was commonly imputed to the effeas of poifon-i-. It
is impoflible, amidst the contradictions of historians, to decide with
certainty concerning its nature, or its cause .:. His life was in the

utmofi

-" Keith, 567. + Melv. 154. Knox, 40r.

: Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poisoned. The, men-

tion the black and putrid puflules which broke out all over his body. Buchanan
adds, that Abernethy the King's physician plainly declared that poison was the
caufc of these symptoms, and that the iQueen rcfufed to allow her own physician to at-
,end him, Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. . lackwood Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 24, 59.
afterr, that the small-pox was the disease with which the King was seized. lie is
called a porickfl) mn in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 15. The reason given by
Frtncbl Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of Sicld, viz. Icfl the young lrii'nce
should catch the infc&ion if he flaid in the palace, fcceus to favour this (.pinion), An-
ldelf. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderlefs to her ltufbnld,
that thoulgh fie never had the finall-pox licrcll; flhe ventured to attelld hin,, vtl. iii.
4,t.'. T'his, if it had been true, would have aflbrdcd a good pretence for nut viiitli;;,

Vol.. I. X x Ilii

BOOK IV. utmost danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour

567 of his constitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.

Negleded by MARY'S neglect of the King, on this occasion, was equal to
M1aryl. that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh.

She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices which footbh
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this juncture, she did not even
put on the appearance of this passion. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, she ainufed herself with excursions to different parts of the
country, and stuffered near a month to elapse before she visited him
at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

The breach THE breach between Mary and her husband was not occasioned
betwcen them by any of those flight disgusts, which interrupt the domestic union,
irreparable.

without diffoling it altoether. Almost all the paflions, which ope-
rate with greatcft violence on a femaie mind, and drive it to the
most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting this
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours she had beflowed,
contempt of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, encroach-
ments on her power, coufpiracies. against her favourites, jealousy,
insolence, and obflinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had great
rcafon to complain. She felt them with the utmost: sensibility; and,
added to the anguifhl of disappointed love, they produced those fymp-
toms of despair which we have already deferibcd. I-Ier rcfentmcntl
against the King fccms not to have abated from the time of his leav-
ing Stirling. In a letter written witl her own hand, to her amnbal'l-

!im fooloer; but IMary huad thlo fial-pox in her infancy, Sadler's rectters. 3. 1iflp
Lefcy affirms, that the Kin(i's di ease wais the Irench: pox, IKith, 364. Note (i,).
In that age, this disease was eflccine d 0l contagious, talt pcleiis infcaLcd with it
were removed without the walls of citics.

o)t-
J

dor in France, juss before (he set out for Glasgow, no tokens of BooK IV.
sudden reconcilement appear. On the contrary, flie mentions, L--6--
with -some bitterness,, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with January .o.
Which he observed her actions, and the inclination he discovered to
diflurb her government, and at the fame time talks of all his at-
tempts with the utmost scorn '.

AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce to be v [:-

lRixv a, (L!

expected that (he would visit the King, or that any thing but g:.a '
marks of jealousy and diflruft fliould appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; ilhe not only visited
Henry, but, by all her words and a&ions, cndeavoured to exprcfs
an uncommon affeCtion for him: And though this made inpreflioni
on the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible on forne
occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to those who are ac-
quainted with the human heart, and who know how seldom and
how slowly such wounds in domcftic happiness are healed, this
sudden transition will appear with a very suspicious air, and will
be confidered by them as the effec of artifice.

BUT it is not on fuifpicion alone, that IMary is charged with Hcrdinin,,.

diifimulation in this part of her conduct. Two of her famous let- lation.
ters to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. tle had so far flucceeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an abiolute alcen-
dant over the Queen; and in a situation fuclh as Mary's, merit not
so conspicuous, crviccs of far i rior imne poriltance, and addrcls much
lcfs insinuating than I3otlhwcll's, may be fuippofed to fleal imlper-
ceptibly on a female licart and entirely to overcome it. Among
thlofe in the higher ranks of life, ilruplcs with regard to conjugal

* Keiith, Pref. viii.

X x a fidlity

BOoKIV. fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the

5(67. manners of that court, in which Mary had been educated, contri-

bute to increase or to fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis
I. and Henry IT. the wildness of the military character in that age,
and the liberty of appearing in all companies, which began to be al-
lowed to women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy of fen-
timent, and those polished manners, which alone can render this
liberty innocent, had introduced, among the French, a licentious-
ness of morals that rose to an astonishing height. Such examples,.
which were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly fail of
diminishing that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first approach of forbid--
den sentiments less mocking; refertment, and disappointed love,.
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufti-
fiable on that account; and so many concurring causes might, al-
most imperceptibly, kindle a new passion in her heart.

The motives BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and
of it. progress of this passion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-

dour and tenderness of love. The affection which Mary there ex-
preifes for Bothwcll, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her
conduct; which; without admitting this circumflance, appears al-
together mysterious, inconfislent, and inexplicable. That recon-
cilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impoflible to give any plausible account, is discovercd, by the
Queen's own confession, to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her avcrfion for her hufbfand, and the suspicious attention with
which flte observed his conduci , became universally known, her
cars were ollicioufly filled, as is uftal in such cafes, with groundlcls
or aggravated accounts of his acqions. By some, nle was told, that
the King intended to seize the pcrfon of the Prince his son, and

6 in

in his name to usurp the government; by others she was aflured, BooK IV.
that he resolved instantly to leave the kingdom; that a vessel was _7
hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive
him -. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country mufft have been highly dishonourable to the
Queen, and would have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures-
While he resided in Glasgow, at a distance from her, and in that
part of the kingdom where the interest of his family was greatest,
he might, with more facility, accomplish his designs. In order,
therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was
neceifary to bring him to some place, where he would be more im-
mediately under her own eye. For this purpose, she firfl employed Prevails on

him to come

all her art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to remove to Edinburgh.
him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that
there he would have easier access to the advice of physicians, and
that she herself could attend him without being absent from her
son t. The King was weak enough to susser himself to be per--
fuaded; and being flill feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue,.
was carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging to

the Provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It flood
almost upon the fame spot where the house belonging to the Prin-
cipal of the University now stands. Such a situation, on a rising
ground, and at that time in an open field, had all the advantages
of healthful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, the so-
litude of the place rendered it cxtrcmcly proper for the commis-
sion of that crime, with a view to which, it seems manifcfily to
have been chosen.

' IK itlh, Prcf. viii. - Good. vol. ii. 8.

MIAnt v

BOOK IV. MARY continued to attend the King with the most afiduous

67.- care. She fcldom was absent from him through the day; she slept

Ilel i nur- several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped
*dered thiclr'.

on him so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great
measure, quieted those fupicions which had so long disturbed him.
But while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he stood on the very brink of deftruaion. On
Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the Queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which the King lay
was blown up with gun-powder. The noise and shock, which
this hidden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of the
lKing, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, un-
touched by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.
IIischaraEler. SUCII was the unhappy fate of H-enry Stewart Lord Darnly,

in the twenty-firtl year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, lie loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diftradion. His insolence and in-
conflancy alienated fiom himi such of tlhe nobls as had contributed
mol: zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice cx-
poscd him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as the
dcfcendant of their ancient Kings and heroes. lhad he died a
natural death, his end would have been unlamented, and hiis me-
mory have been soon forgotten; but the cruel circuimflanccs of his
nurdler, land the rciiilhcns with lwhich it was afterwards avenged,
have made his name to be remembered with regret, and have
rendered him the ol)jec of pity to lwhich lie lad othcrwil no title.

Lv .V] IY

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess who had con- BOOK IV.
trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, with 567

I567.
almost a general content, on Bothwell *; and some reflections Botlhwell and

the Queen sus-

were thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no firanger to the peaed of tle
crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidence,
that the nature of the action will admit. The Queen's known
sentiments with regard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which she was loaded q-.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by the

Queen, offering a considerable reward to any person who flould
discover those who had been guilty of such a horrid and dctcelablc
crimce 1; and though Bothwell was now one of the greatest sub-
JcQs in the kingdom, formidable on account of lis own power,
and prote&ed by the Queen's favour, it was impossible to suppress
the sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers were affixed
to the most public places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; pictures appeared to the fame pur-
pose, and voices were heard,, in the middle of the night, charging
him with that barbarous action. But the authors of these r111mours
.did not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone, they infintatcd
that the Quteen herself was accessory to the crime . This bold ac-
cufaition, which so direcly attacked Mary's reputation, clrew the
attention of her council; and by engaging them in an inquiry after
the authors of these libels, diverted them from searching for the
murderers of the King 'p . It could cnarce l)e expected that Mary
herrelf would be extremely solicitous to discover those who liad rid
lher of an liifband(, whom hle had lo violcntly hated. It was

M' Iclv. 155. AndcifrC vol. i. 156.

-! Sec 1)iffcrtatinn concc'pi h tlic murder of Henry )Darnly, and hllc gcniuil}cnlrs
ol n;I r)y,' letters to 13oth ell. \pplcntlix.

, Aitldcr:l vol. i. 6, Id. vol. ii. I56. '* Id. vol. i. 38.

3otlhwcl 's

BooK IV. Botllwell's interest, who had the supreme direEcion of this, as well

-si - of all other affairs, to stifle and suppress whatever evidence should
2567'

be offered, and to cover, if possible, the whole tranfaaion under
the veil of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was
made, and some persons called before the council; but the exa-
mination was conduaced with the most indecent remissness, and in
such a manner, as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt *.

IT was not her own fubjets alone who fufpe&ed Mary of having

been accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dif-
honourable to her character, owe its rife and progress to the jea-
lousy and malice of her faaious nobles. The report of the man-
ner and circumstances of the King's murder spread quickly over
all Europe, and, even in that age, which was accustomed to deeds
of violence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy breach
with her husband had long been matter of public discourse, the
first conjectures which were formed with regard to his death,
were extremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what
apology to offer for her conduct, called on her to prosecute the
murderers with the utmost diligence, and expeeted that the rigour
of her proceedings would prove the best and fullest vindication of
her innocence (-.

Lenncx ac- LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with in-
cufeb Both vcll
of thl King's ccffant importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's dif-
lkumdcr. grace, and being treated by Mary with neglec, usually resided at

a difiance from court. Rouzcd, however, by an event no lets flhock-
ing to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his fclhcmcs of ambi-
February zi. tion, he venturcd to write to the Quccn, and to offer his advice

t Anderi. vol. iv. 167, 168. 1 Keith, Picf. ix.

with

with refped to the most effeaual method for discovering and con- BOOK IV.
viaing those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of '- -

i567.

a huiband. He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty
with vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared his
own suspicion. of Bothwell, and of those who were named as his
accomplices; he required that, out of regard to decency, and in
order to encourage evidence to appear againif them, the persons
accused of such an atrocious crime should be committed to cuflody,
or at leait excluded from her court and presence .

MIARY was then at Seaton, whither The had retired after the bu-

rial of the King, whose body was deposited among the Monarchs
of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner t. T he former part
of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be eluded; and
it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But, initead
of confining him to any prison, Mlary admlitted him to all her Mal-y crnti-

nues to a-

councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed the murderer vour him,
of her husband, to enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favourite+. The offices which Bothwell already poffeflcd,
gave him the command of all the south of Scotland. The castle
of Edinburgh, however, was a place of too much consequence, not
to with it in his own power. The Quecn, in order to prevail on
the Earl of Mar to surrender it, contented to put the person of
the young Prince in his hands, and immediately bellowed the LlMIrh 19.
government of that important fortrcrs upon Bothwell [1. So many
feps in her conduc, inconliicent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, imufl be imputed to an exccs cither of folly or
of love. Mary's known clhanraler fiully vindicates her from the for-
mner; of tlie latter, many and firiking proofs tfon appeared.

Keithih, 369. -1 Andlrf. vol. i. 23. 1: Il. ibid. 40, &'c.

II Id. ibid. 1'rcf. 64. Keith, 379.
VoL. I. Y y No

BOOKIV. No direEt evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell; but as;

567 ~ time might bring to light the circumfiances of a crime, in which
1567.

March 19. so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance
Haltens on
his trial. to hurry over the trial, while nothing more than general suspicions,

and uncertain surmises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of
March, the I 2th of April was appointed for the day of trial. And
though the law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes
were carried on in that age required a much longer interval, it
appears, from several circumnfances, that this short space was con-
fiderably contracted, and that Lennox had only eleven days warn-
ing to prepare for accusing a person, so far superior to himself,
both in power and in favour". No man could be less in a con-
dition to contend with an antagonist who was thus supported.
Though Lennox's paternal estate had been reflored to him, vwhen
he was recalled into Scotland, it seems to have been considerably
impaired during his banishment. His vassals, while he resided in

* The ad of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date

MIarch the 28th, which happened on a Thursday, Anders. vol. i. 50. The Queen's
warrant to the 7/leengers, impowering them to summon Lennox to be prefcnt, i,
dated on the 29th. Anderr. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid. too. He was summoned at hi:;
dwelling-houfes in Glasgow and Dunbarton the 3oth of March, the llt and 2d days
of April. Ibid. Iol. He was furnmoned at Perth, April ift. Ibid. 102. Though
Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have been
given him sooner. Such an unnccefliry delay affords some cause for fufpiicion. 'Tis
true, Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh the
ensuing week; this gave him warning some days fooncr, that file intended to bring
on the trial without delay. But the prccife time could not be legally, or certainly
known to Lennox sooner than 1 I or 12 days, before the day on which he was required
to appear. By the law and pratlice of Scotland, at that time, parties were funimoned
in calfs of ticafon 40 days previous to the trial.

England,

EngTand, had been accustomed to some degree of independance, BOOK IV.
and he had not recovered that absolute ascendant over them, which 1567
a feudal chief usually pofleffed. He had no reason to expec the
concurrence of any of those factions into which the nobles were
divided. During the short period of his son's prosperity, he had
taken such Reps as gave rife to an open breach with Murray and
all his adherents. The partizans of the house of Hamilton were
his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly was linked in the
closest confederacy with Bothwcll; and thus, to the disgrace of the
nation, Lennox stood alone in a cause, where both honour and hu-
inanity called so loudly on his countrymen to iecond him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and fat

as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which gave direc-
tions with regard to the time and manner of his trial; and he fRill
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the Queen's
presence with the fame distinguished familiarity as formerly*.

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the wiifhes Lcnnoxcraves

a delay,

and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; every Rtep
towards which seemed to be taken by directions from the person
who was himnelf accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose
to conceal rather than to dcteCt his guilt. Lennox foresaw what
would be the ifieu of this mock inquiry, and with how little safety
to himself, or ftuccfs to his cause, he could venture to appear on
the day prefixed. In his former letters, though under cxl)reflons
the most refpe iful, some fymptolls of his (lilrllfling the OQeen
may be dilcovercd. lie (l)oke out now, in plaiii language. He
complained of the il jtlry done hlim, by Ithurrying on the trial with
such illcg'al precipitation. l Ic rcprctcnted once more, the indecency

o Anldcrf. vol. i. 5) 57.

Y y 2 of'

BOOK IV. of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to

retain his former influence over her councils. He again required
her, as fle regarded her own honour, to give some evidence of her
sincerity in prosecuting the murderer, by confining the person who
was, on good grounds, fifpedced to be the author of it; and, till
that were done, he significd his own rcfolution not to be present at
a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were so irregular,
and unfatisfaaory ".

AppLes for HE seems, howevcr, to have expeaced little success from this
this piurpofe
to Elizabeth. application to Mary; and therefore, at the fame time, besought

Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he de-
manded -. Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufpeded the one Queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of
the other, who had treated his son with the utmost contempt, ard
himself and family with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote in-
ftantly to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time, and
urged, in such strong terms, the fame arguments which Lennox
had used, as might have convinced her to what an unfavourable
conflrution her conduct would be liable, if file perfifled in hir
present method of proceeding ::,
The trial pro- NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor thole of Lennox, could

eds prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed, Bothwell

appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would have
been dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punif him. Besides
a numerous body of his friends and vaflals affimbled, according
to cufiom, from different parts of the kingdom, he was attended

* Andcrf. vol. i. 52. ' 1' Good. vol. ii. 352. :: Andlcrr. Pref. 6o.
Sec Appendix, No XIX.

by

by a band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying colours along BooK IV.
the fircets of Edinburgh ". A court ofjuftice was held, with the 567
accuilomed formalities. An indictment was presented against
Bothvell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his accufa-
tion. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his de-
pendants. He excused his Mailer's abenice, on account of the
fhortncfs of the time, which prevented his assembling his friends
and vassals, without whose aliiftance he could not, with safety,
venture to set himfellf in opposition to fuich a powerful antagonist.
For this reason, he desired the court to flop proceeding, and pro-
tested, that any sentence which filould be passed at that time, ought
to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, in-
sifted, that the court should inflantly proceed to trial. One of Len-
nox's own letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prosecute
the murderers without delay was produced. Cunningham's ob-
jections were overruled; and the jury, confilting of Peers and
Barons of the first rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witness was cxa- otli.vchl is

mined,.nor any evidence produced against him. The jury, under ac(lLd.
these circumnances, could do nothing else but acquit him. Their
vcrdict, however, was far from gratifying the willes, or silencing
the murmurs of the people. Elvery circumnlanlce in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation; and thejudgment
pronounced, instead of being a proof of lBothwell's innocence, was
cleccmed an argument of his guilt. 'Paituinades and libels were
affixcd to diffcrent places, cxprefling the fcntiments of the public,
withl the utmofl virulence of language.

:A Andcrf. vol. i. 135.

T.1 lt:

BOOK IV. THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of the censure, to

56-7 wwhich their proceedings would be exposed; and, at the fame time,

that they returned their verdic acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of
Caithness protefled, in their name, that no crime should be imputed
to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indictment. He took notice, likewise,
that the ninth instead of the tenth of February was mentioned in
the indictment, as the day on which the murder had been commit-
ted. A circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the indictment; and at a time when men were
disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
this small matter contributed to confirm and to increase their sus-
picions '

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which he

had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication of his innocence. Im-
mediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in which he offered to
fight, in single combat, any Gentleman of good fame, who flould
presume to accuse him of being accessory to the murder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had been

cleared by the most unexceptionable and fatisfaatory evidence. The
afccndant he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who could not ex-
pec that his own person would be safe in a country lwhere the
murderer of his son had been absolved, without regard to jultice;
and loaded with honours, in contempt of decency; fled with pre-
cipitation towards England ''.

Bothw. Trial. Andcrf. vol. i. 97, &c. -I Keith, 378. Note (i).

Two

Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the opening BOOK IV.

of which the Queen diftinguiihed Bothwell, by appointing him to i567
carry the scepter before her *. Most of the acts passed in this As- A Parliament

held.

fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen his party, and to
promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all the pofecf-
sions and honours which the partiality of the Queen had conferred
upon him; and the act to that effea contained the strongest dccla-
rations of his faithful services to the crown, in all times palt. The
surrender of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The
law of attainder againfi Huntly was repealed, and he, and his ad-
herents, were reflored to the estates and honours of their ancePiors.
Several of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained ratifications of the grants made in their favour; and as
pasquinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby those, int(o
whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded instantly
to destroy it; and if, through their neglec, it should be allowed to
spread, they were fubjeded to a capital punifliment, in the fame
manner as if they had been the original authors -[.

BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had acquired over Iemar:.ir!.

Mary's mind, appeared in the clcaredf manner, by an ad in favour O! t.e :,1.
of the Protcflant religion, to which, at this time, fle gave lier as- "ll'l".
sent. iMlary's attachment to the Romifli faith was uniform and fu-
pcrfnitious; fhc had never laid aside the dclign, nor lofl the hopcs
of refloring it. She had, of late, come.under new engagements to
that purpose, and in confcqucnce of thcel, had ventured upon
some ficps more public and vigorous than any filc had formerly
taken. But Bothwell was prompted, by powerful motives, to pro-
mote this law. He had been guilty of crimes which rendered him
the olbjce of just and universal detcilation. He was meditating

* Keith, 378. Note (d). 1- Ibid. 280.

3~ o~llC)thers,

BOOK IV. others, which he easily foresaw would heighten the public indig-

j6 r7~. nation againfl him. By this popular law, he might hope to divert,

or to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered himself, that
the obtaining this uncxpected and legal security for the Proteflant
religion, would atone for much guilt, filcnce the clamours of the
clergy, and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his
crimes. lThe ad itlelf was so favourable to the doctrine of the
Reformers, that the Parliament, which met next year, under very
liffercnt leaders, could fuhftitute nothing stronger or more explicit
in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word*'.
To pass such an at, was utterly inconfinient with all the maxims
wvhich Mary followed in every other period of her life; but what
could never be extorted from her by the solicitations of the Assem-
blics of the church, or by the intreaties of her people, the more
powerful influence of Bothwell now obtained t.

Bothwell pre- EVERY flep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with
vails on the
rnovblsco re- all the success which his moit sanguine wvithes could expeCt. He
Colm'ren'ld had entirely gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the King had
as an huffland
to the Queen. excited no public commotion; he had been acquitted by his peers

of any fliare in that crime; and their decision had been, in tome

* Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 31.

+ Buchanan, I-lft. 355, not only omits taking any notice of this law, but alTerts,

that the Quccn, though file had given promircs in favour of the reformed religion,
rcfiufed to permit any adt to pa's in support of it, and even difmiflcd the deputies of
the church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Caldcrwood, vol. iii. 41. both as-
film t!ie ritme thing. It wuUll not have bcen nccftary to obfcrve this innflnce ot
Iutichallians inaccuracy ; but that an author so converf.li in our laws as Spotfwood,
and o: r f iniilufrious as ('alderwod , flioul(d tomm it Luchl an ciror, wlin not only
the (,i?.ilsl fl.t te was extant in the records of Maiy's P.irliamcnt, but even when
the printed adi of Miurray's Pl.iliiameint was bcfoic their eyes, is remarkable. Even
lBuclianan himifelf llas taken notice of this aml, Dctccdio, p. 8.

fort,

fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the regal BooK IV.
authority was so extremely limited, and the power of the nobles so -"
formidable, he durst not venture on the last action, towards lwhich
all his ambitious projects tended, without their approbation. In
order to secure this, he, immediately after the diflboution of Parlia- Apii! 19.
ment, invited all the nobles who were present to an entertainment.
I-aving filled the house with his friends and dependants, and iur-
rounded it with armed men"', he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose content, he told them, he had
already obtained; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which, he iaid, was no iets acceptable to their Sovereign, than
honourable to himself t. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy to
all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with the utmost zeal;
the Popifhl ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted to the Q0een,
and ready to sooth all her passions, instantly declared their satis-
faction with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded the
exorbitant power which Bothwell had acquired, and observed tell
QOeen's growing affection towards him in all her actions, were
willing to make a merit of yielding to a measure, whicl they could
neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were confounded and in-
raged. But, in the end, Botllwell, partly by promilfs and ilattc:y,
partly by terror and iforce, prevailed on all who were prclcint to
filbfcribe a paper, vwhich leaves a deeper flaini than any occlurrnce
in that age, on the honour and clharaccr of the ntion.

l-'His paper c ,ontained the ilran e;fi decla rations o0 13otliv,.l l'; in-

In(cenceC, anld the 11i()ft ample ackl nowldgiri()t ol( his g(,d i,)cl 'iccs
t,) tlilc kingdom . L1' atnv f'tlttii rC : :ciIltiuOln

Ih ld 1i -olc lrii t

. . .i

: !i
ILilnn, on ;Iccoillit ol t1lic kil;':; mIllrd(i , i'(c iibfcl iln('.; plr', iliCd ti t

C oJ. 1, l. :. I ,'\ .l:, vol. i ,l' .l
\"o .1. I. , /L tl/tiid

BooK IV. 'sand by him as one man, and to hazard their lives and fortunes in

c 7. lhis defence. They recommended him to the Queen, as the molt

proe per pron she could chufe for a husband; and if the ihould
condescend to beflow on himn that mark of her regard, they under-
took to promote the marriage, and to join him with all their forces,
in opposing any person who endeavoured to obftrudt it ". Among
the fubfcrilbers of this paper, we find some who were the Queen's
chief confidents, others who were firangers to her counsels, and
obnoxious to her displeasure ; some who faithfully adhered to her,
through all the viciffitudcs of her fortune, and others who became
the principal authors of her fuffcrings ; some paflionately attached
to the Romish fuipcrfitiion, and others zealous advocates for the
Protestant faith -. No common intcreft can be supposed to have
united men of such opposite principles and parties, in recommend-
ing to their Sovereign a elp so injurious to her honour, and so
fatal to her peace. This ilrange coalition was the effect of much
artifice, and must be confidcred as the boldest and most maflerly
stroke of Bothwell's addrcie. It is observable, that amidst all the
altercations and mutual reproaches of the two parties which aroie
in the kingdom, this ulnworthy tlan!L.:ion is seldom mentioned.
Conscious on both fides, that in this particular, theirconducL could
ill bear examination, and would redound litile to their fame, they
always touch upon it unwlvillingly, and tccm desirous that it fliould
remain in darl:-ncte, or be buried in ollivion. But as so many per-
sons, who, both at that timen, and ever ai ;-r, poneflfed the Queen's
favour, fubfclricd this paper, the ffplicioin becomes firong, that
Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor
difilapprovcd by her :':.

T l Is 1;:

Anir. vol. i. i 177. I- Kcitl, 38?..

*\ Of all the liflcrct fyncms tvi h rcinlld to tilis tranlafctioll, that of C.amdcn
fccems to bc the leac aci uial, and tle .vorll -oit fnilcd. lie ltupofes tlat a Bot hwvcll

W l S

THESE suspicions are confirmed by the mofi diret proof. o00oK V.

Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a considerable fiare in her favour. IS6-
He, as well as his brother, kept a secret corrcfpondence in Eng-
land, with those who favoured her pretensions to that Crown.
Tlhe rumour of her intended marriage with Botlnwell having
spread early in that kingdom, excited univefial indignation ; and
Melvil received a letter from thence, which rcprcirf tcd, in the
firongcf terms, what would be the fatal effccts of such an
imprudent ftep. He put this letter into the Queen's hands,
and inforced it with the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded these remonfirances, but communicated the matter to

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his alfociates in the murder
of the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. lHe affirms, at the fame
time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear,
that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret. 404.
But besides the absurdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contri-
bute towards raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of after-
wards depriving him of it; besides the impofibility of accomplishing such a mar-
riage, if it had been either unknown to the Queen, or disagreeable to her;
we may obfcrve that this supposition is dcftroyed by the direc testimony of
the Queen herself, who ascribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices,
u/hi prt-chnajd it bIy giving theml to imd;jiand that we were content therewith.
Anderson, vol. i. 94. It would have been no small advantage to Mary, if ile
could have represented the content of the nobles to have been their own volun-
tary deed. It is still more furlirifing to find Lefly ascribing this paper to Murray and
his faflion. Anderson, vol. i. 26. The hiflhop himself was one of tile persons who
subscribed it, Keith, 383. The King's comniflioners, at the conference held at
Yorkc 1568, prctended that none of thle noblcs, except the ]arl of Huntly, would
filfcii -c this paper lill a warrant from the Qiccu was produced, by which they
were allowed to do bo; this wlallrat they hlad in their cuflody, iad exlhibited,
Aidlcrftn, vol. iv. Fart ii. 5'. 'hlis dinf:rs from Buclilan 's account, who sup-
pdics ihat all the nlrh 1s prcicl t f'sbfc il'bd thel p.llel', on hc 19t11, and that, next
(lay, they obtained tlle anlprobatilon of wlit tley had done, by way of flculity
to tlucnlfele's, 355.

Z v. 13othwell;

-NoOK IV. Pothwell; and Mclvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to

Iiy i flom court, whither he durst not return, till the Earl's rage be-
gan to abate*. At the flme time Elizabeth warned Mary of the
danger and infamy to which she would cxpole herself by such an in-
decent choice; but an advice from her met with still less regard t.

,omth\vl ca - THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary went from
is ; ' Qcteen
h\ tl.r to Edinburglh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her son. Both-

U
19 bitr.

r well had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and every pre-
caution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on the last
and decisive itep, the natural impetuosity of his Ipirit did not susser
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an expedition
against the free-booters on the borders, he assembled his followers;
and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned
Api! i2. suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Queen on her return near

that place, dispersed her slender train without resistance, seized on
her person, and conduced her, together with a few of her cour-

'- Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis likewise remonstrated against

the marriage, and conjured the Queen, on his knees, to lay aflde all thoughts of
such a dishonourable alliance. 156. But it has been observed that Herreis is one of
the nobles who subscribcd the bond, April 19. Keith, 383. 2. That he is one
of the witncfles to the marriage articles between the Qieen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 6i. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386.
Iut this remonfl-rance of Lord Herreis againfi the marriage happened before these,
made by Melvil himfcl, 15-. Melvil's remonfirance mufft have happened fonie time
hIfuie the meeting of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired from
cout; he allowed his rage time to subside, and had again joined the Queen, when file
was seized, April 24. 158. The time which muff have clapsed, by this account of
the matter, was perhaps fuflicicnt to have gained Herreis, from being an oppofce, to
ibcone a; promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have committed some miC-
t.ke with regard to this silt to far as relates to Lord Herrcis. He could not well be
iinflk; rn wvith icg.lrd to what himself did.

i- Andcrf. vol. i. Io6.

tiers,

tiers, as a prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She expresscd neither BooK IV

s - _sj

furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at fulch an outrage co:mmittcd 156. -
on her person, and such an insult offered to her authority,.but seemed
to yield without struggle or regret '. Melvil was, at that time, one
of her attendants; and the officer by whom lie was seizcd informed
him, that nothing was done without the Q.een's own consent --.
If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's name, the scheme
had been communicated to her, and every flep towards it was taken
with her participation and advice :-.

BoTrT the OQeen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her conduct; and while ihe could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, she hoped that her reputation, among
foreigners at leaf, would escape without cenulre, or be exposed to
lets reproach. Bothwell could not help difirufting all the methods
which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any con-
cern in the murder of the King. Something was fill wanting for
his fecuritv, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a pardon
under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the moil heinous
crimes mufl be mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all lefIcr
oflences are deemed to be included under the general claiulc, ll /ll/
other crimeZls w ,/J/tJ/cver v.

Io fire tile pcrl-t of tle Prince, is

high trcafonn; and Bothwcll hoped, that a pardon obtailned for tlin :,
wouldl extend to every trling of which lie had been acculec *::;

13o TiInrELL, having nIow ct thec Qeen's pcrionll ilnto hii hands, r; !i.c..

, onl, .

it would have been ulllbecolililn- cl'hcir ia p(,litician or a Ian ol g;;i1- po,.
lantry to have (Ielayed conitlmmatini ; his f:c.tcnn' . IFor t]lis 1ur-

K* Icith, : 38, . I M1vt. ,' ,~,. (<d. v\Ol. ii. 3.
. P.al. 6. Jac. IY. c.t,7. *:: Ai ,d l. ~ u],

cv. l',i
it: (,i.

}(, 1',,

BooK IV. poCe, he inflantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a sentence of

i.: chdivorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's
/, 2'y. lfifler. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both before

Proteflant and Popish judges; before the former, in the court of
Com(iinllarilcs; and before the latter, in the spiritual court of the
Arclhbfilop of St. Andrew's, whose juriilfi&ion the Queen had
lately restorcd. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or
scandalous. But his authority had greater weight than the jufice
of his caufc; and in both courts, sentence of divorce was pro-
nounced, with the fame indecent and suspicious precipitancy .

WVI-ILE this infamous tranfaaion was carrying on, the Queen

rcfidcd at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the
lMav 3. greatest refpcc. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of

his dependants, conducted her to Edinburgh; but instead of
lodging her in the palace of Holyrood-houfe, he conveyed her to
tlie castle, of which he was governor. The difcontcnt of the
nation rendered this precaution necessary. In an house unfortified,
and of cafy access, the Q.een might have been rescucd without
difficulty out of his hands. In a place of firength, she was fccurcd
from all the attempts of his enemies.

ONE finall difliculty fill remained to be surmountcd. As the

Q1eccn was kept in a fort of captivity by Botlhwell, a marriage
concluded ini that condition might be ilputed to force, and be
,iv 12. h]eld inivalid. In or(tlr to obviaite this, arl-y appeared in tlhe court

*-fs cliii,,,, aid imn l)rcicncc of tl e Chancellohr, tll other judcges, and
fcvcial o)i tlie lnoliliti,-, declared that fie was now at full lilerlty;
1andi tliough Li ot1 cli's violence in ici/.ing lihr pcrlon had, at il il,
(X.cxitd lher ilnd ilationl yet Itis rctcli'ul bcliav iour since tliat tilime

And. I. I 1 .

had

had not only- anppeacrd her rcifntmlnt, but determined lher to raiie oK IiiV.
him to hig'her honours".

"'WHA\T these we r i oon became public. 'The title of Duke of I- n':ini1 to

Orkney was conrerred upon Bothwell; and on the 5i5th of Mliay
his marriage with the Queen, which had so long been the object
of his wilhes, and the motive of his crincs, was tolcmnized.
The ceremony was performed, in public, according to thc rites of
the Protestant Church, by Adam Bothwell Biflhop of Orkney, one
of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and on
the fame clay, was celebrated in private, accoiclindg to the forms
prescribed by the Popillh rcligion-'-. The boldnles with which
Craig, the Iliiniitcr who was commanded to pblliifl the banns,
tesinied againfi: the design ; the finall Lnunber or the nobcls, who

rcre nrefent at the marriage; and the fitllcn anld l'i'l'pci,!l

silence of the people, when the Qc cen appeared in pubhi ; \were
manifell fylnptonis; of the violent and general (difltisfcticl o(t i cr
own fubjecs. lThe refusal of Du Croc tle Irench A mll:itldor to
be present at the nuptial ceremony or ncilcrtainmlcnt dilL-ovcrs ;ihe
feltiin';ctls of hCe allies, with re.gard to this part o-f her condndl';
and although every other aLi'-jn iln Mary's lire r'colld be jufitiiied
by1 tle rulets of prdetlnce, or reconciled to the principles oF vir-
tue, t iis tfatal marriag; e

1 would remain ann inconitcfilble proof of
ler ranlllcfs, if nut of her guilt.

Pr...\R 's frlnf care was to oflcr Come Iapclogy Fo-r her col lii;,i

to the courts of t 'iirance andl: :ngland e

ii. Tc illios to her :i--

,afldlT's fllill relma:in, and arc drawn by a inalfcrly c l-i d:, .

ii ut; l:l-..

der all the artiicial anId fal(eC colourin( l eiC cnlll o)1s, it is caly to
dilcover, otl ol ly tlIit

nmany of tlhe lcps Hlie ha. tn..;
Ilv. l 1 -.

t A dlulcfo,), i. 077. *| iLid. .
1 13. ., -'

'

, ,
,,

BOOK IV. jufiifiable, but-that she herself was conscious that they could not

I . t. be j ufified*.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not bestowed

upon Bothwell. Notwithitanding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rash
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he should sign in token of consent, all the public
writs ifiued in her name [. This was nothing more than mere
form, but together with it, he possessed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; she was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjeds could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her :. The Scottish Monarchs were accustomed to live among
their fubjets as fathers or equals, without distrust, and with little
slate; armed guards flanding at the doors of the royal apartment,
difficulty of access, distance and retirement, were things unknown
and unpopular.

Endeavoursto TH-IESE precautions were necefiary for securing to Bothwell the
become man'-
tm of t] , power, which lie had acquired. But, without being master of

ce llC ' the p1)cfol n of the young Prince, lie cilecemcd all that he had gained

to Ie lprcar-ious and uncertain. The Qucen had colmmitted her
1t)n to tlie care of the .arl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
tlitt n11illcnmalll weC too well kno1wn1 to cxpeC that he would bc
ninlil ft) pt Ut thc 1'i nce islto tllc lan oI' tllc nman, who was Io
v.)i!ci ivi Ikhlc.cdtl (.' I'i-.vlln i 'm-dcrctl his; f;ithEcr. Iotlhwvcll, how-
c(.vcr, l:;!)boui-c t(j ;.: thli' 'il: c e intc o lIi.) ;
IS o wcr, wl itli an anxiety,

* ?',lJ .le l 11, 1. 1'-'(). 1' , ().ol. ..
2. (' :1 ' 1tlLl'; I. 136.

which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address as well BOOK IV.
as authority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar, into a 567
compliance with his demands '. And it is no flight proof both of
the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he preserved a
life of so much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to violent
attempts againif it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, General n-

dignation

upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during wvhich the
three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in daeexcitced.
the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the person fufpeaed
of that odious crime suffered not only to appear publickly in every
place, but admitted into the presence of the Queen, distinguished
by her favour, and entrusted with the chief diretion of her affairs;
fubjeaed to a trial, which was carried on with most shameless par-
tiality, and acquitted by a sentence, which served only to confirm
the suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences
f-ivolous, or indecent; and after all this, instead of meeting with
the ignominy due to his actions, or the punishment merited by his
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a Queen,
the wife of the Prince whom he had assassinated, and the guardian
of those laws which he had been guilty of violating. Such a
quick succession of incidents, so singular, and so detestable, is not
to be found in any other history. They left, in the opinion of
foreigners, a mark of infamy on the character of the nation. The
Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durll scarce
appear any-where in public; and after suffering so many atrocious
deeds to pass with impunity, they were universally reproached as

* Mclv. 16o. Buch. 361.
VOL. I. A a a mnC

BooK IV. men void of courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of the

j,.7 reputation of their Queen, and the honour of their country'.

'I hl n bles THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had been hitherto
c" nil iiie
ag .r lt h-r amuife by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The
and iothlevll.

manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acquired,
his repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's person, to-
gether with rome rath threatenings against him, which he let fall t-,
added to the violence and promptness of their resolutions. A con-
fiderable body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an as-
fociation for the defence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tulli-
bardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy $. Stewart Earl of Athol was remarkable
for an uniform and bigotted attachment to Popery, but his indigna-
tion on account of the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, on this
occasion, all contiderations of religion, and united him with the most
zealous Protestants. Several of the other nobles aced, without
quelion, from a laudable concern for the safety of the Prince, and
the lionour of their country. But the spirit wllich some of thei
difcovcrcd, during the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room to
doubt, that ambition or resentment were the real motives of their
condu ; and that, on many occasions, while they were puriling
cnds jufl and ncceffary, they were a;luatcd by principles and pas-
sions altogether unjullifiable.

'THlE fir(t accounts of this league filled the Qiccen and Bothwell
with great confletcrnation. 'They were no itrangers to the Ilcntilncnts

' Andcrf. vol. i. 128, 13t. Melv. 163. Sce Appendix, N0 XX.

I Mclv. 161. 1' Kcith, 394.

of

,of the nation, with refpea to their conduct; and though their BOOK IV.
marriage had not met with public opposition, they knew that it 56
had not been carried on without the secret disgust and murmur-
ings of all ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with which
this indignation would burst out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the storm, Mary issued a pro- May ..
clamation, requiring her fubjeas to take arms, and to attend her
husband by a day appointed. At the fame time, she publified a
fort of manifesto, in which she laboured to vindicate her govern-
ment from those imputations with which it had been loaded, and
employed the strongest terms to express her concern for the safety
and welfare of the Prince her son. Neither of these produced any
considerable effect. Her proclamation was ill obeyed, and her ma-
nifeflo met with little credit*.

THE confederate Lords carried on their preparations with no The Queen

and Bothwell

less activity, and with much more success. Among a warlike peo- retire to Dun.
ple, men of so much power and popularity found it an easy matter bar.
to raise an army. They were ready to march before the Queen
and Bothwell were in a condition to resist them. The castle of
Edinburgh was the place whither the Queen ought naturally to
have retired, and there her person might have been perfetly safe.
But the confederates had fallen on means to fliake or corrupt the
fidelity of Sir James Balfour the deputy governor, and IBothwell
durst not commit to him such an important trufl. I-Hc conduLctd
the Queen to the caflle of Borthwick, and on the appearance of
Lord Home, with a body of his followers, before that place, lie Julc: 6.
fled with precipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by the (Qec1n,
dli!guited in men's clothes. The confederates advanced towairds

l Klith, 3R7, 395, 39 .
A ; ; :. l'', illblrl ',1 ,

BOOK IV. Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate tlhe

"g"^ inhabitants to defend the town against them. They entered with-

out opposition, and were instantly joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmest support of their cause '.-

IN order to set their own condua in the mo'st favourable light,.

and to rouze the public indignation against Bothwell, the noble3
publiflhed a declaration of the motives which had' induced them to
take arms. All Bothwel's pafl crimes were enumerated, all his
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scots-
man was called upon to join them in avenging the one, and in
preventing the other i-.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar; and as

he had many dependants in that corner, he soon gathered such
flrength, that he ventured to advance towards the confederates,.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness and secrecy of
their enterprize gave their friends at a distance no time to join
them; and as it does not appear that they were supported either
with money, or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they
could not have kept long in a body. But on the other hand, Both-
well durst not rifque a delay . His army followed him with
reluctance in this quarrel, and served him with no cordial affeQion;
so that his only hope of success was in surprising the enemy, or
in flriking the blow before his own troops. had leisure to recollecS
thcmfclvcs, or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of his ac-
tions, which had fp)rcad over the reft of the nation. These mo-
tives determined the Q4cen to march forward, with an inconfida-
ratc and fatal fpccd.

I;Kitl, 398. t1 Andcrfon, vol. i. 128. :t Keith, 401.

ON

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates ad- BOOK IV..

vanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the 1567
fame ground which the English had occupied before the battle of The nottes

ma'cli agaioif

Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there them,.
was no equality in point of discipline. The Queen's army conifiedl JUC 15.
chiefly of a multitude, haffily assembled, without courage or expe-
rience in war. The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their most trufly
dependants, who were no less brave than zealous ..

Du CROC the French Ambassador, who was in the field, la- Anaccommo-

dadion atz

boured, by negociating both with the Quecn and the nobles, to tempted.
put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. He re-
presented to the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards peace,
and her willingness to pardon the offences which they had commit-
ted. Morton replied, with warmth, that they had taken arms not
againfi the Queen, but against the murderer of her husband, and
if he were given up to justice, or banished from her presence, she
fould find them ready to yield the obedience which is due from
fubjets to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not
come to ask pardon for any offence, but to puniil those who had
offended. Such haughty answers convinced the Ambafflaor, that
his mediation would be ineffectual, and that their passions were too
high to allow them to liflen to any pacific propositions, or to think
of retreating after having proceeded tb far -.

Ti'l . Q(een's army was polled to advantage, on a rising ground,

The confederates advanced to tlie attack rcfolutely, but Ilowly, and
vwith the caution which was natural on that unhappy field. -Icr

* Cild, vol. ii. 48, '9. -1 Kcitl, 421.

troops

BoOKIV. troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no indlina-

-'7 . tion to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; she wept she
i567'

threatened, she reproached them with cowardice; but all in vain.
A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager for the en-
counter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute, and some began to
steal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by of-
fering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own innocence in
single combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay contended for the ho-
nour of entering the lifts against him. But this challenge proved
tolbe a mere bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt deprived
Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the Queen, by her authority,
sorbad the combat ;.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Ma-

ry would have been inexcusable, had flhe hazarded a battle. To
have retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which Ihe stood, with part of their cavalry, was utterly
impraaicable. In this situation, she was under the cruel necessity
of putting herself into the hands of those fubjecs who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a
brave and generous man, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. -le, with the consent, and in name of the leaders of the
party, promised that, on condition Ille would difinifs Bothwell
from her presence, and govern the kingdom by the advice of her
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their Sovereign-l-.
r:,ihl.i, DPURING( this parlcy, Bothwell took his last: farewell of the

i oi

: O
I Q. Cecn, and rode off the field with a few followers. This difinal

rcvcrfe happened cxalQly one month after that marriage, which

Cilld. vol. ii. 50. 1 Good. vol. ii. 16., Mclv. 165.

5 lhad

had cost him so many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so BOOK IV.
foul a slain on Mary's memory. .

i567'
As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to Kirkaldy, whvo MAfry Iurren-

ders t, tlhe

conduded her toward the confederate army, the leaders of which r,,):es
received her with much respect; and Morton, in their name, made
ample professions of their future loyalty and obedience *. But she
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmost insolence and
indignity. As ihe marched along, they poured upon her all the
opprobrious names, which are beltowed only on the lowest and most
infamous criminals. Wherever fie turned her eyes, they held up
before her a standard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firetched on the ground, and the young Prince kneeling
before it, and uttering there words, " Judge and revenge my caufi,.
O Lord :!" Mary turned with horror from such a shocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints, she
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from finking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and, in.
spite of many delays, and after looking with the fondlnes and cre-
dulity natural to the unfortunate for some extraordinary relief, flc
.irrivcd there. The ftrccts were covered with multitudes, whom
zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an ulnufual
fccnc. The Queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dull,
and bedewed wvith tears, was exposed as a fpctlacle to her own
fbiljcls, and led to the ProvolJ's houfc. Notwxithlfllanding all bcr
ar}-ulecilts and cntreatics, the famc filalnlrdel was carried before iher,
and tlhe famen inlilts and reproaches repeated. A woimanl, young,
!eautiful, land ill dillrcf:, is natuirally thc ol jca ol coinsaltiotl.

" Good. vol. ii. 165.

':1 'i,

BooK IV. The comparison of their present misery with their former fplen-

-567 - dour, usually softens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. -But the

people beheld the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with in-
sensibility; and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so
great the violence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their
Queen did not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or pro-
cure her that sympathy, which is feldomn denied to unfortunate
Princes s

* Melvil, 166. Buch. 364.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK V.

THE

O F
S C TLAND.

BOOK V.

-I E confederate Lords had proceeded to such extremities, BOOK V.
against their Sovereign, that it now became almost impof- ----
fible either for them to stop ifhort, or to pursue a course Dliberations
less violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them of the nobles

concerning

in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. A finall circum- tle Q2,en.
fiance might abate that indignation with which the multitude were,
at present, animated against the Queen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation of their power.
These considerations inclined some of them to treat the Qeen wvith
great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affecEion for 13othwcll continucd

as violent as ever; fhl obflinately rcfiifed to hearken to any pro-
poral for difrIlving their marriage, andl dItermin-lCd not to ab:ando
a man, for \whole- love sic had already facriliccd so i1much i. I tly)'
1fiould allow1 lhir to recover the 'luprclic power, tlic l1-fi c( :crt; (,i
it would be to recall ollitv.'wcl; and they hlad l 'rc; 1i ) l )otl l Jorin Ii

A CKith, 4.19, .1t6, 4-19. MlIv. 167. Sec Appei ..

N, " N\ I.
VOL. 1. 1)5 b b rcf.'ntmclt,

BOOK V. resentment, from her conduC, and from their own, to exped the

1~567. fevercft efifets of her vengeance. These considerations surmounted

every other motive; and reckoning thermfelves absolved, by Mary's
incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the engagements which
they had come under when she yielded herself a Prisoner, they,

They impri- without regarding the duty which they owed her as their Queen,
S i bhCr ill
Lochlevin. and wVithout consulting the reft of the nobles, carried her next

evening under a strong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and signed
a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a
prisoner. This castle is situated in a finall ifand, in the middle of a
lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mother. In this
place, under ftridL custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeded
to the insults of a haughty woman, who boasted daily of being
the lawful wife of James V. Mary suffered all the rigour and
miseries of captivity .

IMMEDI ATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to strengthen their party; they entered into
iew bonds of aflbciation; they asSumed the title of Lords of the
Secret Council, and without any other right, arrogated to themselves
the whole regal authority. One of their first ads of power was
to fcarcl the city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned in
the murder of the King. This fhlew of zeal gained reputation to
tlhemfelvcs, and threw an ol)liqule rcflcction on the OQecn for her
remiflihcs. Several fuifpcc(ed persons were fcizcd. Captain Black-
adder and three others were condemned and executed. IBut no dilf
covcry of importance was made. If we believe tfome lliforians,
they were convitted lby fullicicnt evidence. If we give credit to
others, their fentcnce was unjttnf, and they denied, willt their last
'bicath, any knowledge of the crime, for which they fuifncrcd '-.

'l Kcithl, 403. Note (b). 1I CalJ. vol. ii. 53. Clawr. Mcl. 35.

.AQ ,'

AN unexpected accident, however, put into the hands of Miary's Boorc V.

enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt. Both- i$7
well having left, in the castle of Edinburgh, a caflket, containing fe-
veral sonnets and letterswritten with the Queen's owtn hand; he now
sent one of his confidents to bring to him this precious dcpofite.
But as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the canflet
seized by Morton T. The contents of it were always produced by
the party, as the most ample juffification of their own condu&L,
and the most unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their
Sovereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes 'I

BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary fuc- sonm of tic

,obZes tihv:ur

cess, were frill far from being perfectly at ease. That bo finall a t,, Qen.u.
part of the nobles fhlould pretend to dispose of the person of their
Sovereign, or to afiume the authority which belonged to her, with-
out the concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that body to
be unprecedented and presumptuous. Several of there were now
afTembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they
Ihould hold, in this difficult conjunture. The confederates made
some attempts towards a coalition with them, but without effec-.
They employed the mediation of the Assembly of the Church,
to draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but with no
better fifccefs. That party, however, though its numbers were
formidable, and the

i power of its leaders great, soon loft reputa-

tion by the want of unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no cliecme was concerted
for obflric'liln thle progress of the confederlates ::.

TI ,R i: appeared foine pirofpcl, of danger from another quartcr. vI;:,;!,. h ii..

This great revaolution in Scotland had been carried on \vi ii>i't ;:'I 1. ,''
aid from l.ll.bl)etli, and cvcn without iher kn o\lc(lgc5
. ,1A

' Arnld'rfril, vol. ii 92. Good. (ol 1. (o.
Sec l)ifl'rtatioln at the ca of lie Alppendix. : licit, c-. I. , I ;

1I 1) b 2

BOOK V. though lhe was far from being displeased to fee the affairs of that

15.3' kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom she hated, reduced to dif-

trefs; she neither wished that it flould be in the power of the one
faction entirely to suppress the other, nor could flie view the steps
taken by the confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding
the popular maxims by which she governedl her own fubjeds, her
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their Sovereign,
which they had no right to controul, and had offered violence to
her person, which it was their duty to efreem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other fubjeds, and Mary's cause be-
came the common cause of Princes :. If ever Elizabeth was in-
fluenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of
her heart, rather than by the considerations of interest, it was on
June 30. this occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton into Scotland,

with powers to negociate both with the Queen, and with the con-
federates. In his inftruLcions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation -. And the. choice
of an Amnbaflador so devoted to the interest of the Scottish Qu2een,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's
friendfllip, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail to Mary.
The confederates foresaw what would be the efifets of these good
offices; and that the Queen, elated by the profpec' of protection,
would rejct with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throgmor-
ton acccs to their prisoner; and what propositions lie made to them,
on her behalf, they either rcfufed, or eluded :l:.
Sc'Iemcrs Cr 1\1 ,:AN wvlile they deliberated with the utmofl anxiety, con-

ccrnin"l tlhe Icttlcment of the nation, and the future (lifpofal ot
thie (Qccn's pcrtll. Elizabeth, oblcrving tllat 'Throgmorton made

r~ .C il.| ,

, 112 , *|1. Id.5 l.
. . 1:t Id. ,) 7, 427.

nIo

no progress in his negociations with them, and that theywould lifen BOOK V.
to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party 1567
of the nobles who were affemnbled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and prornifed to as-
sift them in such an attempt, to the utmost of her power''. But
they discovered no greater union or vigour than formerly, and be-
having like men who had given up all concern. either for their
Queen or their country, tamely allowed an.inconfiderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with refped to numbers, or to
power, to fettle the government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
the Queen's person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, and
various opinions arose with regard to each .of these. Some seemed
desirous of adhering to the plan on which the confederacy was at
firtf formed; and after punishing the murderers of the King, and
dissolving the marriage with.Bothwell; after providing for the faec-
ty of the young Prince, and the security of the Proteflant religion;
they proposed to re-eltablilh the Queen in the pofleflion of her
legal authority. The success with which their arms had been ac-
companied, inspired others with bolder and more dcfperate thoughts,
and nothing less would satisfy them than the trial, the condemnation
and punifliment of the Queen herself, as the principal conspirator
againri the life of her husband and the safety of her son -: the
former was Maitland's fytcem, and breathed too much of a pacific
and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wilhes of the
party; the latter was recommended by the clergy, and warmly
adopted bly many laics; but the nobles durit not, or would not
venture on Liich an unprcccdented and audacious deed ::.

?eco Appendix, N XXII. IKeith, 420, 421, 422, 582.

-T The intcntion of puttinlg tlc QIcen to (death seems to have .Icn c:rric:l ,on

by) lole of her fubjcsts: at this timc we often fi)dl liz !bcth o:ailing Ihlit ,\a.ry
oW.edl ier life to her interposition. )Diec's Compl. Aib. 14, cc. lSc Applcnllix,
N < \'VIII.

BO1T! t

BOOK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so moderate

as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be persuaded

1567.

Thel ob!ige or forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
tile (.ieeii to

lil,,itlte claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be appointed to
go,\ illmcnt. govern the kingdom during his minority, with the name and autho-

rity of Regent. With regard to the Queen's own person, nothing
*xas determined. It fecms to have been the intention of the con-
federates, to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to
intimidate herself, and to overawe her partizans, they flill reserved
to thcmfclvcs the power of proceeding to more violent c:tremes.

IT was obvious to soresec difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accustomed
to comrmand. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which she was
born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own subje&s, to con-
Tent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons whom she
conlidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of wlich fie herself was stripped, were points hard to
be gained. These, however, the confederates attempted, and they
did not want means to insure success. Maryhad endured, for several
weeks, all the hardships and terror of a prison; no profpecd of liberty
;appeared; none of her fubljeLs had either taken arms, or so much
.'s llicitcd her reli es ; no person in whom fle could confide was
admitted into her pretence; even the Amlbafltdors of the French
King and OCeenc of England ercre refued acceefs to her. In this
Iolitary hlatc, without a counlcllor or a friicnd, under the prcfliire
of dillrefs, and the npprchcnfionl of danger, it was natural for a
womaln to hearken alniolt to any overtures. The confederates took

;' KCi t, 4t75.
8 .tIadvlat.nIn!,

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They employed Lord BooK V.
Lindsay, the fiercelt zealot in the party, to communicate their -

15G7.

scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her subscription to those papers,
which were necessary for rendering it effectual. He executed his
commission with harshness and brutality. Certain death was be-
fore Mvary's eyes, if (he refuifed to comply with his demands. At
the fame time, she was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name
of Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a resignation
extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked so soon as she recovered liberty. Throg-
morton, by a note which he found means to convey to her, fug-
gested the fame thing*. Deference to their opinion, as well as
concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing which
was required, and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented
to her. By one of these, file resigned the Crown, renounced all
ilare in the government of the kingdom, and consented to the
coronation of the young King. By another, she appointed the !u':
Earl of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers
and privileges of that high office. By a third, flhe fuHbritnutcd
some other nobleman in Murray's place, if he should refiife the
honour which was designed for him. IMarn, when le fe ibcrilbcd
these deeds, was bathed in tears; and while Ihe gave away, as it
wcre, with her own hands, the fccptrc whiclh ihe !hd Iwav-cd i
long, ihe felt a pang of grief and inLlignation, one of tie fcv'crel,
perhaps, which can toucl tlle hulman hcart .'l

Tr IE confederates endeavoured to give thlic

re nto ll ,i

'ci'eight and validity in their power, b)y procecdinl' withllout (dJa. i to
. .' '

F Kcili, .125. Notc (b). M ellc,. 16c), I I 1d. 3. Cr.a 'f. .Lc;1. 38.

BOOK V. crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

I" on the 2gth of July, with much solemnity, in presence of all the

nobles of the party,.a considerable number of lesser Barons, and a
great assembly of the people. From that time, all public writs were
ifued, and the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever cffefed with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither pofleffed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, imprisoned, and de-
throned their Queen, and without shedding a single drop of blood,
let her son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

Rcofonings of DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
both parties.

bth p . the nation were turned on them, with astonishment; and various

and contradi&tory opinions were formed, concerning the extraordi-
nary fleps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of government, which pre-

vails in Scotland, said the favourers of the Queen, and notwith-
Rianding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the prince possesses
confiderablc powcr, and his person is treated with great veneration.
No encroachment fliould be made on the former, and no injury of-
sered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness of
the nation cannot be secured ly any other means. Such cafes fcl-
dlom cxill, and it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at
leacfl to aI majority of the focicty, to judge of their exifcncc. lBy
wlhat ation could it be pretended, that Mary had invaded the rights

? Kcithl, 137.

)1

or property ofher fubjeds, or what fcheme.had she formned against Boo K V.
the liberty and constitution of the, kingdom ? Were fears,. and fLuf- ~7

.o56,7.

picions, and furmifes,,.enough to juifify the imprisoning, and the
depofing.a. Qeen, to whom the Crown descended from so long
a race of Monarchs ? The principal author of whatever, was
reckoned culpable in her conduc:, was now driven from her
pretence. The murderers of the King might have been brought
to condign punishment, the safety of the Prince havebeen secured,
and the Protestant religion have been established, without wrest-
ing the sceptre. out of her hands, or condemning her to perpe-
tual imprisonment. -Whatever right a free Parliament might
have .had.to proceed. to such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever
name. its determinations .might.,have merited, a sentence of this
nature, pafred by a few nobles, without acknowledging or con-
fulting the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion against
the government,. and. a. conspiracy against the.perfon of their So-
vereign.

THE .partizans of the confederates reasoned, very differently. 'Tis

evident, said they, That Mary either previously gave consent to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid adion.
1Her attachment to Bothwell,. the power and honours with which
ihe loaded him, the manner in which fle suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with which flie married a man,
itained with so many crimes, raise firong tifpicions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have fuffcred the fuprece
power to continue in the hands of an amlbitious man, capable of
the most atrocious and deleierate acLions, would have been dlifgracc-
fil to the nation, diflonourablc to the Queen, and dangerous to
the Prince. Recourfc was, thrcforie, had to arms. The QCcii

VOL. I. C c c had

BOOK V. had been compellcd to abandon a husband, so unworthy of herself.
k 1G - But her affection toward him still continuing unabated, her in-

1567.

dignation against the authors of this separation being visible, and
often expressed in the strongest terms ; they, by restoring her to her
ancicnt authority, would have armed her with power to defiroy
themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded
her an opportunity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, therefore, re-
maincd, but by one bold aCtion to deliver themselves and their coun-
try from all future fears. The expedient they had chosen was no
less refpeQful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public safety.
While one Prince was set aside as incapable of governing, the
Crown was placed on his head, who was the undoubted reprefen-
tative of their ancient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on comparing the ar-

guments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we
may entertain concerning the justice or necessity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied that their conduct,
so far as regarded themselves, was extremely prudent. Other expe-
dients less rigorous towards Mary might have been found for set-
ling the nation; but, after the injuries they. had already offered the
Q2cen, there was none so effectual for securing their own safety, or
pcrpetuating their own power,

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of the confederates

appeared not only wife, but juit. The King's acccffion to the
throne was cvcry-where proclaimed, and his authority fuibmitted
lo without opposition. And though fcvcral of the nobles were fill
:alliml)lcd at Hamilton, and seemed to le entering into some com-
l)ination ag-aiinfl his government, an aflociation for fulpporting it was

formed,

formed, and signed by so many persons of power and influence BOOK V.
throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempts 1567.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this time, added lMurrav

afirnumes the

strength to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form. govalunmeont.
Soon after the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired into
France, upon what pretence historians do not mention. During
his residence there, he had held a close correspondence with the
chiefs of the confederacy, and, at their desire, he now returned.
He seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of Regent. This
hesitation cannot be ascribed to the scruples either of diffidence, or
of duty. Murray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor am-
bition to aspire to this high dignity. He had received the first
accounts of his promotion with the utmost satisfaction; but by
appearing to continue for some days in fufpence, he gained time
to view with attention the ground on which he was to adt; to
balance the strength and resources of the two contending factions,
and to examine whether the foundation on which his future fame
and success must reft, were found and firm.

BEFORE he delared his final resolution, he waited on Mary at

Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter, and a Queen, in a prison, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the cir-
cumftanccs, which discover the great want of delicacy and refine-
ment in that age. Mlurray, who was naturally rough and uncoulltly
in his manner l-, cxpoRtulatcd lb warmly with the QLtccn conccrn-
ing her past conducd, and charged her faults so home upon lier,
that Mary, who had flattered hlcrelf with more gentle and bro-

* Anders. vol. ii. 231. -I Keith, 96.

C c c tlherly

BooK V. therly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned hier-

fe self entirely to despair". This interview,' from which Murray'
1567.

could reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a
spirit so severe and urirelenting, may be reckoned among the most
bitter circumflances in Mary's life, and certainly one of the rmof
unjuflifiable in his condut.

SooN after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted the office

August 22. of Regent, and began to act in that character without opposition.
Fate of Both- AM IDST so niany great and unexpeded events, the fate of Both-

well well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As-

ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for some time among
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding it impof-
fible for him to inake head, in that couintry, against his enemies, or
even to secure himself from their pirfuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and when he, overawed by the
confederates, vas obliged to abandon him, he retired to the Oik-
ney iflcs. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
fcrcd at once the miseries of infamy, ;and of want. His indigence
torced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few finall flips, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every veflel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
fubli)flcnce for himself and his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and
Murray of Tullibardin were font out against him by the corifedc-
rates; ntrd furprifiig him while he rode at anchor, scattered his
Finall fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a single
ihip towards Norway. On that coast he fell in with a vcffel richly
laden, and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with

* Kcith, 445, 446.

armed

armed: boats: to its assistance, and'after a desperate fight, Bothwell BOOK V.
and all his crew were taken prisoners. His name and quality were 5
both unknown, and he was. treated.at firft.with all the indignity
and rigour,, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real
charater was soon. diScovered; and though it saved him rom the
infamous death towhich his. associates were condemned, it could,
neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his
imprisonment. He languished ten years in this unhappy condi-
tion; melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at lafl.
he ended his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unassisted by
frangers *. Few men ever accomplishcd their ambitious projets
by worse means, or. reaped from them less fatisfadion. The early,
part of his life was restless and enterprising, full of danger and of.
vicissitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained
by so many crimes, was extremely short; imbittered by much.
anxiety, and disquieted by many fears. In his latter years, he'
suffered the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretched are
fiubjec,, and from which persons who have moved in so high. a.
iphere are commonly exempted.

THE good effecs of Murray's acceflion to the regency were Succersof lle

Regent's ad-

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre- miniltration.
folutC, and disunited; and.no sooner was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man tb ;crmarkable both for his abili-
ties anlt popularity, than hlie nobles o'- whom it was cominofed loft
all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat fcparatcly with the
Regent. So many of therm were brought to acknowledgc tche King's
authority, that scarce any appearnce of opposition to the cltabllifhcd .
government was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered to the

Melv. i68.

7 Qcuen

Boo-K V. Queen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth's difpofi-

I-L-J tion at that time, that she would have afforded them such assist-:

ance as mig-ht have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.
But there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
that flie was discouraged from espousing their cause, and the Re-
gent, taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to submit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to themselves,
or to the Q.een .

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of fRrength in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy
governor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms
of great advantage to himself. The governor of Dunbar, who dif-
covered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate; some other
finall forts surrendered without refitance.

A Parliament. THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent to
ecem. I5. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the confederates, except
the approbation of this supreme court; and after the success which
had attended all their measures there could be little doubt of ob-
taining it. The numbers that resorted to an Assembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of so much importance, were great.
The meeting was opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its ads
pasted with much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who
had difcovcred the warmers attachment to the QOeen were prcfent:
but they had made their peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly,
,and H-erreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that their bcha-

Kcrth, 447, 450, 463.

Viollur

viour towards the King had been undutiful and criminal .. Their BOOK V.
compliance, in this manner, with the measures of the Regent's 1567
.party, was either the condition on which they were admitted into
favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of their reconcile-
ment.

TIE Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de- Confirms the

mand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the security o f the con-,
that form of government which they had established in the king- drt'es.
dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and declared
to be valid. The King's authority, and. Murray's election, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and she was declared to be accessory to the murder of the King' -.
At the fame time, all the ats of Parliament. 560, in favour of the
Protestant religion, were publickly ratified; new statutes to the fame
purpose were enacted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was negleced.

IT is obfcrvable, however, that the fame parsimonious spirit pre-

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of I56o. The Protcflant clergy,
notwithlflanding many clifcouragcrnents, and their extreme poverty,
had, for fcven years, performed all religious ofliccs in the king-
dom. The expcdients fallen upon for their iubfiitance had hi-
tlerto proved ineficclual, or were intended to be so. But, nor-
wvitllandling, thlCir klnonll indigence, anl the warm rcmoniirances
of the allembly of the church, which met this year, the Parliament

Andcrf. vol. iv. 153. Sec Appced. No XXIII.
-1 Good. vol. ii. 66. Andct6. ic . l ii. 206.

did

3BOK V. 'drfd' nothing tote' for their relief, ithan prescribe some new regum
i567. lations- concer'ning the payment of 'the thirds of benefices,' which

did 'not 'produce any considerable change in the situation 'of the
'clergy.

1568. A FEW days after the diflblution of Parliament, four of Both-
IaLuary3 , '-ell's 'dependants were convited of-being guilty of the King's

murder, and suffered death as traitors. Their confessions brought
to light many circumitanices relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but- they were persons of. a low rank,
and seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the con-
ipiracy *

NOTWITHSTANDING" the universal submission to the Regent's

authority, there lill abounded in-the kingdom many secret murmurs
and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelheraulti who, as first
Prince of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to be
Regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began to move
many to commiserate her cafe. All who-leaned to the ancient opi-
nions in religion dreaded the effeCts of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'
his abilities were great, did not possess the talents requisite for sooth-
ing the rage or removing the jcaloufiesof the different facions. By
insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened many,
who had opposed him; but he was a firanger to these gentle arts.
His virtues were revere; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the regency, diflant and haughty.
This behaviour offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
Qccln's faction, which had been so cafily difpcrfcd, began again to

* Andcrr. vol. ii. 165.

gathls,

gether, and to unite, and was secretly favoured by rome who had BOOK V.
hitherto zealously concurred with the confederates -. -.

' z68.
SUCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards the Mary escapes

from Loch-

Queen, when she recovered her liberty, in a manner no less fur- levin.
prizing to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen. As
her manners were naturally affable and insinuating, she treated him
with the molt flattering diftinaion; she even allowed him to en-
tertain the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall tome expreflions,
as if ihe would chufe him for her husband t. At his age, and in
such circumstances, it was impossible to refirl such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found means
to steal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind her,
and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipita-
tion to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching the
shore, was received with the utmolt joy, by Douglas, Lord Scaton,
and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a fIzv attendants, waited for
her. She inflantly inounted on horfelack, and rode full speed
towards Nicldric, Lord Scaton's feat in \cfl--Lothian. She arrived
there that night, without being purfuicd, or interrupted. After
halting three hours, she iet out for IIamilton ; and travelling at
the iauic pace, Ihe reached it next morning.

* Mclv. 179. *1 Kiith, 469.
VOL. 1. D d cd ON

BOOK V. ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, whom, in their

i768. Jprefent disposition, a much smaller accident would have rouzed,
x568.

Arrives at ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great
Hamilton,
and raises a and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-

inumerous
army. lowers, as formed an army of above 6o00 strong. In their pretence,

she declared that the resignation of the Crown, and other deeds
t, ihe had signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her

by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and on that,
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief men
of her party pronounced all these tranfadions void and illegal. At
May 8. the fame time, an association was formed for the defence of her per-

son and authority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bishops, eigh-
teen Lords, and many gentlemen of diftinaion*. Among them,
we find several who had been present in the last Parliament, and
who had signed the counter-aflociation in defence of the King's
government; but such sudden changes were then so common, as
to be no matter of reproach.

Conflernation AT the time when the Queen made her efcepe, the Regent was
of the Re-
gent's adhe- at Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An event so contrary to
aents. their expectations, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock

to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute;
others began to carry on private negociations with the Queen; and
ibmc openly revolted to her fide. In so difficult a junQure, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depended on his choice,
the Regent's most faithful aflociates were divided in opinion. Some
adviscd him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already lrong, and only eight miles diflant; the adjacent
counitry was full of the friends and dependants of the house of Ha-

* Kcith, 475.

miltonl,

milton, and other Lords of the Queen's fation; Glasgow was a BooK V.
large and unfortified town; his own train consisted of no greater ig58g
number than was usual in times of peace; all these reasons pleaded
for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were urged of no
inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well affe:-
ed to the cause; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in a few days;
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as upon num-
bers; reputation is gained, or lofl, by the first ftep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended with all the igno-
miny of a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire ris prudent

condudc.

his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this,
the superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both
to chufe with wisdom, and to ad with vigour. He declared against
retreating, and fixed his head-quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to hearken to some
overtures, which she made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost industry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He was soon in
a condition to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy
in number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the ncgociation,
and determined to hazard a battle .

AT the faime time, the Qccn's generals had commanded her M:y 13,

army to move. Their intention was, to conduct her to l)umI)ar-
ton cafilc, a place of great flrcngth, lwhich the Regent hadt not
been able to wrefl out of the hands of Lord Fleminig thel governor;

1 Buchlanan, 369.
D (1 d but

BooK V. but if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march, they
' R---' resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no

resolution could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces was
assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans were soon
expected; her sufferings had removed, or diminished the preju-
dices of many among her fubjeCs; the address with which she
surmounted the dangers that obftruaed her escape, dazzled and
interested the people; the sudden confluence of so many nobles
added lustre to her cause; the might assuredly depend on the
friendship and countenance of France; she had reason to expeCt
the protection of England; her enemies could not possibly look
for support from that quarter. She had much to hope from pur-
suing flow and cautious measures; they had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her pas-
iions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition from the
depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
(he never doubted of success. Her army, which was almost double
to the enemy in number, consisted chiefly of the Hamiltons, and
their dependants. Of these the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's had
the chief direCtion, and hoped, by a victory, not only to crush
MI/urray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get the person of
the Qcn into his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one
of the Duke's sons, or at least to commit the chief direcion of
licr affairs to himfclf. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen,
to himni:lf, and to his family '.
p Itilc n MARY'S imprldcn c, in rcfolving to fight, was not greater

L , th,,!ini. tll he ill condut: of l.cr generals in the battle. Between the

'* Andcrfon, vol. iv. 32. Mclvil, 181.

two

two armies, and on the road towards Dumbarton, there was an BooK V.
eminence called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the precau- 1
tion to seize, and poired his troops in a friall village, and among
some gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
tion he waited the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the van-guard, ran so eagerly to the
attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. '1 he encounter of the fpearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposcd, on
the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, at-
tacked on the other by the Regcnt's most choice troops, and not
fipported by the reft of the Queen's army, they were soon ob- 'rhe Queen's

army de-

]iged to give ground, and the rout immediately became universal. feated.
Few victories, in a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
been purfilud with less violence, or attended with less bloodshed.
Three hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were
killed. The Regent and his principal officers rode about, beseech-
ing the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of pri-
foners was great, and among them many persons of diflinction.
The Regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks
to God for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodlcfs victory - .

DURING the engagiement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great dif- I-Hr n;ght.

tancc, and bhecld all that paflcd in the field, with such emotions
of mind as are not cafily dccliribcd. When hle saw the army, which
was her lait hope, thrown into irretrievable conflfion, hcr ifirit,
which all her pas misfortunes had not been able entirely to fubduc,

* Kcitlh, 477.

isll 1i

BooK V. funk altogether. In the utmost consternation, ihe began her flight,

568. and so lively were her impressions of fear, that she never closed her

eyes till she reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty
Scottish miles from the place of battle *.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid,

than singular. In the short space of eleven days, she had been a
prisoner at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies; she had seen
a powerful army under her command, and a numerous train of
nobles at her devotion; and now flhe was obliged to fly, in the ut-
most danger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a
corner of her kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that
retreat; her fears impelled her to an ation, the most unadvised,
as well as the most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her
retiring into England, a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to
have appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Resolves on BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual difiruft and jealou-
retiring into

Lnlad. sics had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their subsequent

tranfa&ions had contributed to exasperate and inflame these pas-
sions. She had endeavoured, by secret ncgociations and intrigues,
to difnurb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to ad-
vance her own pretensions to the English Crown. Elizabeth, who
poffcflied greater power, and ad lccd with lecs refcrvc, had openly sup-
ported Mary's rebellious filujects, and fomented all the difienfions
and troubles in which her reign hlad been involved. The max-
ims of policy flill authorized that (Quccn to purfuc the fatme courfc;
as by keeping Scotlalnd in con ffifon, she cfl'ccaually fccuredl the peace
of her own kingdom. The Rcgent, after his victory, had marched

* Kcitll, 481.

to

to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the Queen had taken, BOOK V.
it was several days before he thought of pursuing her *. She might 15
have been concealed in that retired corner, among fubjeds devoted
to her interest, till her party, which was dispersed, rather than
broken, by the late defeat, ihould gather such strength, that she
could again appear with safety at their head. There was not any
danger, which the ought not to have run, rather than throw her-
self into the hands of an enemy, from whom she had already
suffered so many injuries, and who was prompted both by incli-
nation, and by interelt, to renew them.

BuT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Elizabeth

had declared against the proceedings of her fubjeats, and solicited
for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance of
sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England, and had
promised to meet her in person, and to give her such a reception
as was due to a Queen, and an ally t. Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs, while she had power
in her hands, she was, at present, the object, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be both un-
generous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were frefl in
Mary's memory, and if Ihe should fall a second time into the hands
of her fubjeas, there was no injury to which the prcfumption of
success might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt escaping
into France, was dangerous; and, in her situation, almolt impof-
fiblc; nor could hfe bear the thoughts of appearing as an exile,
and a fugitive, in that kingdom, where fhc had once enjoyed all the
splendor of a (Q.ccn. England remained her only afylim;in; and, in
spite of the intreatics of Lord -Icrreis, Fleming, and her other

a Crawf. Meicm. .59. -1 Cand. 489. Andcrf. vol. iv. 99. 120. Mlurdir,, 369.

3 attcndants ,

BOOK V. attendants, who conjured her, even on their knees, not to con-

I'S8' fide in Elizabeth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was

invincible, and the resolved to fly thither. Herreis, by her com-

Her reception mand, wrote to Lowther the deputy-governor of Carlisle, to know
at Care what reception he would give her; and, before his answer could

return, her fear and impatience were so great, that she got into a
May x6. fifher-boat, and with about twenty attendants, landed at Wirk-

ington in Cumberland, and thence the was conducted with many
marks of refpe&t to Carlisle .

Elizabeth de- So soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote a long letter to
liberates con-
cerning the the Queen, representing, in the ftrongelt terms, the injuries which
_manner of
treating her. he had fiffered from her own fubjeas, and imploring that pity

and assistance which her present situation demandedt. An event
so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in con-
sequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influ-
enced by considerations ofjuftice or generosity alone, they would not
have found them long or intricate. A Queen, vanquiihed by her
own fubiijes, and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown herself into
the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally, from whom flie had
received repeated aflTirances of fricndllip and prote&ion. There
circumflances entitled her to rcfpect and to compaltion, and re-
quired that Ihe should either be reltored to her own kingdom, or
at leafl be left at full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter.
But witli Elizabeth and her counsellors, the queilion was not,
what was mo1s jufi or generous, but what was moll beneficial to
herself, and to ti.e Englilh nation. Thrcc different resolutions might

CKeith, 4.83. Anderson, vol. iv. 2. t Id. 29.

have

have been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-inllate Boolc V.
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire into France, ' --'
was another; to detain her in England, was a third. Each of
these drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, which
were examined, as appears from papers fill extant ", with that mi-
nute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Minifers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To reflore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached to the English
interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resentment.
And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom strong or lafling, regard
to her own interest might soon efface the memory of her obliga-
tions to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renewv the alliance of the
Scottish nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to the
English Crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circumncribe the
Scottish Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these dan-
gers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a single vicory might give them
the superiority, which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

TI-E dangers arising fiom suffering M/ary to retire into France,

were no leis obvious. The French King could not refuse his as-
fiflance towards rcftoring lis filcer and ally to her throne. Eliza-
bcth would, once more, fee a forcign army in the illand, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to entcrl her kingdomn; and if the corn-

* Andcf. vol. iv. 31, 99, 102.
VOL. I. 1' c c( mOtions

BoerA V. motions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the Princes
k5si$~(^R of Lorrain might resume their ambitious projects, and the united
15683.

forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where it is
weakest and most defenceless.

Resolves to NOT HING therefore remained but to detainher in England; and
detain her in
)ngland. to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in a

priobn. The former was a dangerous experiment.. Her court would
become a place of resort to all the Roman Catholics, to the difaffec--
ed, and to the, lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth affeEed to
represents Mary's pretensions to-the English Crown as altogether ex-
travagant and ill-founded, she was not ignorant that they did not
appear in that light to the nation, and that many thought them
preferable even to her own title. If the activity of her emissaries
had gained' her so many abettors, her own personal influence was
much more to be dreaded; her-beauty, her address, her sufferings;
by the admiration and' pity which they would excite, could not
'faiiof making many converts to her party y.

'TwAS indeed to be apprelended, that the treating Mary as a

prisoner would excite universal indignation against Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom fie had-promifed( her protection, file would forfeit the
praise of justice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her ad-
miniflration. But the Englifl Monarchs were often (f solicitous to
ficurc their kingdom againfl the Scots, as to be little scrupulous
abotut the means which they employed for that purpose. Henry IV.
had icizcd the heir of the Crown or' Scotland, who was forced, by

' Andlerf. vol. iv. 56, 6o,

- ' tie

, r *
a, Y

the violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his BOOK V.
kingdom; and in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without I56
regarding his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father,
detained him a prisoner for many years. This ation, though de-
terred by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue
was not more proof than Henry's had been, againfl the temptations
of interest; and the possession of a present advantage was preferred
to the profpe&d of future fame. The fatisra&ion which she felt in
mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplishments she envied,
had, perhaps, no less influence than political considerations, in
bringing her to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to
screen herself from the eenfure which this condut merited, and to
make her treatment of the Scottilh Queen look like the effecQ of ne-
ceffity, rather than of choice, she determined to put on the appear-
ance of concern for her interest, and of deep sympathy with her
sufferings.

WVITH this view, she instantly dispatched Lord Scroop warden May zo,

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions ofkind-
neCs and condolence. But, at thc fame time, they had private in-
firuCions to watch all her motions, and to take care that fhc hould
not cfcapc into her own kingdom '. On their arrival, Mary de- pi,, ,',,
manlcd a personal intcrview with tlhe Qccin, tihat fie might lay ,''l2',1l.1;:
before her the injurics which she liad iuffcrcd, and receive fr,!In r c;,.I' sl'.
her those friendlly olticcs which fle hlad hbccn ncouraged to cxpcc.
They anfwcrccd, tlht it was with rcl uancc this honour was at
preclclt denied her; that whlile flic lay under the iliplluttiotll of a
crnic so horrid, as the murder of llcr huffand, thcir minlrcls, to

A i Jdcrf. vol. iv. 3(, 7,
7 ) .

iL c c c 2 wl )ti

PoOK V. whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a slain

upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence; but as loon
as she had cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised her a
reception suitable to her dignity, and aid proportioned to' her dif-
trcai '.

Shec oNrs to NOT-1'IN G could be more frivolous than this pretence. It was
vindicate her
cond ct. the occasion, however, of leading the Queen of Scots into the

snare, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers wisted to intangle her.
Mary expressed the utmost furprize at this unexpected manner of
evading her request; but as ihe could not believe so many profef-
sions of friendlhip to be void of sincerity, ihe frankly offered to
submit her cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to
produce such proofs of her own innocence, and of the falsehood of
the accusations brought against her, as liould fully remove the

F.l: zacth scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the Engliih Queen. This was
t:ire of' this the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to bring the matter.
offer. By this appeal of the Scottish Queen, flie became the umpire be-

tween her and her filbjecs, and had it entirely in her own power
to protrad the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and involve
it in endless difliculties. In the mean time, flie was furnified with
a plausible pretence for keeping her at a diflance from court, and
for rcfufing to contribute towards replacing her on her throne.
As Mary's coiidut li had been extremely incautious, and the pre-
ilmptions of her guilt were many and strong, it was poflible her
ful)ijcc:s mighlt make good their charge againlfl her; and if this
flould be the rcfult of the inquiry, fhic would, thcnccibrth, cease
to be tli olejct: of regard, or of comlpanion, and the treating her
with coldnies and ncgle& wvould merit little ccnfure. In a matter

" Antlcrf. vol. iv. 8, 55.

lB

so dark and mysterious, there was no probabiiity that Mary could BOOK V.
bring proofs of her innocence, so incontefled, as to render the con- 568.
dud of the Englilh Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her
impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's partiality,
or her discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such cabals,
as would justify the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages, which would

arise from an inquiry into the condua of the Scottish Queen, car-
ried on under her direction. There was some danger, however, that
Mary might discover her fccret intentions too soon, and by reced-
ing from the offer which she had made, endeavour to disappoint
them. But even in that event, she determined not to drop the-in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expedients for carrying
it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accef-
fory to the murder of her son, and thirnling for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza-
beth's jufice, and solicitcd her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her husband's, to bring the Scottifl Queen to a trial for that
crime ". The parents of the unhappy Prince had a jufc right to
prefer this accusation ; nor could filc, who was their near-cf kinf-
woman, be condemned for liflcning to so equitable a demand. Be-
fidcs, as the Scottish nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretcnded to be able to confirm their charge by fiiiEciCnt proof;
it would be no dinlicult mnattcr to prevail on them, to petition the
QIccn of EIngland to t:ake cognizance of their procccdings aga;lil
their Sovereign ; and it was the opinion of the English counci], th:,t
it would be rcalolnable to comply w ith the rcqtiei -|'. At the ilme

C* Cnd. . 412. IJL.ync, 469- . i Antlrf. vol iv. 37.

timl

BOOK V. time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-

~8-" ' land began to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended
x568.

that the decision of the conteit between Mary and her fubjets be-
longed of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all
these expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve. to be made
ilfe of as occasion might require, {he wished that the inquiry into
\,lary's conduct should appear to be undertaken purely in compli-
ance with her own demand, and in ordei to vindicate her inno-
cence; and so long as that appearance could be preserved, none of
the other expedients were to be employed.

WHEN Mary contented to submit her cause to Elizabeth, she was

far from fufpeting that any bad consequences could follow, or that
any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
peded that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine her de-
fences *; she meant to confider her as an equal, for whose fatisfac-
tion she was willing to explain any part of her conduc, that was
liable to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior, before
whom she was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very
different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself as choferl
to be judge in the controversy between the Scottish Queen and her
fubjeds, and began to ad in that capacity. She proposed to ap-
point commiflioners to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wrote
to the Regent of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear
before them, in his name, and to produce what he could allege inx
vindication of his proceedings againfl his Sovereign.

,M:r, grc.tily MARl.l had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable credulity onP
.if betlh ''; Elizabctlh's profcflions of regard, and cxp)ccd t htc that io many kind
cond uil.

*' Anders. vol. iv. o1,

fpccclies

ipeeches would, at last, be accompanied with f6me fu'table actions. BooK V.
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived ' qG8
the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and saw what a diminution it
would be to her owIn honour, to. appear on a level'with ler rc-
bellious fubjeas, and to stand together with them at the bar of a.
filperior and'a judge. She retraCted the offer which atie had made,
and which had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her in-
tention. She demanded, with more carnefinefs than ever, to be
:admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her in a flrain June 3;o
very different from what she had formerly used, and which fully
discovers the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. " In
"my present situation, fays she, I neither will, nor can-reply to

the accusations of my fulbjeds. I' am ready, of my own accord,

" and'out of friendliip to you, to satisfy your fcrupies, and to
" vindicate my own condu:t. My fubjeas are not my equals;

nor will I, by fibmitting my cause to a'judicial trial, acknow-

" ledge them to -'c so. I fled'into your arms, as into those of my
4' nearest relation, and most perfect friend. I did you honour,.
sb as I imagined, in chufing you preferably to any other Prince, to
" be the restorer of an injured Queen. Was it ever known that.
" a Prince was blamed for hearing, in pcrfon, the complaints of
" those who appealed to his juflice, agaiift the false accusations of
'' their enemies ? You -admitted into your presence my bastard-
6 brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me
s that honour ! God forbid tlhat I fhloull be the occasion of bring-.
"ing any stain upon your reputation. I expeccte( that your man-

ncr.of treating me would'have added lullre to it. Suffcr me

' either to implore the aidlof other Princes, who-C delicacy on thiS
" lhead will be less, and their rcfcntmcnt of my wrongs gIreater;
5' or let ime receive from your hands that aflilancc, whichl it-l)e.

" Co01 ',.

BooK V. " comes you, more than any other Prince, to grant; and by that

.-I--.. " Ibenefit, bind me-to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude ."
J$68.

June 2o. T-HI letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did
Elizabeth's precautions not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter be-
againa her. fore the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwithftand-

ing the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottish Queen, to go
on with the inquiry into her conduc, and till that were finished,
it was agreed that Elizabeth could not, confiitently with her own
honour, or with the safety of her government, either give her the
assistance which ihe demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. And left fie should have an opportunity of escaping,
while Ihe resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable to
remove her to some place, at a greater distance from the bor-
ders t.

Proceedings WHILE the English court was occupied in these deliberations,
of theRegent the Regent did not neglect to improve the viCtory at Langfide.
Queen's ad- That event was of the utmost importance to him. It not only

drove the Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her adherents
dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed resolved,
at first, to proceed against them with the utmost rigour. Six per-
sons of some diftindion, who had been taken prisoners in the
battle, were tried, and condemned to death as rebels against the
King's. government. They were led to the place of execution, but
by the powerful intercession of Knox they obtained a pardon. I-a-
milton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the nmblcr, who lived to
give both the Regcnt and Knox rcafon to repent of this commend-
able a&E of Ienity ::.

d Andcrf. vol. iv. 9... - Id. ibid. I02. :: Cald. vol. ii. 99.

I SOON

SOO N after the Regent marched with an army, consisting of 4000 BOOK V.
horse and Iooo foot, towards the weft borders. The nobles in this 68

I568'

part of the kingdom were of the Queen's fadion; but as they
had not force sufficient to obftrud his progress, he must either
have obliged them to submit to the King, or would have laid waste
their lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it
was to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth the
Scottish Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her desire.
After keeping the field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to
the English Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an expedition,
which might have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a
few ads of severity .

THE resolution of the English Privy Council with regard to Mary carried

to Bolton.

Mary's person, was soon carried into execution; and, without re-
garding her remonstrances or complaints, {he was conducted to
Bolton, a castle of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire t. July r3.
In this place, her correspondence with her friends in Scotland be-
came more difficult, and any profped of making her escape was
entirely cut off. She now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's
power, and though treated as yet with the refpec due to a Queen,
her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary knew what it
was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worfl of all
evils. While the remembrance of her late imprifonmcnt was still
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Elizabeth
thought it a proper juncture to renew her former proposition, that
fhle would fiiffer the Regent and his adherents to be called into Jiy s.
England, and content to their bcing heard in defence of their

Cald. vol. ii. 99. -1 Andcrf. vol. iv. 14.
VOL. .L E f own

BOOK V. own conduct. And on her part, she promised, whatever ihould

j.5g be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her power and influence

towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few limitations,

Agrees that which were far from being unreasonable. Fear, impatience,
an inquiry be
,rr!ic touler despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which the propo-

fition was accompanied: induced the Scottiflh Queen to comply '.

Her diffimu- IN order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired nothing so much
lation with
regard to re- as to render the union between them as close as possible, she fihewed

gon" a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,

during all her past and subsequent misfortunes, she was uni-
formly inflexible. She expressed a great veneration for the liturgy
of the church of England; she was often present at religious wor-
ship, according to the rites of the reformed church; made cloice
of a Protestant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard him preach
against the errors of Popery with attention and seeming pleasure;
and dicfovered all the symptoms of an approaching conversion t.
Such was Mary's known and bigotted attachment to the Popifl
religion, that it is impossible to believe her sincere in this part of
her conduct; nor can any thing mark more strongly the wretched-
ness of her condition, and the excess of her fears, than that they
betrayed her into dissimulation in a matter, concerning which her
sentiments were, at all other times, scrupulously delicate.

Asgtif i s. AT this time the Regent called a Parliamcnt, in order to pro--
in Srctla,,!"l. ceed to the forfeiture of those who rcfufed to acknowledge the

King's authority. The QCceen's faction was alarmed, and Argyll
and -Iiuntly, whom IMary had appointed her liiutinants, the one
in the flutlh, and the other in the north of Scotland, began to antcl--
' Anclrf. vol. iv. o09, I-ayncs, 468. '1 Andcrf. vol. iv. I13. Iliyncs, 509.

5~S ~blce

ble forces. to obftruac this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, Book V.
and envy at those who governed in the King's name, had added so 68
much strength to the party, that the Regent would have found it
difficult .to withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her
cause to Elizabeth, file could not refuse, at her desire, to command
her friend to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently till rmat-
ters were brought to a decision in England. By procuring this cef-
fation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the Regent's
faction, as she had formerly given to the Queen's *.

THE Regent, however, would not conlent, even at Elizabeth's

request, to put off the meeting of Parliament. But we may ascribe
to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen from extermi-
nating the other, any appearances of moderation which this Par-
liament discovered in its proceedings. The most violent oppo-
nents of the King's government were forfeited; the reft were
allowed itill to hope for favour o-.

No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her cause to her rival, Elizabeth rc-

quires the
than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, deputies pro- Rcgent to de-

fend his con-

perly inftruated for vindicating his conduc, in presence of her du. co
comrnifioners. I. was not without hesitation and anxiety, that
the Regent consented to this measure. Hii authority was already
efl:abliflhed in Scotland, and confirmed by Parliament. To fufler
its validity now to be called in quefiion, and fuiljcctcd to a foreign
jurifdcliqion, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his ibvcrciiln
before firangers, the ancient cnemics of the Scottish name, wvias an

" A (ndcif vol. iv. 125. I' B1uci, 371.

F f f ()(,.lion(,

BOOK V. odious task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to succeed'

-568- in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse faction daily

increased. He dreaded the interposition of the French King in its
behalf. In his Situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so
much at heart, her commands were neither to. be dispute.d, nor
disobeyed. ,..

Both the THE neceflity of repairing in person to York added to the igno-
;tnd he ap- miny of the flep which he was obliged. to take. All his afrociates
pjoint Con- declined the office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose

tlemfelves to the' odium, and danger with which it was easy to
foresee that the discharge of it would be attended, unless he hirm
Septem. i8. self consented to share these in common, with them. The Earl of

Morton, Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Commendator of
Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay were joinedwithhim in commis-
lion. Macgill of Rankeilor and Balnaves of Halhill, two eminent
Civilians, George Buchanan his. faithful adherent, a. man whose
genius did honour to the age, Maitland,.and several others,,were ap-
pointed to attend them as afiftants. Maitland owed this diftindion
to the Regent's fear, rather than to his affetion.. He had warmly
remonitrated against this measure. He wished his country to con-
tinue in friendship with England, but not to become dependent on
that nation. He was defirousof re-establishing the Queen.in some de-
gree of power, not inconsistent with, that which the King pofiflled;
and the Regent could not with safety leave behind him a man, whose
views were so contrary to his own, and. who, by his superior abili-
ties, had acquired an, influence in the nation, equal to that which
others derive from the antiquity and power of their families -'.

'* Buch. 372. See Append. NO XXV.
l Id. ibid. AndcrLf vol. iv. 35. Melvil, i86, 183.

MAR

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord Livingston, Lord BooK V.

Boyd, Lord-Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, <'""58
Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn. of Skir-
ling, to appear in her name *.

ELIZABETH nominated' Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,

Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Cbm-
missioners to hear both parties..

THE fourth of October was the day fixed for opening the Con- The confe-

s~~ t-,renceatYoikk.

ference. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, the dig- r
nity of the judges-before whom they were to-appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the importance of
the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfacfion no less illufiri-
ous, than it was singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared; on this occasion; firikes us with an air of magnificence.
Her rival, an independant Queen, and the heir of an ancient race
of monarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
represented the majesty, and possessed the authority of a King-
flood in person at her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose
power her ancestors had often dreaded, but could never subdue,
was now absolutely at her. disposal..

THE views, however, with which the several parties consented Views of the

different par-

to this conference, and the issue to which they cxpeced to bring it, tit.
were extremely different.

MAR Y'S chief objIc was the recovering her former authority.
This induced her to confcnt to a mcafuIrc, ag-ainst which flh had.

" AMJndrf. vol. iv. 33.

:long;:

BOOK V. long firuggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-

i2"3 taining hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in order to
.568o

'which, she would have, willingly, made many concessions to the
King's party; and the influence of the English Queen, and her
own impatience under her present situation, might have led her
to many more *. The Regent aimed at nothing but securing
Elizabeth's protection to his party, and seems not to have had the
noft ditfant thoughts of coming to any composition with Mary.
Elizabeth's views were more various, and her schemes more in-
tricate. She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour,
and solicitous that she should wipe off the aspersions which ble-
inifhed her character. This she pretended to be the intention of
the conference; amusing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the
French and Spanish ambassadors in her behalf by repeated pro-
mnies of assisting her as soon as she could venture to do so, without
bringing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil of friendship
and generosity, Elizabeth concealed fcntiments of a different na-
ture. She expected that the Regent would accuse Mary of being
accessory to the murder of her husband. She encouraged him, as
far as decency would permit, to take this desperate ftep t. And
as this accusation might terminate two different ways, ile had
concerted measures for her future conduEc suitable to each of these.
If the charge against Mary fiould appear to be well founded, flic
resolvcd to pronounce her unworthy of wearing a Crown, and to
declare that lhe would never burthen her own conscience with the
guilt of an alion so dectcflable, as the refloring her to her king-
dom :[. If it should happcn, that what her accufcrs alleged, did

* Anldcrfon, vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. f Alndcrfon, vol. iv. 1 , 45.
Hayncs, 487. : Andlcrlbn, vol. iv. 1x.

not

not amount to a proof of guilt, but only of mal-administration, BOOK V.
she determined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but on i6
such conditions, as would render her for ever dependant on Eng-
land, and the slave of her own fubjeds *. And as every ftep in
the progress of the conference, as well as the final result of it,
was in her own power, ihe would frill be at liberty to chufe'
which of there courses the would hold; or -if there appeared to.
be any danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, she
might protract the whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in
inextricable perplexity.

THE conference, however, was opened with much solemnity. Complaint of

the Queen's

But the very firit ftep discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to coimifFioners
inflame, rather than to extinguish the dissensions and animofities aRainl.th
among the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the con-
tending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the Queen to offer pardon for what was past, or her fubjeds to
promise more dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary, oaober 0s
Mary's commiflioners were permitted to prefer a complaint against
the Regent and his party, containing an enumeration of their
treasonable aaions, of their Celzing her person by force of arms,
committing her to prison, compelling her to resign the Crown,
and making use of her son's name to colour their usurpation of
the whole royal authority. And of all thefc enormities, they re-
quired such speedy antd efTetual redress, as the injuries of one
(uccen demanded from the juflicc of anotlherl '.

IT was then expelctd that the Ricg-ent would have difcloefcd the
whole circumstances of that unnatural crime, to which he pre--

Andcrfl ii, vol. iv. I6. '1' Id. ibid. 52.

tendtlcd'

Boo1 K V. tended the Queen had been accessary, and would have produced

evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,
the Regent did not even answer the' complaints brought against
himself. He discovered a relucance at the undertaking that office,
and started many doubts and scruples, with' regard to which, he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself . IHis reserve and
'hesitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the English
commissioners than to his own associates. They knew that he
could not vindicate his conduct without charging the murder upon
the Queen, and he had not hitherto shown any extraordinary
delicacy on that head. An intrigue had been secretly carried on,
since his arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

intriuties of THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the molt powerful and
Norfolk wivh
the Regent. most popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and he

began already to form a projed, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with
the Queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would be the con-
sequence of a public accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial
it might be to her pretensions to the English fucceflion. In order to
save her this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland, and ex-
pressed his aftoniniment at secing a man of so much reputation for
wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure so dishonourable
to themselves, to their (Qeen, and to their country; submitting the
public tranfadcions of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of their Sovereign,
which they were bound in good policy, as well as in duty, to con-
ceal and to cover. It was cafy for Maitland, whose fcntiments were
thel fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own condudct. He afflrcd

* I-ayncs, 48.

hliin

him, that he had employed all his credit, to dissuade his country- BooK V.
men from this measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to
communicate the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced
the fame arguments which he had used with MIaitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he muff expose himself, by such a vio-
lent action, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her character. Iffhe ever recovered any degree of power,
his deftrudcion would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it at
her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a pub-
lic approbation of his conduct. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, she was resolved to give no definitive fen-
tence in the cause. Let him only demand that the matter should
be brought to decision, immediately after hearing the proof, and
he would be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be for him to
appear as the accuser of his own Sovereign-. The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover, in these remonstrances, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep impression on the Re-
gent. He daily received the strongest aflirances of Mary's willing-
ness to be reconciled to him, if he abflained from accusing her of
such an odious crime, together with denunciations of her irrecon-
cileable hatred, if he ated a contrary part t-. All these confidera-
tions concurred in determining him to alter his purpose, and to
malke trial of the expedient which the D)Liue had fuggcftcd.

-HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, befurc lie proceeded o.l c,.,
farther, whether the Elnglil .coniuflioners cwere ilnpowered to

M* M lv. 187. I.iyncs, 573. I Anilci. vol. iv. 77. Goid. vol. . ii. 1
Sct AIppclix, N0 XNXVI.

1Vol,. I. ' d' ,'e !dchr::;

BooRK V. declare the Queen guilty, by a judicial aa; whether they would

i 568. promise to pass sentence, without delay, whether the Queen should

be kept under such refiraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the
government now established in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth,
if file approved of the proceedings of the King's party, would en-
gage to protea it for the future '. The paper containing these de-
mands was signed by himself alone, without communicating it to
any of his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil t. Nothing
could appear more natural than the Regent's solicitude, to know-
on what footing he flood. To have ventured: on; a ftep so uncom-
mon and dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without pre-
vioufly ascertaining that he might take it with safety, would have
been unpardonable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not ex-
pea that he would have moved any such difficulty, had not im-
powered her commiflioners to' give him that iatisfaaion which he
demanded. It became ncceffary to tranfinit the articles to herself,
and by the light in which Norfolk placed thei, it is easy to fee
that he owisied that they liould make no flight impreilon on Eli-
zabeth and her Minhllcrs. " Think not the Scots, said lie, over-
" ficrupulous or preCifc. Let us vicw their condu&c, as we would
'" vw ifh our owni to ,c vicveel, in a like situation. The game they

I p!a>y is deep(; il icl :

c.iates, lies, theiir honour are at stake.

I" t ;s :vow iin tlici own power to be reconciled to their Qcen, or
' to oiscnd hicO iriccovcrably, and in a matter of to much import-
" :' ncc, tlhc utmofl dCg ree o lcaution is not exceflive .)'

VTrtLl ' th1 li'.l;'Il colmmiflioncrs waited for fuller inflruc-

ti,'s '.: 1

h rc'a;dl to tlc v:llcnt's ldemands, lie gave in an answer

t:, !'c Loiompl lint, v\ lIii1h l11d bccnioff'red in name of the Scottifi

* A t. rs. vol .
.l. i. 55. M( l. 190. :: Andcrr. vol. iv. 77.

( Quccn,

Queen. It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the sys- Boo \.
tern which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua- -56
tion of the Queen's being accessory to the murder of her husband;
the bitterness of stile peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necessary to take arms in order to diflblve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the keeping
her for some time under refiraint; yet nothing more was said on
these ful)jedls than was barely requisite in his own defence. The
Queen's comniiffioners did not fail to reply M. But while the ar- Ocober 17.
tide with regard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only fkirmithes at a distance, of no consequence towards ending
the contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduced in a manner Theconfer-

ence removed

which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of these to Wcllin-
discoveries which she had expeced. The ditfance between York fter.
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every difficulty
which occurred, consumed much time. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scottish Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for her sagacity
in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
deepest schemes t. Inltead, therefore, of returning any anfwcl to
the Regent's demands, she resolved to remove the conference to
Westminster, and to appoint new cominfioners, in whom flce couldl
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Q./een and the IRgeint
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this refolultion :-.

* Antdrr, vol. iv. 64, 80. 1 Good. vol. ii. bo. Aidcrf. vol. iii. 2;

'1: Hayncs, 4X4. Andcrf. vol. iv. 94.

CG g 2g ,V

BOO V. WE often find Mary boafling of the superiority of her commis-
'-~--J fioners during the conference at York, and how, by the strength of

1568.

their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced all
their cavils `. The dispute flood, at that time, on a footing, which
rendered her victory not only apparent, but easy. Her participa-
tion of the guilt of the King's murder was the only circumflance,
which could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjeds. And
while they indufirioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained
as much as that of her adversaries loft by fupprefling this capital
argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enjoy the fame ad-

vantage in the conference to be held at Weftminfler. She delibe-
rated with the utmost anxiety, how (he might overcome the
Regent's ifruples, and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She con-
fidered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commiiTioners
to answer such an accusation; and as she foresaw that the promises
with which it was neceflary to allure the Regent, and which it was
impossible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would naturally ex-
afperate her to a great degree, ffic determlined to guard her more nar-
rowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her no reason to
d(iii ru his vigilallce or [dlclity, vet becaur: i e was the Duke of Nor-
to,,k's brother-in-law, ilc thlouglht it plropri to remove the Queen as
l;on as poilible to Tuthbury in StaFrorllllirc, and commit her to the
keepingc oC thc Eal of SircwlLbury, to whom that cafle belonged -'.
iv~ ryr"- ri MA.\Y l began to fuefpct the dlcfi;n of this second conference;

, i'

[ }1n, dI- andl notwithflanlling tllc ltisfilioln hle cxprcllecd at iccing her cause
'''" " ... takcn imore immediately under the Ql cen's own eye ::, fle framed

* Good. vol. ii. i86, 284, 350. -1' Hayies, 487. :: Andcr. vol, iv. 95.

her

her inftruicions to her commissioners, in such a manner, as to avoid BooK V.
being brought under the necessity of answering the accusation of

1568

her fubjets, if they should be so deiperate as to exhibit one againfi
her *. These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circumstance
extremely mortifying. The Regent having arrived at London, in
order to be present at the conference, was immediately admitted
into Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only with re-
sped, but with affetion. This Mary jufily confidered as an open
declaration of that OQeen's partiality towards her adversaries. In Ncvm 22.
the first emotions of her resentment, the wrote to her commis- Jol,'iSa,,e.-
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the pretence of the of Elizab'Lth
Englifl nobles, and before the ambafladors of foreign Princes, of
the usage she had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries
which Ihe had reason. to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjets were
allowed access to the. Queen,. fhe.was excluded irom her presence;
they enjoycdl full liberty, Ihe languished under a long imprison-
xnent; they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
the laboured under every disadvantage.. For there reasons: he once
nmore renewed her demand, of being admitted into the Q..een's
presence; and if that were denied, /he inftruaed them to declare,
that fle recalled the consent fle had given to the conference at.
Westminster, and protefled, that whatever was done there, flould
be held to be null and invalid l-.

THIS, perhaps, was the moii prudent rcfolution Mary could have

taken. The pretences on which lle declined the conference were
1paiufible, and the jun'ture for oflc.ring them well chotcn. 13ut
citlhr the Qteen's letter did not reach her corrminfioncrs in due
time, or they tIfl-ercdl tlhclnflvcs to be deceived by EIlizabeth's

a Good. vol. ii. 3'19, i'- I. ibid. :8..

profcfions

BooK V. professions of regard for their Mistress, and contented to the open-

n68. ing of the conference ".
Novem. zs. To the commissioners who had appeared in her name at York,

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the Great Seal,
the Earls of Arundel and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil t-. The difficulties which obftruted the proceedings at York
were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given to the Re-
gent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
raise objections as formerly. His negociation with Norfolk had
been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil $. His personal safety, as well as the
continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favouring
Mary, fle might, at any time, ruin him, and by a question which
ihe artfully flarted, concerning the person who had a right, by the
law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, {he let
him fee, that even without restoring the Queen, it was an easy mat-
ter for her to deprive him of the supreme diretion of affairs j).
These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by most of
his attendants, at length determined the Regent to produce his ac-
cufation against the Queen.

The RcgcP t HIE endeavoured to leffn the infamy, with which he was fen-
:"cn oi',bc- fible this ation would be attended, by protesting, that it was with
ilg acccfiIOry the utmost relucance he undertook this disagreeable tafil; that his
to her hus-
alid's mnur- party had long fufFcrcd their condua- to be mifconflrued, and had
dcr.

borne the worst imiputations in silence, rather than expose the
crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of firangers; but that now
the infolcncc and itnportunity of the advcrfe faction forced them

. Andc f. vol. iii. 25. I- Id. vol. iv. 99. t Mclv .
r. 1 IIlaynes, 48.1

t(

to publish, what they had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, BOOK V.
endeavoured to conceal *. These pretexts are decent; and had the '---

1568.

party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the Queen's
actions, in the reft of their conduCt, might have passed for the
real principles by which they were influenced. But their former
treatment of the Queen renders it impossible to give any credit to
these profefions. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a fitnation,
where no liberty of choice was left him; and was obligedc either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or tc charge Mary
with having committed murder.

THlE accusation itself sas conceived in the firongeft terms. Mary

was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but
with being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been icreeaed from the pursuits of
jutlice by her favour; and she had formed designs no less danger-
ous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of the liberties
and constitution of the kingdom. If any of these crimes fllould
be denied, an offer was made, to produce the most ample and un.
doubted evidence in confirmation of the charge -l1-

AT the next meeting of the commisioners, the Earl of Len- Novemb. 29:

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he i mplored Elizabcth's jullice againat
the Queen of Scots, whom he acculCed, upon oath, of being the
author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he pretended,
would make good what he alleged. The entrance of a icw acaor
on the flagc, Co opportunely, and at a juniUre t) critical, can scarce

t Anders. vol. iv. 15. Id. ibid. 119,

bc

BOOKV. be imputed to chance. This contrivance was manifestly Eliza-

L-'"- beth's, in order to encreafe, by this additional accusation, the in-
1568.

famy of the Scottish Queen . -

Her commis- MAR Y'S commiflioners expressed the utmost furprize and indig-
fioners refuse
to anfver. nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Q(een with ca-
Dc-mb. 4. lulmnies, which, as they affirmed, she had so little merited. But,

instead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the
charge, they had recourse to an article in their inftruions, which
they had formerly neglected to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their
Niftrefs's request, of a personal interview, they protested, if that
were denied her, against all the future proceedings of the commis-
fionerst. A protestation of this nature, offered just at the critical
time, when such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary,
and when the proofs in support of it were ready to be examined,
gave reason to fufpet that she dreaded the event of that examina-
tion. This suspicion received the itrongeft confirmation from
another circumilance; Ross and H-erreis, before they were intro-
duced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protestation, privately
acquainted Leicester and Cecil, that as their Miflrefs had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards bringing the differ-
ences between herself and her fubjed-s to an amicable accommoda-
tion, so fie was still desirous, notwithstanding the Regent's auda-
cious accusation, that they should be terminated in that manner 1:.

SuCII moderation is scarce compatible with the firong resent-

mcnt, which calumniated innocence naturally feels; or with that
eagcrnclfs to vindicate itfclf, which it always dilcovcrs. In Mary's

Andtcrr. vol. iv. 122. ' I Id. 33, 158. :: Jd. iv. '34. Cabblila, 157.

I;tuation,

situation, an offer so ill-timed mufl be confidered as a confession of Boox V.
the weakness of her cause. The known character of her commis- -'S-

1568.

fioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion
of treachery. Some secret conviction, that the conduct of their
Mistress could not bear so ftrit a scrutiny, seems to be the moss
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they endea-
voured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre-

tence for rejecting it. She told Mary's commiflioners, that, in the Dccem. 4.;
present juncture, nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mif-
trefs, as an accommodation; and that the matter would seem to
be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and
to hide her shame; nor was it possible that she could be admitted,
with aly decency, into her presence, while she lay under the in-
famy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commiffoners withdrew; and as they

had declined answering, theie seemed now to be no further rea-
son for the Regent's producing the proofs in support of his charge.
But without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were
incompleat; and her artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as
successful as any the had hitherto employed. She commanded her
commiflioners to tcftify her indignation and difplcaihre at the Re-
gent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a fubjecq, as to
accuse his fovcreign of such atrocious crimes. I-ic, in order to
rcgain the rood opinion of such a powerful protcercfs, offlrccd to
.ficw that his accusations were not malicious, nor ill--groundcd.
Then were produced, and delivered to the Englit f commillonclr,
thc adls of the Scottilli Parliament in conlirmation of the lRcclltc's

VOL. I. I h auLIorit\,

BooK V. authority, and of the Queen's, resignation; the confessions of the

i 68- persons executedfor the King's murder; and the fatal casket which

contained the letters, sonnets, and contracts, that have been already
mentioned.

Elizabeth ELIZABETH having got these into her poflefllon, began to lay
treas Mary
-irh: greater aside the expressions offriendfhip and refpee which she had:hither-
igtOlr' to used in all her letters to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to

her, in such terms, as-if the-prefumptions of her guilt had amounted
almost to certainty; file blamed her for refusing to vindicate her-
self from an accusation which could not be left unanswered, without
a manifest injury to her character; and plainly intimated, that un-
Iefss that were done, no change would be made in her present fitua-
tion *. She hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments would
intimidate Mary, who Was scarce recovered from the (hock of the
Regent's attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm her refig-
nation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's authority as Regent, and
to consent that'both herielf and her son should reside in England,
under her protecion. This scheme Elizabeth had much at heart;
ihe proposed it both to Mary and to her commissioners, and neg-
lcated no argameit, nor artifice, that could possibly recommend-
it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, to her
prctcnflons, and even to her personal safety. She rejected it without
hecitation. " Death, said the, is less dreadful than firfch an igno-
<' minious flep. Rather than give away with my own hands, the
" Crown which dcfccended to me from my anceflors, I will part
( with life; but the last words I utter, flhall be tlolse of a QEcen
' of ScotIlandl''."

* Andcrfon, vol. . . 179, 13. Good. vol. ii. 260.
-I Ila)nces, 4(7. Scc Appendix, No XXVII. Good. vol ii. 274, 301.

ATJ

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible how open her BooKr V.

reputation lay to censure, while /he suffered such a public accufa- 168
tion to remain unanswered; and though the conference was now
dissolved, Ihe impowered her commissioners to present a reply to
the allegations of her enemies, in which she denied, in the
firongeft terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon Dccem. 24..
the Regent and his party, by accusing them of having devised
and executed the murder of the King *. The Regent and his
associates asserted their innocence with great warmth. Mary con-
tinued to insist on a personal interview, a condition which lhe
knew would never be granted t. Elizabeth urged her to vindi-
cate her own honour. But it is evident from the delays, the eva-
sions, and subterfuges, to which both Queens had recourse by
turns, that Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make
any further progress in the inquiry.

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Scotland, 1569.
vwhere his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to raise Iebr.. z.

Difiniffes tlihe
some commotions. Before he set out, he was called into the Privy Aegent w\ith-

out either ap-
Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. p.ovin, or

cnildcrniini g

Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had lhi coidud.
been objeacd to his condua, which fihe could reckon dctrimen-
tal to his honour, or inconfiflent with his duty; nor had he, on
the other hand, produced any thing againfl his Sovereign, on which
she could found an unfavourable opinion of her ations; and for
this reason, ihe rcColved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, pr1cifcly
in the farme situation, in which lhe had found thcm, at the bc-

' Good. 2,285. -|- Ibid. 283. Cabbala, 157.

I I h 1, g(inn in'

BooK V. ginning of the conference. The Queen's commissioners were dif-

.'56. miffed much in the fame manner *
I569.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnestly

on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclusion of

But secretly the whole, appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. Nothing,
supports his
party. however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's original views,

or more subservient to her future schemes. Notwithstanding her
seeming impartiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neuter; nor
was ihe at any loss on whom to bellow her protetion. Before the
Regent left London, she supplied him with a considerable fum of
money, and engaged to support the King's authority, to the ut-
moif of her power t. Mary, by her own conduct, fortified
this resolution. Enraged at the repeated instances of Eliza-
beth's artifice and deceit, which the had discovered during the
progress of the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining
any succour from her, she endeavoured to rouze her own adhe-
rents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to Elizabeth
and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotsman with in-
dignation. Murray, the pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places
of greatest strength in the kingdom; and to acknowledge the de-
.pendance of the Scots upon the English nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Scot-
land; and, at the fame time, the question with regard to the Eng-
lifl ficccffion was to be decided in favour of the Earl of Iartford,
who had promiscd to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account

Q Good. 2. 315 333. '1 Id. 213. Carte, 3. 478.

of these wild and chimerical projects was spread indufhrioufly BooKx V.
among the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it was calculated of pur- --569.
pose to bring her government into difreputation, laboured to
destroy its effecs, by a counter-proclamation, and became more
disgusted than ever with the Scottiih Queen i.

THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the utmost Eflortsof Ma-

ry's adherents

tranquillity. But the rage of the Queen's adherents, which had aaainit him.
been suspended in expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break out with all
the violence of civil war. They were encouraged, too, by the ap-
pearance of a leader; whose high quality and pretensions intitled
him to great authority in the nation. This was the Duke of Cha-
telherault, who had resided for some years in France, and was now
sent over by that court with a fmiall supply of money, in hopes
that the pretence of the first nobleman in the kingdom would
strengthen the Queen's faction. Elizabeth had detained him in
England, for some months, under various pretences, but was
obliged at last to susser him to proceed on his journey. Before
his departure, Mary inverted him with the high dignity of her FLb. 25.
Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with the fantastic title
of her adopted father.

TI-E Regent did not give him time to fo-m his party into any IlTi vi'gorus

co ulud

regular body. He afTembled an army, with his usual expedition, I,-ciks her
and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and I-Iuntly, l).
who composed the chief part of the Qucen's faction lying in very
diflant corners of the kingdom, and many of the Dukc's depcn-

m'.lyncs, 500, 503. Sec Append. N0 XXVIII.

Clants,

BOOK V. dants having fallen, or having -been taken in the battle of Langfide,

569- the spirit and strength of his adherents was totally broken, and an

accommodation with the Regent was the only thing, which could
prevent the deflru&ion of his estate and vassals. This was effeced
without difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke pro-
mifed to acknowledge the authority both of the King and of the
Regent; and to claim no jturifdiction in consequence of the com-
million, which he had received from the Queen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the at, which Ead passed for attainting
several of the Queen's adherents; to restore all, who would sub-
mit to the King's government, to. the poffefeion of their eflates and
honours; and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties should be fettled by mutual content. The
Duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty; and,
in token of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanxied the
Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Regent set
at liberty the prisoners talken at Langfide *.

ARGYLL and HTuntly refused to be included in this treaty. A

fccret negociation was carrying on, in England, in favour of the
captive Queen, with so much success, that her affairs began to wear
a better atifed, and her return into her own lingdom feemeed to be
an event not very distant. The French King had lately obtained
fi;ch advantages over the Hlugonots, that the extinction of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
incf.ic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented fiom protecling
.I.r friends in Britain. There circuinilances not only influenced
Argyll and 1-Iuntly, but made so deep an impcfflion on the Duke,

i, .,
:- Cabbnala, 16i. Cralvf. Mcim. x 1-1

8 that

that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly dif- BOOK V.
covered that he vWifhed to evade the accompliflhment of the treaty. 169.
The Regent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to shake him-
self loose, in this manner, from his- engagements; and inflantly
formed a resolution equally bold, and politic. He commanded his
guards to seize Chatelherault in his own house in Edinburgh,
whither he had come, in order to attend the Convention agreed
upon; and, regardless either of his dignity as the first nobleinan
in the kingdom, and' next heir to the Crown,- or of the promises
of personal security, on which lie had relied, committed him and
Lord Terreis, prisoners to the castle of Edinblurgh e. A blow so April 6.
fatal and unexpeEted dispirited the party. Argyll submitted to the
King's government, and made his peace with the Regent, on very
easy terms; and'Huntly, being left alone, was at last obliged to
lay down his arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned'into Scotland, and brought let- iulv :r.

ters to the Regent both from the Englifhl and Scottish Q leens.A A P;,,.
Colvention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Fliza- 'y '' :tU
beth's letter contained three different prbpofals with ret;ard to
Maiy; that the fliould citler be rcftbred to the full pioflclion of
ier fodme'r authority; or be admitted to rcign jointly with the
King her son; or at least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in foinc
deccent retirement, without any fiare in the a1lminiflr;tion of o-
v.ernimcnt. Thicfe ovcrturcs ere ovtorte by thre importunity of
Fcnclon the French ambaildoi-, and have some appearance of
h1cing favourablc to the clpttive Qccn. They were, hlowvevr
iperfc&ly suitable to li izabcth's gcnci-:l f{,flclrn witl rc;'lld te) Sc,-
tifl affairs. Among propolitions Io unctqual and clifiproporionatc,

'* Crawr. Mc,n. 1ii. AI!'. 2?2i

lie.

BOOK V. fie easily saw where the choice would fall. The two former

were rejeted; and long delays must necessarily have intervened,
and many difficulties have arisen, before every circumstance rela-
tive to the last could be finally adjusted .

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found inva-
lid, ihould be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal
marriage was the principal source of all the calamities she had
endured for two years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries, her reputation had suffered by that Rtep. It was
her interest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to account

Norfo'lk's for her long silence with refpe& to this point. Her particular mo-
scheme for
marrying tle tive for proposing it, at this time, began to be so well known, that
sQecn of the demand was rejeced by the Convention of estates. They im-

puted it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her
eagerness to conclude a marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THrIs marriage was the objedt of that secret negociation in Eng-

land, which we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projeting genius of Maitland iirft conceived this
fclheme. During the Conference at York, he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Biflhop of Ross. The former readily
cloled with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The latter
confidered it as a probable device for refcoring his Mifrefs to
liberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with
wlhoin Norfolk held a correfponldncc, by means of his fifler Lady
Scroop, avcrfc from a mealuirc, wlicl would have reforcd her to

* Spotsw00d, 230.

lier

her kingdom, with so much splendor'. The sudden removal of BOOK V.
the conference from York to Westminster suspended, but did not 56
break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were still the Duke's
prompters, and his agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the Queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an administration so vigi- Conceals it

si-o:n EI.l ia-

lant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long concealed, beth.
he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of openness and can-.
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He mentioned to her
the rumour, which was spread of his marriage with the Scottish
Queen; he complained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full of
contempt, both for Mary's characer, and dominions. Jealous as
Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, ihe
seems to have credited these professions t. But, instead of difcon-
tinuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and
admitted into it new associates. Among there was the Regent of
Scotland. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public
accusation of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which he
had entered at York. He was then ready to return into Scotland.
The influence of the Duke, in the North of England, was great.
The Earls of Northumberland and Wcfinorland, the most power-
ful noblemen in that part of the kingclom, thlreatcned to revcnir.
upon the Regent, the injuries which he had done his Sovereignl.
In order to secure his safe retreat, he aclldr-cfld himnfelf to NorfilIk,
and, after tmoe apology for his pafl conduclu, hc iniillalrtcd t1i;

* Camrn. 19. Haiyl. ncs, 573. St;lc 'lri'Is, 1. 73.
I- I-Liyiics, 574. SL.itc 'lIIils, i. 7 , :o.
~O L. I_ . I i i (li

300K V. the Duke's scheme of marrying the Queen his sifter was no less

5"-g acceptable to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he

would concur, with the utmost ardor, in promoting so desirable
an event '. Norfolk heard him with the credulity, natural to those
who are pafionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to desist from any hostile attempt against Murray, and to that
he owed his passage through the Northern counties without dif-
turbance.

c<;.iLc. the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Regent, he next
cn!;ill of' the
: ;!,;il n- attempted to draw the English nobles to approve his design. The

nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. Herjealouf, kept
the question with regard to the right of succession undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
houses of York and Lancaster was still recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perifled, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deftru&ion, in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
Queen, though her right of succession was generally held to be
undoubtetd, might meet with formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a Popifl Prince, and bring both liberty and
rcli ion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Engliflman,
a Ycalous Protcrlant, the moist powerful and most universally be-
loved of all the nobles, an efcclual remedy seemed to be provided
againift all tlicfe evils. The greater part of the Peers, either di-
rclly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a fhlutary projceI. The Earls
of ArI-utcl, elmbcrolelc, ,ciccfler, and Lord Lumley fuibfcribcd a
let tCr to Llte Scottili Qeeccn, written with Lciccltcr's hand, in which

'' AndcTrf. 3. 34

T they

they warmly recommended the match, but insisted, by way of pre- Boo1K V.
liminary, on Mary's promise, that she should attempt nothing, in l-"

5j69.

consequence of her pretensions to the English Crown, prejudicial
to Elizabeth or to her poflerity; that she should consent to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms; that fie ihould
confirm the present establishment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her subjects as had appeared in arms againfl
her. Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying these ar-
ticles, they engaged that the English nobles would not only con-
cur in restoring her, immediately, to her own throne, but in
securing to her that of England, in reversion. Mary readily con-
sented to all these proposals, except the second, with regard to
which, she demanded some time for consulting her ancient ally the
French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was indufirioufly concealed fron

Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottifih Qeen was well known,
nor could it be expected, that she would willingly come into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation, and to in-
crease the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much confe-
quence to the nation, the taking- a few fleps without her knowledge
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every perlfol con-
cerned, even iMary and Norfblk themfelvcs, declared that nothinil
should be concluded without obtaining her conient, the duty' an.3
allegiance of tiuljeds ieemed to be fully prefervced. The ;reatel
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Thole '!w)
conl nutcd the intrigue, had fartlher and lmore (1ngeros v i ',,.
They laiw the advanta.ncs w!lich MIarv procurel 1)' tli; tret t.,to
be prctbent and ertailn ; 1and llh execution of the proniiics which

' \iols. vo.I!. i i. 51. Car ed. .1'o.

I i i ' :]:e

BooK V. the came under, to be distant and uncertain. They had early com-

1 09. municated their scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and
I5o9.

obtained their approbation . A treaty, concerning which they
consulted foreign Princes, while they concealed it from their own
Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent. They hoped, however,
that the union of so many nobles would render it necefiary for
Elizabeth to comply; they flattered themselves, that a combination
so f-rong would be altogether irrefiflible; and such was their con-
fidence of success, that when a plan was concerted, in the north of
England, for rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Nor-
folk, who was afraid that if she recovered liberty, her sentiments
in his favour might change, used all his interest to diflwade the
conspirators from attempting it-''.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd arrived

from England; and, betides the letters which he produced pub-
lickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the most fan-
guine hopes. The whole nobility of England concurred, said they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjufled; nor was
it poflible that a scheme so deep laid, condu&ed with so much art,
and supported both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or
be dlfeated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting, but the
concluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by )procuring a fentcncc of divorce, which would remove the only
obftaclc that flood in the way. This was expected of him, in con-
fcqucicc of his promilf to Norfolk; and if he regarded ciher his
i nit:rcO or lis Iliuc, or evcn his aifcty, he would not fail to fulfil
ticf: cuen gagiemcnts :|:.

An(lcrf. vol. iii. 6.. *1 Caml ,1.0o. :i: -Ha)cs, 520. Spots. 2.0.
i'c; ApicnJlix, N" )XiXIX.

Iht,'T

BUT the Regent was now in very different circumflances, fr-om BOOK V.
those which had formerly induced him to assea an approbation of ~~ -

1569.

Norfolk's schemes. He saw that the dowrifal of his own power
must be the first consequence of the -Duke's success. And if the
Queen, who confidered him as the chief author of all her misfor-
tunes, should recover her ancient authority, he could never expe&t
favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a
flep so fatal to himself, and which would have eftablifled the gran-
deur of another on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned
a delay. But, as every other circumfiance was fettled, the Bishop
of Ross, in name of his Mistress, and the Duke, in person, de-
clared, in presence of the French Ambassador, their mutual con-
sent to the marriage, and a contract to this purpose was signeL,
and entrusted to the keeping of the Ambassador '.

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not long Anlgut Iz.

remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and Elizabeth . lizabethdir
calling the Duke into her presence, exprefced the utmost indigna- Duke's de-

-si(gn, and de-

tion at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts of fe a:sit.
profccuting such a dangerous design. Soon after, Lcicerfer, who
perhaps had countenanced the project with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumfiances of it to the Qteen. Pembroke,
Arundel, Lumly, andt Throginorton were confined, and examined.
MIary was watched more narrowly than ever; and Hailin-s Earl
of I-Iuntington, lwo pretended to diifpte with the Scottish Quen
her right to the fuccclion, ibeing joined in cornmilion with ShrlI\\l-
bury, rendered her iinprifilbncnlt more intolerable, by the exccfs
of his vigilance and rigour-l. The Scottilh Regent, threatened

Cairtc, vol. iii. 486. Ila)yfts, 525, 525, 530, 532.

wtith

Boox V. with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his

letters in her hands; and furnished all the intelligence in his power .
Thle Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-
tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprisonment of his atfo-
ciatcs; coldly received by his friends in that county; unprepared for
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some
Oaober 3. days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor.

He was firfli kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then sent to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble submission to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottiha Queen t. During the progress of Norfolk's ne-
gociations, the Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt
of their issuing in her restoration to the throne, with an increase of

MJlitland im- authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that
prironllc by
the Regcnt. party, and the person whose activity and abilities the Regent

chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He continued to foment the
flirit of dis'affection in Scotland, and had seduced fro'n the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former afociates.
Vhile lie enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon his own
power fccure. For this reason, lie employed Captain Crawfurd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of being acceflfry to the murder
of the King; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to

dinlu rghl. l c would foonl have been broulht to trial, but was
lived bly tlhe friicinllhil of Klirkaldy, governor of' the caftlc, who,
by prLtendllTi a( warrant lor tilat purpole fronm the Regent, got lilin
out of the Iiai!s of the pcribon to vwhofe care lie was comniiittel,

: Sec lAppnd. N" XXX. I' Ila)les, 520, 597.

1and

and conducted him into the castle, which, from that time, was en- BooK V.
tirely under Maitland's command. 'I he loss of a place of so much
importance, and the defeaion of a man so eminent for military
skill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difreputation, for
which, however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly com-
penfated.

TH-E intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottifih Quecn to liber- A reAeli r

ty having been discovered, and disappointed, an attempt was made, Ili'l, .:,"
to the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better fuc- ry sauhntrr.t
cess. The Earls of Northumberland and VWeftmorland, though
little distinguished by their personal merit, were two of the molt
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they poflicf'ed that influence over
the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and Imartial
families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popish religion, and discontented with the court, where new men,
and a new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interef-; and zeal for popery, oppo-
fition to the court, and commifcration of her fiiferings, had en-
gaged them in different plots for her relief. Notwithftandingl the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close corrctpondencc with her,
and communicated to her all their designs '. They were privy to
Norfolk's fchcmes ; but the caution with which lie proceeded did
not Iuit their ardor and impctuolity. The liberty of the Scottlil
Qkccn was not their folc o)j'C. 'They aimed at ringing abolut a
chan"- in the religion, and a revolution in thle governmenlt of the
kingdom. For this rcailn, they folicit'le the aid of the Kini of
Spain, tlic avowed and zealous patron oil lo)pcr inl tlhat age. No-

, II.iyncs, 595. luI. ili, ,1.l,
r S, &c.

thLing

BOOK V. thing-could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or

more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,
than the involving England in the confusion and miseries of a civil
war. The Duke of Alva, by his direction, encouraged the two
Earls, and promised, so soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or rescued the Queen of
Scots, that he would supply them both with money, and a strong
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, founded the ports where it would be most pro-
per to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers,
was dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling some commer-
cial differences between the two nations; but in reality, that the
rebels might be sure of a leader of experience, so soon as they ven-
tured to take arms %.
Defeatcd. TH E condu& of this negociation occasioned many meetings and

messages between the two Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these;
and though she fufpeaed nothing of their real design, the con-
cluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's confidents.
They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. Con-
fcious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving obe-
dience. A fccond, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without fIaking off their allegiance. And
November 9. as no time was left for deliberation, they inflantly erceed their

flandard againfl their Sovereign. The re-establishing the Catho-
lic religion; the fettling the order of fucceflion to the Crown; the
defence of the ancient nobility, were the motives they alleged to
jlPifiy their rebellion l-. Many of the lower people flocked to
theml , witlh fich arms as they could procure; and had the capacity of

) Cartc, vol. iii. 4Yg, 19o. Carnd.
C 21, j1 Strype, vol. i. 547.

the

,tie leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it must BOOK V.
.shave soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth aded with 156

1569.

.ptuience and vigour ; and was served by her subjects with fidelity
amd ardor. On the firif rumour of an infurredion, Mary was re-
t-moved to -Coventry, a place of strength, which could not be taken
without a regular siege; a detachment of the rebels, which was
sent to rescue her, returned without success. Troops were assem-
bled in different parts of the kingdom' as they advanced, the male-
contents retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their spirits funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to direc
-their flight, kept together, for some time, -a small body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland. But they were at length Decemberzz.
-obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottish
borderers. The two Earls, together with the Countess of Nor-
thumberland, wandering for tome days in the waftes of Liddifdale,
were plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the sea-
:son, -and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weftmoreland was
i-oncealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherfi, and after-
wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by the Regent, who had marched with some troops towards the
borders, to prevent any impreflion the rebels might make on those
mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of the Church, Church as-

fais.

for two years, have almost escaped our notice. Its General Aflfm-
blics were held regularly; but no business of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of the Proteflant Clergy
daily incrcaefd, the deficiency of the funds, set apart for their sub-
fiflancc, became greater. Many efforts were made towards recover-

* Cabbala, 17r. Camdcn, 422.
VoL. I. K k ing

BooK V. ing. the ancient patrimony of the Church, or at least so much of it,

1569. as was poTfeffed by the Popish. incumbents, a race of men, who were,

now, not only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But though
the manner in which the Regent received their addresses and com-
plaints, was very different from that to which they had been ac-
customed, no effeaual remedy was provided; and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppression, and groaned under extreme poverty,
fair words, and liberal promises, were all they were able to obtain*.

1570. EIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping such a danger-
soles to gie ous prisoner as the Scottish Queen. During the former year, the
iPe Rery to tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, firit by a secret

combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others;
and she often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
hidden calfe of both. Many of her own fubjeats favoured, or pi-
tied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interested in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, she foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and infurreaions among the former,
and might expose her to the hostile attempts of the latter. She re-
solved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose fccurity, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from rc-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carried some length, when it was discovered by the vigilance
of the Bilhop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanifl
Ambassadors, remionftratcd against the infamy of such an ation,
and represented the tlrrcndcring the (Qieen to her rebellious sub-
jctls, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth flhould, by her own au-
thority, condemn her to nfilant death. This procured a delay;

* Cald. vol. ii. 80, &c.

and

5

and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that de- BOOK V.
sign . I7

157o.
HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed Butheis

murdered.

this barbarous acion. He had been condemned to death soon after
the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed his
life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate had been be-
ltowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his house,
and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, she became furiously mad. This injury
made a deeper impreflion on him, than the benefit he had receiv-
ed, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged upon the Re-
gent. Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private resentment.
His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the enterprize. The max-
ims of that age justified the most desperate course he could take to
;obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time, and
watched for an opportunity to firike the blow. He resolved at
last to wait till his enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through
which he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He
took his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the fireet; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of
his.feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that
his shadow might not be observed from without; and after all this
preparation, calmly expected the Regent's approach, who had
lodged during the night in a house not far distant. Some indif-
tind information of the danger which threatened him, had been
conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it, that
he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he had en-
tered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But as the croud

* Cartc, vol. iii. 491. Anderson, vol. iii. 84.

K k k 2 about

BOOK V. about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear,
'I.----. he proceeded directly along the street; and the throng of the people

obliging him to move very slowly, gave the assassin time to take so
true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet, through the
lower part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentleman who
rode on his other fide. His followers instantly endeavoured to break
into the house whence the blow had come, but they found the door
strongly barricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
had mounted a fleet horse, which flood ready for him at a back pas-
sage, and was got far beyond their reach. The Regent died the
fame night of his wound %.
HischaraEter. THERE is no person, in that age, about whom hiflorians have

been more divided, or whose character has been drawn with such
opposite colours. ,Personal intrepidity, military ikill, sagacity and
vigour in the adminifiration of civil affairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have possessed, in an eminent degree.
His moral qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be
praised, nor censured, without great reserve, and many diftinCions.
In a fierce age, he was capable ofufing vidory with humanity, and
of treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown, or defpifel.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which diftinguiifhed him, even
at a time, when profeflions of that kind were not uncommon.
His confidence in his friends was great, and inferior only to his
liberality towards them, which knew no bounds. A difintercflcd
paflion for the liberty of his country, prompted him tooppofe the
pernicious fyflem, which the Princes of Lorrain had obliSed the
Qucen-mother to plirfue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he

nuchlan. 385. Crawf. Mcnm. .13.

ecrvcd

3

served her with a zeal and affection, to which he sacrificed the BOOK V.
friendship of those who were most attached to his person. But, 1570

.570o

on the other hand, his ambition was immoderate; and events hap-
pened, that opened to him vast profpeds, which allured his en-
terprizing genius, and led him to ascions, inconsistent with the
duty of a subjet. His treatment of the Queen, to whose bounty
he wvas so much indebted, was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The
dependance on Elizabeth, under which he brought Scotland, was
disgraceful to the nation. He deceived and betrayed Norfolk, with
a baseness unworthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such
unexpeced dignity, inspired him with new passions, with haugh-
tiness and reserve; and instead of his natural manner, which was
bLunt and open, he affected the arts ofdifilmulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery, and impatient of ad-
vice, his creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him astray, while
his ancient friends flood at a distance, and predicted his approaching
fall. But, amidst the turbulence and confusion of that faaious pe-
riod, he dispensed justice with so much impartiality, he repressed
the licentious borderers with so much courage, and established such
uncommon order and tranquillity in the country, that his admi-
nillration was extremely popular, and he was long and affelion-
ately remembered among the commons, by the name of the Good

ThRege

e f

th. FRT LU
The E ND of the FIRST Vo L u M sI
