THE
HISTORY

F
A M E R I C A.

V OL. I.

a 19 ~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~x~3

of the
of ME, XICIC
~~~~bw i; Ilv IS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~h. SLAWIDS a.,U

o For L~~~~~~~ T~~~~r~~ n~~Hobertte lben'rssn'

VPpIilo3oLria

~~~M g '· Bt~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~jP/,,·'X·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Th usie 1
.7)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~mnr·.

b 1·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- 4
Ar v ~w *7r

i: Q ~ ~

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~En~~~~~~r (' a I1C
e~~~~~~~,oLU LA ILL F

--------s~r P'`Ct
~~~~-~~~~~ob, c~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~~~~·sn A ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~nPI: dO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Ym~~~~~~~~ZII tsocd~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1. ~ ~ ~ J

Is: ~~~~~~~na~~~~,~~~p~~~Y'Si~~~~~~~·~~~u~~~' ~~~ ~ Al

·ti ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~PIP~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~ ,,~~~~~~~R
:r. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ armar~~~~~~~~~~~~Y a ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~ItZ h ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~jj~~~~~jy

~ ~~; .,s~~~~~~~~~m~~~lk

-11'·1KLpcS~ ~ 2·r"~ r
j^~ ROM e a Rn.

!'~~~~'~~~5··~~~~· Sh~~~~~~e e~~~~u8

~

~

~

~

~

sqP.~~~~~R~~~r~~~o

2-

~~~~~~T;MJ~~~~~~S-#

C~b~kCZt~~c ··, ,

,

ii-~-A·
8

7, 'Q"-ra..?;?i..

THE
H I ST 0 R Y

F

M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
RINCIPAL OF THI UNIVlESITY or EDINIOZIG, MNITORIOGOIAPNZ

o0 IlS MAJIZTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBE OF THE

EOYAL ACADMY OF ISTOIY AT ADID.
IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.
THE FIFTH EDITION.

LONDO N:
?rinted for A. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

# PREFACE.

PR E FA CE.
IN fulfilling the engagement which I had

come under to the Public with refpea

to the History of America, it was my inten-
tion not to have published any part of the
work until the whole was completed. The
present state of the British Colonies has in-
duced me to alter that resolution. While
they are engaged in civil war with Great Bri-
tain, inquiries and speculations concerning
their ancient forms of policy and laws,
which exist no longer, cannot be interest-
ing. The attention and expectation of man-
kind are now turned towards their future
condition. In whatever maimer this un-
happy contest may terminate, a new order
of things must arifc in North America, and
its affairs will assume another afpedt. I wait,
with the solicitude of a good citizen, until
the ferment fubfidc, and regular government
be re-established, and then I shall return to
this part of my work, in which I had made

A 3 fume

some progress. That, together with the
history of Portuguese America, and of the
settlements made by the several nations of
Europe in the Welt India islands, will com-
plete my plan.

THE three volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the
New World, and of the progress of the Spa-
nifh arms and colonies there. This is not
only the most splendid portion of the Ame-
rican flory, but o much detached, as, by
itself, to form a perfec whole, remarkable
for the unity of the fubje&. As the prin-
ciples and maxims of the Spaniards in plant-
ing colonies, which have been adopted in
some measure by every nation, are unfolded
in this part of my work; it will serve as a
proper introducion to the history of all the
European eablifhments in America, and
convey such information concerrring this im-
portant article of policy, as may be deemed
no less interesting than curious.

IN describing the atchievements and infli-

tutions of the Spaniards in the New World,
I have departed in many inltances from the
accounts of preceding liitorians, and have

17 often.

often related fats which seem to have been
unknown to them. It is a duty I owe the
Public, to mention the sources from which I
have derived such intelligence, as justifies me
either in placing tranfaions in a new light,
or in forming any new opinion with refpea
to their causes and effects. This duty I per-
form with greater fatisfaaion, as it will afford
an opportunity of expressing my gratitude to
those benefaaors, who have honoured me
with their countenance and aid in my re-
searches. - -

As it was from Spain that I had to exped

the most important information, with regard
to this part of my work, I confidered it as
a very fortunate circumstance for me, when
Lord Grantham, to whom I had the honour
of being personally known, and with whose
liberality of sentiment, and dip.fip:iun to
oblige, I was well acquainted, vas appointed
ambassador to the court of Madrid. Upon
applying to him, I met with such a reception
as satisfied me that his endeavours would be
employed in the most proper manner, in or-
der to obtain the gratification of iny wishes;
and I am perfectly fenlible, that what pro-
grefs I have made in my inquiries among the

A 4 Spaniards,

Spaniards, ought to be acribed chiefly to
their knowing how much his Lordship inte-
refted himself in my success.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord

Grantham, than the advantages which I have
derived from his attention in engaging Mr.
Waddilove, the chaplain of his embafly, to
take the conduc of my literary inquiries in
Spain, the obligations I lie under to him
would be very great. During five years,
that gentleman has carried on researches for
my behoof, with tich ativity, perseverance,
and knowledge of the subjet, to which his
attention was turned, as have filled me with
no less astonishment than fatisfation. He
procured for me the greater part of the Spa-
nifh books, which I have consulted; and as
many of them were printed early in the fix-
teenth century, and are become extremely
rare, the collecting of these was such an occu-
pation, as, alone, required much time and
afliduity. To his friendly attention I am in-
debted for copies of several valuable manu-
scripts, containing fats and details which I
might have searched for in vain, in works
that have been made public. Encouraged by
the inviting good-will with which Mr. Wad-

dilove

dilove conferred his favours, I transmitted to
him a set of queries, with refpe& both to the
customs and policy of the native Americans,
and the nature of several infittutions in the
Spanish settlements, framed in filch a manner,
that a Spaniard might answer them, without
disclosing any thing that was improper to be
coammunicated to a foreigner. He translated
these into Spaniih, and obtained from various
persons who had resided in most of the Spa-
nifh colonies, such replies as have afforded
me much inftruaion.

NOTWITHSTANDING those peculiar ad-

vantages with which my inquiries were car-
ried on in Spain, it is with regret I am
obliged to add, that their success muff be
ascribed to the beneficence of individuals,
not to any communication by public autho-
rity. By a singular arrangement of Philip II.
the records of the Spanish monarchy are de-
posited in the Archivo of Simancas, near Val-
ladolid, at the distance of a hundred and
twenty miles from the feat of government,
and. the supreme courts of juflice. The
papers relative to America, and chiefly to
that early period of its history, towards which
my attention was direcded, are so numerous,

that

that they alone, according to one account,
fill the argeft apartment. in the Archivo;
and according to another, they compose eight
hundred and feventy-three large bundles.
Conscious of possesing, in ome degree, the
industry which belongs to an historian, the
profpe& of such a treasure excited my most
ardent curiosity. But the profped of it, is
all that I have enjoyed. Spain, with an ex-
cess of caution, has uniformly thrown a veil
over her trapfations in America. From
firangers they are concealed with peculiar so-
licitude. Even to her own fubjets the Ar-
chivo of Simancas is not opened without a
particular order from the crown; and after
obtaining that, papers cannot be copied,
without paying fees of office so exorbitant,
that the expence exceeds what it would be
proper to bestow, when the gratification of
literary curiosity is the only object. It is to
be hoped, that the Spaniards will at last dif-
cover this system of concealment to be no
less impolitic than illiberal. From what I
have experienced in the course of my in-
quiries, I am satisfied, that upon a more
minute scrutiny into their early operations in
the New World, however reprehenifible the
acions of individuals may appear, the con-

dud

dut of the nation will be placed in a more
favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different

sentiments prevail. Having searched, with-
out success, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes
to Charles V. written oon after he landed
in the Mexican empire, which has not hi-
therto been published ; it occurred to me,
that as the emperor was setting out for Ger-
many at the time when the nmefengers from
Cortes arrived in Europe, the letter with
which they were intruded might possibly be
preserved in the Imperial library of Vienna.
I communicated this idea to Sir Robert Mur-
ray Keith, with whom I have long had the
honour to live in friendship, and I had oon
the pleasure to learn, that upon his applica-
tion, her Imperial Majesty had been gra-
cioufly pleased to issue an order, that not only
a copy of that letter (if it were found), but
of any other papers in the library, which
could throw light upon the History of Ame-
rica, hould be tranlfmitted to me. The letter
from Cortes is not in the Imperial Library,
but an authentic copy, attefled by a notary,
of the letter written by the magistrates of the
colony planted by him at Vera Cruz, which

I have

I have mentioned, Vol. ii. p. 269, having
been found, it was transcribed and sent to
me. As this letter is no less curious, and as
little known as that which was the object of
my inquiries, I have given ome account, in
its proper place, of what is most worthy of
notice in it. Together with it, I received a
copy of a letter from Cortes, containing a
long account of his expedition to Honduras,
with refpea to which, I did not think it
necetfary to enter into any particular detail;
and likewise those curious Mexican paintings,
which I have described, Vol. iii. p. 173.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were car-

ried on with equal facility and success. In
examining into the nearest communication
between our continent and that of America,
it became of consequence to obtain authentic
information concerning the discoveries of the
Ruffians in their navigation from Kamchatka
towards the coafft of America. Accurate re-
lations of their firfi voyage, in I74i, have
been published by Muller and Gmelin. Se-
veral foreign authors have entertained an
opinion, that the court of Ruffla studiously
conceals the progress which has been made by
more recent navigators, and suffers the Public

to

to be amused with false accounts of their route.
Such conduct appeared to me unsuitable to
those liberal sentiments, and that patronage
of science, for which the present sovereign of
Russia is eminent; nor could I discern any
political reason, that might render it im-
proper to apply for information concerning
the late attempts of the Ruffians to open a
communication between Asia and America.
My ingenious countryman, Dr. Rogerfon,
first physician to the empress, presented my
request to her Imperial Majesty, who not only
disclaimed any idea of concealment, but in-
flantly ordered the journal of Captain Krenit-
zin, who conducted the only voyage of dif-
covery made by public authority since the
year 1741, to be translated, and his original
chart to be copied for my use. By consulting
them, I have been enabled to give a more
accurate view of the progress and extent of
the Ruffian discoverics, than has hitherto been
communicated to the Public.

FROM other quarters I have received in-

formation of great utility and importance.
M. le Chevalier de Pinto, the minister from
Portugal to the court of Great Britain, who
commanded for fcveral years at Matagroff,

a fettle-

a ettlement of the Portuguese in the interior
part of Brazil, where the Indians are nu-
merous, and their original manners little
altered by intercourse with Europeans, was
pleaied to fend me very full answers to some
queries concerning the charater and infti-
tutions of the natives of America, which his
polite reception of an application made to
him in my name, encouraged me to pro-
pose. These satisfied me, that he had con-
templated with a discerning attention the
curious objecs which his situation presented
to his view, and I have often followed him as
one of my best inftruaed guides.

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation of

the Hiltory of the Reign of Charles V. I owe
the favourable reception of that work on the
continent, procured me answers to the fame
queries from M. de Bougainville, who had op-
porrunitics of observing the Indians both of
North and South America, and from M. Godin
le Jeune, who resided fifteen years among In-
dians in Quito, and twenty years in Cayenne.
The lartcr are more valuable from having
been examined by M. de la Condaminc, who,
a few eLks before his death, made some
fiort additions to them, which may be con-

fidered

confidered as the last effort of that attention to
science which occupied a long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one

region in America. Governor Hutchinson
took the trouble of recommending the confi-
deration of my queries to Mr. Hawley and
Mr. Brainerd, two protestant missionaries,
employed among the Indians of the Five
Nations, who favoured me with answers,
which discover a considerable knowledge of
the people whose cuttoms they describe. From
William Smith, Efq; the ingenious historian
of New York, I received some useful in-
formation. When I enter upon the History
of our Colonies in North America, I shall
have occasion to acknowledge how much I
have been indebted to many other gentlemen
of that country.

FROM the valuable Colle&cion of Voyages

made by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with
whose attention to the History of Navigation
and Discovery the Public is well acquainted,
I have received rome very rare books, parti-
cularly two large volumes of Memorials,
partly manuscript, and partly in print, which

were

were presented to the court of Spain during
the reigns of Philip III. and Philip IV. From
these I have learned many curious particulars
with refpe: to the interior state of the Spa-
nifh colonies, and the various schemes formed
for their improvement. As this Collecion of
Memorials formerly belonged to the Colbert
Library, I have quoted them by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have

consulted with that attention which the re-
spec due from an Author to the Public re-
quired; and by minute references to them,
I have endeavoured to authenticate whatever
I relate. The longer I reflect on the nature
of biftorical compolition, the more I am con-
vinced that this scrupulous accuracy is ne-
ceffary. The hiflorian who records the
events of his own time, is credited in pro-
portion to the opinion which the Public en-
tertains with refpea to his means of inform-
ation and his veracity. He who delineates
the tranfadions of a remote period, has no
title to claim aent, unless he produces evi-
dence in proof of his assertions. Without
this, he may write an anusing tale, but
cannot be said to have cornpoed an authentic
iifory. In those entiments I have been

conlirlced

confirmed by the opinion of an Author *,
whom his industry, erudition, and discern-
ment, have deservedly placed in a high rank
among the most eminent historians of the
age. Emboldened by a hint from him, I
have pub!ifhed a catalogue of the Spanish
books which I have consulted. This practice
was frequent in the last century, and was con-
fidered as an evidence of laudable induRtry in
an author; in the present, it may, perhaps,
be deemed the effec of ostentation; but as
many of there books are unknown in Great
Britain, I could not otherwise have referred
to them as authorities, without encumbering
the page with an insertion of their full titles.
To any person who may chufe to follow me
in this path of inquiry, the catalogue must
be very useful.

MY readers will observe, that in men-

tioning fums of money, I have uniformly
followed the Spanish method of computing
by pesos. In America, the peso fuerte, or
duro, is the only one known, and that is
always meant when any fum imported from
America is mentioned. The peso fuerte, as

* Mr. Gibbon.
VOL. I. a well

well as other coins, has varied in its nume
rary value; but I have been advised, with
out attending to such minute variations, t(
confider it as equal to four hillings ane
sixpence of our money. It is to be remem
bered, however, that in the sixteenth cen
tury, the effective value of a peso, i. e. th
quantity of labour which it represented, or o
goods which it would purchase, was five o
fix times as much as at present.

N. B. Since this edition was put into th

press, a Hitfory of Mexico, in two volume
in quarto, translated from the Italian of th
Abb6 D. Francesco Saverio Clavigero, ha
been published. From a person, who is
native of New Spain, who has resided fort
years in that country, and who is acquaintc,
with the iMexican language, it was natura
to expec much new information. Upo
peruiing his work, however, I find that i
contains hardly any addition to the anciei
Hitory of the Mexican empire, as related b
Acofta and Herrera, but what. is derive
from the improbable narratives and fancifi
conjecdtrcs of Torqucmada and Boturin

X3?~~ ~Havin

Having copied their splendid descriptions of
the high state of civilization in the Mexican
empire, he, in the abundance of his zeal for
the honour of his native country, charges me
with having miflaken sone points, and with
having misrepresentcd others, in the Hiflory
of it. When an author is conscious of having
exerted industry in research and impartiality
in decision, he may, without presumption,
claim what praise is due to thele qualities,
and he cannot be insensible to any accusation
that tends to weaken the force of his claim.
A feeling of this kind has induced me to
examine such ftriaures of M. Clavigero on
my History of America as merited any at-
tention, especially as thee are made by one,
who seemed to poflefs the means of obtaining
accurate information; and to shew that the
greater part of them is defiitute of any just
foundation. This I have done in notes upon
the passages in my History, which gave rife
to his criticisms.
COLLGE of EDINBURGH,

Mfarch ilf, 1788.

a2

# CONTENTS.

CO N T E N T S.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.

R O G R ESS of navigation among the ancients
-lT'ew of their discoveries as preparatory to

those of the moderns-Imperfetion of ancient na-
vigation and geography-Doatrine of the Zones
-Farther dcoveries checked by the irruption of
barbarous nations-Geographical knowledge still
preserved in the Ea, and among the Arabians-
Revival of commerce and navigation in Europe-
favoured by the Croifades-extended by travellers
into the Eat-promoted by the invention of the
mariner's compas--Firli regular plan of dyfco-
very formed by Portugal-State of that kingdom
-Schemes of Prince Henry-Early attempts feeble
-Progress along the western coast of Africa-
Hopes of discovering a new route to the East
Indus-Attempts to accomplijh tis-Pr/petts
of Juccefs.

a 3 BOOK

BOOK II.
Birth and education of Columbus-acquires naval

j'ilj in .the fer'wce of Portugal-conceives hopes
of reaching the EaJtI ndies by holding a wefferly
courJe-his J]fienm founded on the ideas of the
ancierts, and knowledge of their navigation-
and on the dcoveries of the Portuguefe-His
negociations with difierent courts-- Obstacles
-.:hich-.be had to surmount in Spain-Voyage of
diJcov'ey --difficuties-fuccefs-return to Spain
-Ajlonijhm;ent of mankind on this discovery
of a New WVorld-Papal grant of it-Second
voyage-Colony fettled-Farther dyicoveries-
IlIar with the Indians-Firf tax imposed on them
-Third voyage-He dcovers the continent-
State of the panif7j colon-Errors in the firfi
fjflem of colonizing-7oyage of the Prtuguefe
to the East Idies by the Cape of Good Hope-
Effests of this--Di.overies made l'y private ad-
venturers in the Nezw World-l-Name of America
given to it-Mlahinaticns againji Columbus-
Disgraced and Jelnt in chains to Europe-Fourth
voyage of Columb:s-IIis difcoveries-difafers-
death.

B OO K I.
Stae of the colony in t/paniola-New war wiitl

the Indians-Cruelty of the paniards-Fatal
regulio.'s ccncernilng the coulition of. the .In-

dians-

dians--Diminution of that people-Di/coveries
andfettlements-Firft colony planted on the con-
tinent-Conqueft of Cuba-Difcovery of Florida
-of the South Sea-Great expeslations raffed
by this-Caufes of difappointmnent with refpet
to thbee for some time-Controverjy concerning
the treatment of the Indians-Contrary dci/ions
--Zeal of the ecclesiastics, particularly of Las
Cafas-Singular proceedings of Ximenes-Ae-
groes imported into America-Las Casas' idea of
a new colony-permitted to attempt it-unfuc-
cefsful-Difcoveries towards the WeIft- ucatan
-Campeachy- New Spain-Preparations for
invading it.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

B O OK V.

'iew of America when firfi discovered, and of the

manners and policy of its most uncivilized inhabit-
ants-IVaj extent of America-Grandeur of the
objects it presents to -view-Its mountains-rivers
-lakes-Its form favourable to conmmerce-Tem-
perature-predominance of cold-Cates of this
-uncultivated-unwholefome-its animals--foil
-Inquiry how Ancmrica was peopled-various
theories--what appears most probable-Condition
and charaser of he Americans- ll, the Mexi-

a 4 cans

cans and Peruvians excepted, in thb Jate of fa-
vages-Inquiry confined to the au^oilized tribes
-Di¢Scuty of obtaining informatio various
causes of this-Method observed in the iiquiry--
I. The bodily confitation of the Americans eon-
Jidered-II. bhe qalities of their minds-
III. Their doheftic Atate--IV. bheir political
slate and inftitutios-V. heir fyjfem f war
and public fecurity-VI. The arts with wbibc
bthy Tvere acquainted-VII. Ibheir religious ideas
and initutions-VIII. Such singular and de-
tached cftoms as are not reducible to any of the
former heads-IX. General review and rfimate
of their virtues and defeefs.

BOOK V.
HiJory of the conquest of New Spain by Corter.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

BOOK VI.
Ilifory of the conquefi of Peru, by Pizarro-and

of the dijenfions and civil wars of thb Spaniards
in that country-Origin-progrefs-and #efls
of these.

BOOK

B OO VII.
iiew of the inflitutions and manners of the Mexi-

cans and Peruvians-Civilized flates in eompa-
rifon of other Americans-Recent origin of the
Mexicans-Fats which prove their progress in
civilization-View of their policy in its various
branches-of their arts-Fasts which indicate
a small progress in civilization-What opinion
jbould be formed on comparing those contradicory
faats-Genius of their religion-Peruvian mo-
narchy more ancient-Its policy founded on reli-
gion-Singular feJes of this-Peculiar slate of
property among the Peruvians-Their public
works and arts-roads-bridges-buildings-
Their unwarlike fpirit-View of other domi-
nions of Spain in America- Cinaloa and Sonora-
California-T ucatan and Honduras-Chili--
Tucuman-Kingdom of ierra Firmi-New
Kingdom of Granada.

B O 0 K VIII.
View of the interior government, commerce, Sc.

of the Spani# colonies-Depopulation of America
sirs effet of their fettlements-not the confe-
quence of any jfyJem of policy-nor to be im-
puttd to religion-Number of Indians f/ill re-
maining-Fundamental maxims on which the
Spanilh Jyftem of colonization is founded-Con-
dition of different orders of men in their co-
lonies-Chapetones - Creoles-Negroes-Indians

-Eccle-

-Eccle/iaftical slate and policy-Charaater of
secular and regular clergy-Small progress of
Christianity among the natives-Mines chief
objel of their attention-Mode of working
thefe-their produce-Eff eis of encouraging this
species of induJfry-Other commodities of Spanifl
America-Firfi effecs of this new commerce with
America on Spain-Why the Spani/h colonies
have not been as beneficial to the parent-ftate
as those of other nations -Errors in the Spanif
fyJfem of regulating this commerce-confined ti
one port-carried on by annual fleets-Contra-
band trade-Decline of Spain both in populatio,
and wealth-Remedies propofed-Jiew of thi
wife regulations of the Bourbon princes-A neu
and more liberal fvJycm introduced-Beneficia,
effe5ls of this-Probable confequences-lrad
between New Spain and the Philippines-Reeni,
of Spain from Armer-ica-whence it arifes-t
what it amounts.

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

OF
Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
AC AR E T E de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la

Riviere de la Plata, & de la par Terre au Perou.
Exf. Recueil de Thevcnot, Part IV.

---- -- A voyage up the River de la Plata, and
thence by Land to Peru, 8vo. London, 1698.

Acofta (P. JoC de) Hifloria Natural y Moral de las Indias.
+to. Madrid, 1590.

--- (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturellc & Morale des Indes
tant Orientales qu' Occidcntales, 8vo. Paris, 1600.

--ovi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Ext. in Collec. Thcod. de Bry, Pars IX.

- - De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de pro-
curanda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo. 1589.

- ---- (Chriftov.) Tratado da las Drogas y Medecinas

de las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al vivo,
4to. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Chriltoph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama.
zones, Izmo. Tom. ii. Paris, 162z.

Acugna's Relation of the great River of the Amazons in
South America, 8vo. Lond. i698.

Alarchon

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprere il Regno di
fette Citta. Ramufio, III. 365.

Albuquerque Coello, (Duarte de) Memorial de Artes de
la Guerra del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1634.

Aleafarado (Fran.) An HiRlodcal Relation of the Diciavery
of the Me of Madeia, 4to. Lond. r675.

Algedo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-

Politico-Geografico, con las Noticias mas particulares, del
Peru, Tierra Firmi, Chili, y neuvo Reyno de Granada, 4to.
Mad. 1740.

-- Compendiw Miforico de 1a Proviacia y Puerto de
Guayaqui, 4to. Mad. 1741.

- Memorial fobre diferentes Puntos tocantes al

eftado de la Real hazienda, y del Comercio, &c. en las
Indias, fol.

Aldama y Guevara (D. Jos. Aguffin de) Arte de la
Lengua Mexicana, zmo. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Her. Cortes

Referlendole sus Expediciones y Conquiftas en varias Pro-
vincias de N. fpagna. Exft. Barcia Hiftoind. Primit.
tom. i.

--- Lettere due, &c. Exft. Ramus. III. 296.
Aparicio y Leon (D. Lorenzo de) Difcurfo Hifrico-

Politico del Hospital San Lazaro de Lima, 8vo. Lim
1761.

Aranzeles Reales de los MiniRros de la Real Audiencia de
N. Efpagna, fol. Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquila de las Illas
Malucas, fol. Mad. 1609.

--- Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragoca, 1630.
Arguello (Eman.) Sentum Confefionis, iamo. Mlx.
1703.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del
Peru, 4t0. ima, 16z1.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus, ecu generalis

Inftruftor pro Regimine Confcientiae, in ijs qua ad Indias
fpeant, fol. z vol. Antwerp, 1660.

Azaar

Aznar (D. Bern. Fran.) Difcurfo tocante a a real-hazienda
y dminiftrcion de ella, 4o.

B

Bandini (Angelo Mara) Vita e Lettere di Amerigo

Vespucci, 4to. Firenze, 1745.

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores Primitivos de las
Indias Occidentalcs, fol. .3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera (D. Martin de) Argentina y Conquilia

del Rio de la Plata Poema. Exft. Barcia Hitoriad.
Primit. III.

Barros (Joo de) Decadas de Aa, fol. 4 vols. Liboa,

z682.

BellefReros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, foL

2 vols. Lima, 1685.

Beltran (P. F. Pedro) Arte de el Jdioma Maya reducido a

fucintas reglas, y Semilexicon, 4to. Mex. 1746.

Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hilorise-De Bry America,
Part IV. V. VI.

Betancurt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Iglefias

Metropolitanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Converlion de Piritu de Indios
Cumanagotos y otros, szmo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Idea de una neuva HiRtoria

general de la America Septentrional, findada fobre material
copiofa de Figuras, Symbolas Carateres, Cantares y Manu-
fcritos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco dc) El

Nuevo Mundo Poema Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias,

Reynos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Gcographiae Veteris & Nova, 4to.
Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Relacion de los Nau-
frgios. Exft. Barcia Hill. Prim. tom. i.

Cabcza

Cabea de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Examen Apologetico

]a Hiftorica Narration de los Naufragios. Exft. Barcia Hi
Prim. tom. i.

--- - Commentarios de lo fuccedido duaran
fu gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 310.
Cabota (Sebaft.)Navigazione de. Exlt. Ramus. . . .
Cadamuftus (Aloyfius) Navigatio ad Terras incognita
.Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynaci, p. .

Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Orde
de San Augulfin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y Ticr

hechos en 1768, al Norte de California di ordcn dcl Marqu
de Croix Vi-rey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo qi

a fu Mageftad Provien de la Nueva Epagna y Peru, 4t
1645.

Campomanes (D. Pedro Rodrig.) Antiguedad Maritima c

la Republica de Cartago, con el Periplo de fu general Hann(
traducido e illuftrado, 4to. Mad. 1756.

- Difcurfo fobre el fomento de la Indufri
popular, 8vo. Mad. 1774.

_-- - Difcurfo fobre la Educacion popular de lc
Artefanos, 8vo. 5 vol. Mad. 1775, &c.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compagn
Guipufcoana de Caracas, zmo. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias qi

tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe Proviel
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad, lo que fe Gafta c
ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedicado al Marques
Santos Claros, Agno, de 1611. MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico para
Ililloria general de la Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Carranzana (D. Gongales) A Geographical Description
the Coalts, &c. of the Spanish Weft-Indics, 8vo. Lonl. 174c

Casas (Bart. de las) Breviflima Relacion de la Dcftruycic
dlc las Indias, 4to. I55-.

Clf.

Casas (Bart. de ls) Narratio Iconibus illuftrata per Theod.
de Bry. 4to. Oppent. 1614.

-- (Bart. de las) An Account of the firil Voyages

and Difcovcrics of the Spaniards in America, Svo. Loud.
1693.

Caffani (P. Joseph) Hiltoria de la Provincia de Cc.n-

ragnia de Jesus dl Nucvo Reyno de Granada, fol. MId.
1741.

Caltanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimento

& Conquifla de India pclos Portugucfcs, fol. 2 vol. Lilbon,

155z.

Caftcllanos (Juan de) Primera y Sccunda de las Elcgias dc
Varones lluftres de Indias, 4to. z vol. Mad. 1589.

Caflillo (ernal Diaz del) lilloria Verdadera de la Con-
quilla de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 163z.

Cafiro, Figueroa y Slazar (D. Pcdro de) Rclacion di fu
ancimicnto y fervicios, zmno.

Cavallcro (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las

pefas y Medidas di varias Naciones, reducidas a las que
Correen nCaftilla, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cepeda (D. Fern.) Relacion Universal del Sitio cn que
ella fundada la Ciudad de Mexico, fol. Mex. 1637.

CieSa de Leon (Pedro de) Chronica del Peru, fol. Scvill.

i553.

Cifneros (Diego) Sitio, Naturaleza y Propricdadcs de la

Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Clemcnte (P. Claudio) Tablas Cilronologicas, en que

contienen los Sucefos Ecclefialtico y Seculares de Indias,
4to. Val. 1689.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) IIillori:a de Yucatan, fol.

Mlad. 168S.

Collecao dos Brives Pontificos c Iccs Rcgia3 quc forao

J.:pedidos y Publicadas dedc o Anno 17 4 , il)re a la L-
berdada dcs Pclfoas bene Comlmcrci) dos Inds. de Brefil.

Colleccion General de las 'rovidcnci:ls halta aqui tomadas
par cl Gobicrio fobre el Ellragiiiniclto, y Occupacion de

Tempo-

Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de
Efpagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hilloria del Almirantc, D.
ChriRoval Colon. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. I. .

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hac-
tenus incognitas invenit. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. 90.

(Ferd.) Life and Afions of his Father Admiral
Christoph. Columbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Compagnia Real de Comercio para las Iflas de Sto.
Domingo, Puerto-rico y la Margarita, izmo.

Compendio General de las contribuciones y gattos que

pcafionan todos los effetos, frutos, caudales, &c. que traican
entre los reynos de Castilla y America, 4to.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en

la muy Noble y muy leal Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos de
1555 & 1565, fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum
Mexici, Anno 1585, fol. Mcxici, 1770.

Continente Americano, Argonauta de las costas de Nueva
Efpagna y Tierra Firmc. zmo.

Cordeyro (Antonio) Hiftoria Infulana das ilhas a Portugas
fugeytas no Oceano Occidental. fol. Lilb. 1717.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los

Segnores, manera y Differencia de ellos, que havia en la
Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y de
sus Leyes, Ufos y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en
Tributar sus Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS.
4t0. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere del

Viaggio fatto del Fra. Marco da Nizza al fette Citta de
Cevola. Exft. Ramufio III. 354.

Relacion Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ramuflo II.
359.

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador

Carlos V. en que ha Relacion dc sus Conquiftas en la Nueva
Efpagna. Exil. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Corteffli (Ferd.) De infulis nuper inventis Narrationcs ad
Carolum V. fol. 1532.

3 Cortcfc

Cortee-(Fern.) Relacioni, &c. Ext. Ramufio III. 22z.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte dl

Mundo, Zaragoff. 4to. 1688.
Cumana-Govierno y Noticia de, fol. MS.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria dc la Fundacion y

Difcurfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Bruff.
1625.

--- (Gil Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la Pri-

mitiva Iglefia de los Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols.
1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regulares

de la Compagnia fufcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas Obifpo
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echaveri (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El Reyno Jefuitico del

Paraguay. ExfR. tom. iv. Colleccion dc Documentos, 4to.
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Aflu (D. Francisco de) La Eftrella de Lima

convertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, foL Amberes,
s688.

Eguiara El Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana,
five Eruditorum Hiftoria Virorum in America Boreali natorum,
&c. tom. prim. fol. Mex. 1775. N. B. No more than
one volume of this work has been published.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana, Poema
Eroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

-a------- vol. 8vo. Mad. 1777.
Efcalona (D. Gaspar dc) Gazophylacium Regium Peru-
vicum, fol. Mad, 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiforia del Reyno de Portugal,
fol. Amber. 1730.

VOL. I. b Faria

Faria y Sousa, HiRory of Portugal from the irft Ages to
the Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lond. 698

Fernandez (Diego) Primera y fecunda Parte de la Hiloria
del Peru, fol. Sevill. 1571.

------- (P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Hiftorial de las

Mifliones de los Indias que claman Chiquitos, to. Mad.
1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcur.
so VI. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

----- Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico fobrc

la Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tom. v. del
Teatro Critico.

-- - (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de
Ciudad y Provincia Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Pivatas de la America, 4to.
Fraffo (D. Petro) De Regio Patronatu Indiaru, fol
2 vols. Matriti, 1775.

G

Galva6 (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos Antigos:
Modernos, fol. Lifboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from th

first Original unto the Year 555. Osborne's Collec. I1
354-

Gamboa (D. Fran. Xavier de) Comentarios a los ordi
nanzas de Minas, fol. Mad. 1761.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiloria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de 1

India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion de la Santa Evar
geliaen ella, 12mo. Baeca, 1626.

.--- (Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nue
Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Gaftelu (Anton. Valcfquez) Arte de Lengua Mexican:
4to. Puibla de los Angeles. 1716.

Gazeta de Mexico pos los Annos 1728, 1729, 1730, 4to.
Girava (Hicronymo) Dos Libros de Cofmographia. Mila

1556.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que tra
del Dcfcubrimiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Proviucias,

Gufrr

Guerras que tuio con los Indios. Exft. Barcia Hil. Prim.
tom. i.

Godoy Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 300.
Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las Indias,
izmo. Any. 1554.

- Hiftoria general de las Indias. Exft. Barcia Hilt.
Prim. tom. ii.

- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 6 Conquifta de
Mexico. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. ii.

Guatemala-Razon puntual de los fucceffos mas memora-

biles, y de los efiragos y dannos que ha padecido la rindad de
Guatemala, fol. 1774.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) El Orinoco illuftrado y defendido;

Hiftoria Natural, Civil, y Geographica de ete Gran Rio, &c.
4t. 2 tom. Mad. 1745.

--------- Hilloire Naturelle, Civile, & Geogra-

phique de l'Orenoque. rraduite par M. Eidous, limo.
tom. iii. Avig. 1758.

Gufman (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provincia

de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exft. Ra-
mufio III. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides Belli Guiaranici, ab
Anno 1754. Exft. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarum, Animalium & Mineralium

Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. 165 1.

Herera (Anton. de) Hiftoria general de los Hechos de

los Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma de Mar Oceano,
fol. vols. Mad. 1601.

Hiftoria General, &c. 4 vols. Mal. 1730.

- General History, &c. Tranfated by Stephens,

8vo. 6 vols. Lond. 1740.

--- Defcriptio Indic Occidentalis, fol. Amfl. 1622.
Hueme y Horcafitas (D. Juan rancifco de) Extratto de
los utos de Diligencias y reconocimicntos de los rios, lagunas,

b a vcrticnte.,

vertientes, y defaguas de Mexico y fu valle, &c. fol. Mex.
1748.

Jefuitas-Colleccion de las applicaciones que fe van ha-

cicndo de los Ciencs, caras y Coligios qde fucron de a Com-
pagnia de Jefis, cxpatriados de ellos Reales dominios, 4t0.
2 vols. Lima, 177Z y 1773.

------., Colleccion General de Providencias hafta aqui

tomadas por el Gobierno fobre el Erannamiento y Occupa-
cion de temporalidades, de los Regulares de la Compagnia dc
E(pagna, Iudias, c Iflas Filipinas, 4to. Mad. 1767.

- Retrato de los efuitas formado al natural, 4to.
2 vols. Mad. 1768.

*----- Relacion Abbreviada da Republica que os Reli-
.giofos Jefuitas ellabeleceraon, zmo.

Idea del Origen, Gobierno, &c. dc la Com-
pagnia de Jesus, 8vo. Mad. 1768.

L

Laevinius (Apollonius) Libri V. de Peruviae Invention. &
rebus ineadem geltis, Izmo. Ant. 1567.

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. de) Hernandia, Poema Hcroyco de Con-
quila de Mexico, 4to. Mad. 1755.

(Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental y
Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

Lima, A true account of the Earthquake which happened

there z8th Otober 1746. Translated from the Spanifl,
8vo. Lond. 1748.

Lirna Gozofa, Description dc las feftibas Demonltraciones,

con que clla ciudad Celebr6 la real Proclamacion de el
Nombre Augflto del Catolico Monarcho 1. Carlos 111.
Lima, to. 1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufcb.) Prcliminar al Tomo I. de

la Memorias Hiftorico-Piyficas, Critico-Applogeticas de a
America Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz, 1759.

18 Lopez

Lopez (D. Juan Luis) Difcurfo Hiftorico Politico en defenfo
de la Jurifdicion Real, fol. 1685.

- (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Sep-

tentrional y Meridional, zmo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Arzobifpo de Mexico, ahora, de

Toledo, Hiltoria de Nueva Efpagna, efcrita por fu Efclarecido
Conquistador Hernan Cortes, Aumcntada con otros Docu-
mentos y Notas, fol. Mcx. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Dfcription Chorographica, dl Terre-

torios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los Ritos
y Coftumbres, de las innumerabiles Naciones que la liabitan.
4to. Cordov. 1733.

- Hiltora de la Coinpagnia de Jrfus cn la Pro-

vincia del Paraguay, fol. z vols. Mad. 1753.

Madriga (Pedro dc) Dfcription dc la Gouverncment di.

Percu. Exit. Voyages qui ont fcevi ;l l'ctaLlifcmn nt de la
comp. des ndes, torn. ix. o5.

Mariana (P. Juan d) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades de la
Compagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiflas, y Guerras de la India
Oriental, y sus Iflas, dc!de los Tiempos dcl Infante Don
Enrique de Portugal si inventor. 4to. Mad. 1681.

M1artyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & Nova
Orbe Decades trcs, Isnzo. Colon. 1574.

--- - Dc Infulis nuper invent is, & de MAolibu
Incolaruin. llid. p. 329.

Opus Epiilolarum, fol. Amfl. 167o.

-- 11 So:niri:-io cavato della fua Hiftorin del Nuevo

Mlundo. Ranurio 111. i.

IVla:a (D. G;cron. F1crn. de) Ideas politicas y or;al.,
I'mo. Toledo, 16eo.

1Mechuacan,-Rcl.icion die las Cercnlonias, Pi

, i Pul.

nlcion de s Indios de Meclin.-an liccha al 1. S. 1). Ait. 1,
jMndoa irrcy de Nueval l s;:,rn, ti;l. MS.

[. '

Melendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Verdaderos de las Indias

Hiftoria de la Provincia de S. Juan Baptifa del Peru, del
Orden de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols. Rom. 1681.

Memlorial Ajuftado por D. A. Fern. de Heredia Goberna.
dor de Nicaragua y Honduras, fol. 1753.

Memorial Adjullado contra los Officiales de Casa de Moneda
a Mexico de el anno 1729, fol.

Mendoza (D. Ant. de) Lcttera al Imperatore del Disco.

primento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramon.
tano. Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

(Juan Gonz. de) Historia del gran Reyno de

China, con un Itinerario del Nevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom
1585.

Miguel (Vic. Jos.) Tablas de los Sucefos Ecclefiaffico

en Africa, Indias Orientales y Occidentales, 4to. Val
1689.

Miscellanea Economico-Politica, &c. fol. Pampl. 1749.
Molina (P. F. Anton.) Vocabulario Catellano y Mexicano
fol. 1571.

Monardes (El Dotor) Primera y Segunda y Tercer

Parte de la. Hiftoria Mecdicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen d
nuefiras Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medicina, 4tc
Sevilla, 1754.

Moncada (Sancho de) Rclauracion Politica de Efpagna
defeos Publicos, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Morales (Ambrofio de) Coronica General dc Epagni:
fol. 4 vol. Alcala, 1574.

Moreno y Efcaudon (D. Fran. Ant.) Defcripcion y Ead

del Virreynato de Santa Fe, Nuevo Reyno de Granada, &
fol. MS.

Munoz (D. Antonio) Difcurfo fobre economia politic;
8vo. Mad. 1769.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Ter
al Cevole, Regno di cettc Citta. Exft. Ramus. III. 356.

Nod

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Barth. y Gonz. de Nodal al defcubrimiento del Eltrecho que
hoy es nombrado de Maie, y reconocimiento del de Magel-
lanes, 4to. Mad.

Noticia Individual de los derechos egun lo reglado en
ultimo proyeato de 1.7zo. rto. Barcelona, 1732.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna

dibidida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos,
Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
fegunda de f maravillofa Conversion a la F y modo de
celebrar las Fiestas de Nuefira Santa Iglefia. En la tercera
del Genio y Caracer de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que
notaban sus Acontecimientos, con otras particularidades; y
Noticias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Rcyno. Efcrita
en el Agno 1541 por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos
que primero Paffaron a entender en fu Conversion. MS. fol.
pp. 618.

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, Izmo. Mad.
1605.

Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad.
1681.

Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer
Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) History of the Portuguese, during the
Reign of Emmanuel, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

Oflorius( Hieron.) De rebus Emmanuclis Lulitanix Rcgis,

8vo. Col. Agr. 1572.

Ovalle (Alonfo) Hiftorica Rclacion del Reyno de Chili,

fol. Rom. 1646.

- An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili.
Exft. Churchill Colled. III. .

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiloria la Conquifla y Publi-
cacion ce Vcnezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedo Sommaria, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 44.

b 4 Oviedo

Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hilloria
Natural de los Indias, Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hilloria (enerale & Naturale dell Indie Occiden-
tale. Exft. Ramufio III. 74.

- Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandilfma
Fiune Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III. 415.

P

Palacio (D. Raim. Mig.) Difcurfo Economico Politico,
4to. Mad. 1778.

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o
Naturaliza y Coftumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

--- Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de
I'Angelopolis, 12mo. Cologne, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de
las Iflas de Gran Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pegna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Pa-

rochos de Indios, cn quc tratan les materias mas particularcs,
tocantes a ellos para fa bucn adminiltracion, 4to. Amberes,
1754.

Penalofa y Mondragon (Fr. Benito de) Cineo Excellen-

cias del Espagnol que des pueblan a Efpagna, 4to. Panpl.
16z9.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Con-
quifta del Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apollol de las In-

dias y nueves gentes San Francisco Xavicr de la Compagnia
de Jesus Epitome de sus Apollolicos hechos, 4to. Pampl.
1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hifloricos do eftado
do Maranchao, fol. Lilboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo d(el Defcopri-
mento y Conquilta del Peru. Exll. Ranuf. IIr. 371.

Peru -Relatione d'un Secrctario dec Franc. I'izzarro della
Conquefai del Peru. Exft. Ramufo 111. 371.

.-- Relacion dl Peru, MS.
pefqilira de los Oy,!orcs dc Panama contra D. J:lme Mug-

1t0 '·

aos, &c. por haverlos Commerciado illicitamente en tiempo
de Guerro, fol. 1755.

Philipinas-Carta que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de
Philipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le pregunta
el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Eftas Illas.
MS. 4t0.

Piedrahita (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquiftas
del Nuevo Reynode Granada, fol. Ambres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Leon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental

y Occidental en qe fe contienen los Efcritores de las Indias
Orientalcs y Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio & res per

eum repertse. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynxi, p. 119.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illultres del N.

Mundo, fol. Mad. 1639.

Plancus Judorum Chriftianorum in America Peruntina,

12mo.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hilto-

rias de los Defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus Iflas,
4to. Mad. 681.

Q_

QOir (Ferd. de) Terra Auflralis Incognita, or a new

Southern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the World lately
found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

Ramufio (Giov. Battifla) Racolto delle Navigationi e

Viaggi, fol. 3 vol. Venct. 1588.

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias hilto-

riales Practicas, de los Succeffos y Adelantamientos de elta
Comnpagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728 halla 1764, 4to.
1765.

I'ccopilacion de Leycs de los Reynos de las Indias, fol.
4 uols. Madl. 7,56.

RIcglaiicnto

Reglasento y Aranles Rm as pr cl Comordo d
Efpagnaa Indias, fol. Mad. 1778.

Relatione d'an G tilhuomno dl Sig. Fern. Ctefe del

gran Citta Temiiaa, Mexico, & iele attre cofe dea Nov
Spagna. Ext. Ramu/.
t . I 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) HiRforia general de las Indias Occi

dentales y particular de a Governacim de Clhiapa y Guati
mala, fol. Mad. 16zo.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichnelo de) Relacion del Viag

de(li que falio de Liman, afa quc leg a Epagna, 4tc
Mad. 1657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Con
pendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad. 17'55.

Ribas Andr. Perez de) Hiftori de los Triumphos d

NueRra Sta Fe, entre Gentes la mas Barbaras, en las miffione
de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre e

eflado atual de los Papeles universales de la Monarchia
MS.

Ripia (Juan de la) Practica de la Adminitracion y cobranz
de las rentas reales, fol. Mad. 1768.

Rocha Pitta (Sebastian6 de) Hiforia de America Portou

gueza des de o Anno de 1500 du fu Defcobrimento ate o d
1724, fol. Lilboa, 1730.

Rodriguez (anuel) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Sani
Cruzada, 4t0. Alcala, 1589.

- -- (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, Hiftor

de los Defcubrimientos, Entradas y Reducion de Nacione
fol. Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vol
Mad. 1595.

Roma y Rofell (D. Franc.) Las fegnales de la fel

cidad de Efpagna y medios de hacerlas efficaces. 8vo. Mad
a768.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafo
Arzobifpo de Mcxico, fol. Mad. 1671.

3 Rubalav

Rubacava (Don Jos. Gutierrez de) Tratado Hiftorito
Polisico, y Legal de el commercio de las Indias Occidentales,
izmo. Cad. 1750.

Ruiz (P. Ant.) ConquiRa Efpiritual hecha por los Reli-

giofos de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias de la
Paraguay Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) MIonarquia de Efpagna,
tom. i, ii, iii. fol. Mad. 1770.

-- - y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquitla de

Mexico-Segunda parte, Cordov. 1743.

-- y Zeval!os (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conftituciones

y Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real
Univerfidad y eltudio general Re San Marcos de la Ciudad de
los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Rcyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur 'Origine de la

Maladie Venerienne, dans laquelle on preuve qu'elle n'a point
te portee de l'Amerique, izmo. Paris, 1765.
Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al ERrecho de
Magellanes, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Companias
General, izmo. Mad. 1732.

Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, y Margarita, Real Com-
pagnia de Comercio, i2mo. 1756.

Schemidel (Huldcrico) Hiftoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio
de la Plata y Paraguay. Exf. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva (of. de) Recueil Chronologiquc & Ana-

lytique de tout cc qu'a fait en Portugal la Societ6 dite de Jesus,
depuis son Entre6 dans ce Royaume en 154o jufqu'a son Ex-
pulfion 1759, Izmo, 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Segni (). Diego Raymundo) Anriquario Noticiofa General
deEfpagna y sus Indios, mo. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juftis belli caufis, pre-
fertim in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

---- --- (Jo. Genefius) Epifolarum Libri VII. 12mo.
Salam. 1557.

Sepulveda

Sepulvedaderegno, LibriIII. 2mo. Ilerdax, 1570.
Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval Hydrographico,
4to. 1648.

---- - Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotera de la
Region Austral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiltoriales de las Conquiftas de
Tierra Firme en las Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Iifloria de las Conquiltas de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1684.

- -- History of the Conqueil of Mexico.-Tranf-
lated by Townsend, fol. 1724.

Solorzano y Pereyrra (Joan.) Politica Indiana, fol. 2 vol.
Mad. 1776.

L--- De Indiarum jure, five de juita Indiarum Occi-
dentalium Gubernatione, fol. vols. Lugd. 1672.

Obras Varias pofthumas, fol. Mad. 1776.

Soto y marne (P. Franc. de) Copia de la Relacion de Viage

que defde la ciudad de Cadiz a la Cartagena de Indias hizo,
4to. Mad. 1753.

Spilbergen ct Le Maire Speculum Orientalis Occidentalifque
Navigationum, 4to. L. Bat. 619.

Suarez de Figueroa (Chriftov.) Hechos de D. Garcia
Hurtado dc Mendoza, 4to. Mad. 1613.

T

Tanco (Luis Beaerra) Felicidad de Mexico en la admi-

rable Aparicion de N. Signora di Guadalupe, 8vo. Mad.
1745.

Tarragones (HIieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmographia,
4to. Milan, 1556.

Tccho (F. Nichol. de) The Hiflory of the Provinces

Paraguay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exit. Churchill's
Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. 1723.

Torres (Siim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exft. Barcia
Hlill. Prim. 11l.

Torrcs

Torres (Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Mi-

lit:.res de Santiago, C.latrava y Alcantara, dcfde fu Fundacion
hafta el Rcy D. Fclipe II. Adminitador perpetuo dellas,
fol. Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hifioria Natural
Efpagnala, fol. Mad. 7S4.

- --- Differtacion HilloriCo Polltica y en mucha parte

Geographicade las l!las Pliilipinas, 12mo. Mad. 1753.

Totanes (F. Sebalian dc) Manual Tagalog para auxilio de

provincia de las Philipinas, 4to. Samplai cn las Philipinas,
1745.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) oyage Hiltorique de l'Amcrique
Meridionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 1752.

-- (D. Ant. de) Noticias Americana5, Entretenimi-

entos Phyficos-Hilforicos, fobre la America Meridional y la
Septentrional Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

---- (D. Bern. de) Reltablecimicnto de las Fbricas,

trafico, y comercio maritimo de Efpagna, 1zmo. 2 vol.
Mad. 1740.

- (Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole dclle

Specierie fino al Mare dtto Vermejo nel 1539. Exit. Ra-
muf. III. 339.

-- (D. Bcrnardo) Rctabliffement des Manufa1ures &
du Commerce d'EIpagne, Izmo. Amft. 1753.

Uztariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y PraCtica de Commercio &
de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

- The Theory and Practice of Commerce, and Ma-
liti:re Affairs, 8vo. z vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Verages (D. Thor. Tamaio de) Reflauracion de la Ciu-

dad del Salvador y Baia de Todos Sandos en la Provincia del
Brasil, 4to. Mad. 6z8.

Vargas

Vargas Machaca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripcion d,
ls Indias, 40o. Mad. 1699.

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hiltoire de la Conquete de 1;
Floride. Traduite par Richelet, Izmo. 2 torn Leyd. 1731.

--- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol
Lond. 1688.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffi de la) Hiftoire des Guerre

Civiles dos Espagnoles dans lea Indes, par Baudouin, 4to
2 tom. Paris, 1648.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanif Rule of Trade to thi
Well Indies, 8vo. Lond. 170z.

--- Linage (Jos.) Declamacion Oratoria en Defenfa d
D. Jos. Fern. Veitia Linage, fol. 1702.

-- Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occidentales
fbl. Sevill. 1672.

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil History of Call
fornia, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1759.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione dellc Terra per lui Scopert
nel 1524. Exft. Ramufio III. p. 420.

Vefputius (Americus) Dua: Navigationes sub aufpicii
Ferdinandi, &c. Exft. De Bry America. Pars X.

- Navigatio prima, fecunda, tertia, quarta. Exfl
Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. 155.

Viage de Efpagna, Izmo. 6 tom. Mad. 1776.
Vi&oria (Fran.) Relationes Theologics de Indis & de jur
belli contra eos, 4to. 1765.

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la HiRloria general d
las Iflas de Canaria, 4t0. 3 tom. Mad. 1772.

Villalobos (D. Juan de) Manifiefto fobre in introduccio

de efclavos negros en las Indias Occidentalcs, 4t0. Sevilla
z68z.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hiftoria de Nueva Mexico Poema
I mo. Alcala. 1610.

Villa Segnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Americanc

Detfcripcion general de los Reynos y Provincis de la Nuec
Efpagna, fol. 2 tom. M. 1746.

Res puefta fobre cl precio de Aaogue, 4t0.
Vocabulario B1raliliauo y Portugues, 4to. MS.

War

W

Ward (D. Bernardo) Proyeto Economico fobre la pobla-
cion de Efpagna, la agricultura en todos sus ramos, y de mas
eftablecimientos de indufria, comerdo con nueftra marina,
arreglo de nuetra interefes en America, libcrtad del commereio
en Indias, &c. z vols. 4to. MS.

X

Xeres (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la ConquiRa del
Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V.
Exit. Barcia Hitl. Prim. tom. iii.

-- --- * Relatione, &c. &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 372.

z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento y Con-

quifta de la Provincia del Peru. Exft. Ba.cia Hist. Prim.
tom. iii.

-- -Hiftoire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du

Perou, zmo. 2 tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al Rcy

N. Segnor D. Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro Aumento del
Real Erario. No place. 1732.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hiforia y Viage del
Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1691.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK I.

THE
HI T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOK I.
T H E progress of men in discovering and -BOOK L

peopling the various parts of the earth, The earth

slowly pe.

has been extremely flow. Several ages elapsed pled.
before they removed far from those mild and
fertile regions where they were originally placed
by their Creator. The occasion of their first
general dispersion is known; but we are unac-
quainted with the course of their migrations, or
the time when they took poffeflion of the dif-
ferent countries which they now inhabit. Nei-
ther history nor tradition furnish such informa-
tion concerning those remote events, as enables
us to trace, with any certainty, the operations
of the human race in the infancy of society.

W\ may conclude, however, that all the Fir mir.a-
early migrations of mankind were made by land.

VOL. I. B land.

BOOK _ land. The ocean, which surrounds the habita.

ble earth, as well as the various arms of the t-a
which separate one region from another, though
destined to facilitate the communication between
diltant countries, seem, at first view, to be form-
ed to check the progress of man, and to mark
the bounds of that portion of the globe to which
nature had confined him. It was long, we may
believe, before men attempted to pass there
formidable barriers, and became b skilful and
adventrous as to commit themselves to the mercy
of the winds and waves, or to quit their na-
tive shores in quest of remote and unknown re-
gions.

Firl at- NAVICATIO and hip-building are arts o
teln pts ro-
w.,dsnavi- nice and complicated, that they require the in-

genuity, as well as experience, of many fuc-
ccffive ages to bring them to any degree or
perfection. From the raft or canoe, which first
served to carry a savage over the river that
obstructed him in the chace, to the conftruc-
tion of a veffcl capable of conveying a nume-
rous crew with safety to a distant caaft, the
progress in improvement is immense. Many
efforts would be made, many experiments
would be tried, and much labour as well as
invention would be employed, before men
could accomplilh this arduous and inmportr;i

undcrtakii,:g

tndertaking. The rude and imperfect state in BOK I.
which navigation is flill found among all na-
tions which are not considerably civilized, cor-
responds with this account of its progress, and
demonstrates that, in early times, the art was
not so far improved as to enable men to under-
take distant voyages, or to attempt remote dif-
coveries.

As soon, however, as the art of navigation Introduc.

became known, a new species of correliPondcnce ,co,,rce
among men took place. It is from this era,
that we muff date the commencement of such
an intercourse between nations as deserves the
appellation of commerce. Men are, indeed,
far advanced in improvement before comm:rlce
becomes an objea of great importance to them.
They must even have made lome conGclerable
progress towards civilization, before they ac-
quire the idea of'property, and aertain it b
perfe&lly as to be acquainted with the mofl
limple of all contracts, that of cxchanging by
barter one rude commodity for anothcr. But
as loon as this important right is eitlified,
and every individual feels that lie has ;an cx-
clufive title to pofilfs or to alienate v.lhtever
lie has acquired by his own labour or dexte-
rity, the wants andt ingenuity of is nature
liggell to him a new nmethod of incrcafng his

B 2 acluiitions

~OOK, acquisitions and enjoyments, by disposing of

what is superfluous in his own stores, in order
to procure what is necessary or desirable in
those of other men. Thus a commercial in-
tercourfe begins, and is carried on among the
members of the fame community. By degrees,
they discover that neighbouring tribes possess
what they themfclves want, and enjoy comforts
of which they with to partake. In the fame
mode, and upon the fame principles, that do-
meftic traffic is carried on within the fociery,
an external commerce is established with other
tribes or nations. Their mutual interest and
mutual wants render this intercourse desirable,
and imperceptibly introduce the maxims and
laws which facilitate its progress and render it
secure. But no very extensive commerce can
take place between contiguous provinces, whose
foil and climate being nearly the fame, yield
similar produtions. Remote countries cannot
convey their commodities by land, to tho&
places, where on account of their rarity they
are desired, and become valuable. It is to na-
vigation that men are indebted for the power ol
transporting the superfluous stock of one parn
of the earth, to supply the wants of another
The luxuries and blesings of a particular cli
mate are no longer confined to itfclf alone, bui

lll

the enjoyment of them is communicated to the BOOK .
most distant region.

IN proportion as the knowledge of the ad-

vantages derived from navigation and com-
merce continued to spread, the intercourse
among nations extended. The ambition of
conquelt, or the neceflity of procuring new set-
tlements, were no longer the sole motives of
visiting diltant lands. The desire of gain be.
came a new incentive to acaivity, routed ad.
venturers, and nt them forth upon long voy-
ages, in search of countries, whose products or
wants might increase that circulation, which
nourishes and gives vigour to commerce. Trade
proved a great fourc. of discovery, it opened
unknown eas, it penetrated into new regions,
and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring men acquainted with the situation, the
nature, and commodities of the different parts
of the globe. But even after a regular com-
merce was etablifhed in the world, after
nations were considerably civilized, and the
iciences and arts were cultivated with ardour
and success, navigation continued to be so im.
perfet, that it can hardly be said to have ad-
vanced beyond the infancy of its improvement
in the ancient world.

B 3 AMONO

BOOK ;. AMONG all the nations of antiquity the
Imperflion ftru1ure of their vessels was extremely rude,
o0 naviga ion
aon;s the" and their method of working them very dl.

fective. They were unacquainted with feve.
ral principles and operations in navigation,
which are now confidcred as the first ele.
ments on which that science is founded. Though
that property of the magnet, by which it
attracts iron, was well known to the ancients,
its more important. and amazing virtue of
pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their
obferyation. Destitute of this faithful guide,
which now condus the pilot with so much
certainty in the unbounded ocean, during the
darkness of night, or wh.n the heavens are
covered with clouds, the ancients had no other
method of regulating their course than by ob-
serving the fun and stars. 'Iheir navigatior
was of confcquence uncertain and timid. Thes
durst seldom quit fight of land, but crept alone
the coast, expof'd to all the dangers, and re
tarded by all the obfrrutions, unavoidable ir
hol,ing Ilch an aukward course. An incre-
dible length of time was rquifite for perform
ing voyages, which are now finishcd in a fhor
space. Even in the mildest climnates, and i
fcis the least temnpeftuous, it was only clurii
the fummrcr months that the ancients venturce
out of thir ha:rours. ''he reiainder of tht

ye.

year was loft in inactivity. It would have been BO O K J.
deemed moit inconsiderate rashness to have
braved the fury of the winds and waves during
winter'.

WHILE both the science and practice of na-

vigation continued to be so defefive, it was an
undertaking of no frnall difficulty and danger
to visit any remote region of the earth. Under
every disadvantage, however, the active Ipirit
of commerce exerted itself. The Egyptians, Navisa'ion
soon after the establishment of their monarchy, .c'..e' ctile
are said to have opened a trade between the
Arabian 'Gulph or Red Sea, and the western
coast of the great Indian continent. The com-
modities which they imported from the east,
were carried by land from the Arabian Gulph
to the banks of the Nile, and conveyed down
that river to the Mediterranean. But if the
Egyptians in early times applied themifelves to
commerce, their attention to it was of f(ort
duration. The fertile foil and mild climate of
Egypt produced the necessaries andt comforts of
life with such profusion, as rendered its inha-
bitants so independent of o:her countries, that
it became an eltablifhel maxim among that
people, whose ideas and inftiiutions dillt'red in

Vcgetiu, dec Re milit. lib. iv.

13 4 alnlol;

0K 1. almost every point from those of other nations,

to renounce all intercourse with foreigners. In
consequence of this, they never went out of their
own country; they held all sea-faring persons in
detestation, as impious and profane; and forti-
fying their own harbours, they denied frangers
admittance into them b. It was in the decline
of their power, and when their veneration for
ancient maxims had greatly abated, that they
again opened their ports, and resumed any com-
munication with foreigners.

of thc;e THE chara&er and situation of the Phenici-
phonicians.

ans were as favourable to the spirit of commerce
and discovery as those of the Egyptians were
adverse to it, They had no distinguishing pe-
culiarity in their manners and institutions; they
were not addiced to any singular and unsocial
form of superstition; they could mingle with
other nations without scruple or relucance.
The territory which they pofflied was neither
large nor fertile. Commerce was the only
source from which they could derive opulence
or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on
by the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more
cxtenfive and enterprising than that of any slate
in the ancient world. The genius of the Phe.

bDiod. Sicul. lib. i. p. 78. Ed. Weffelingi. Ams.
17;6, Strabo, lib, xvii. p. 1142. Ed. Amfl. 1707.

nicians,

picians, as well as the object of their policy and BOOK
the spirit of their laws, were entirely commer-
cial. They were a people of merchants who
aimed at the empire of the sea, and aually
pofleffed it. Their hips not only frequented
all the ports in the Mediterranean, but they
were the first who ventured beyond the ancient
boundaries of navigation, and pafling the
Streights of Gades, visited the western coasts of
Spain and Africa. In many of the places to
which they resorted, they planted colonies, and
communicated to the rude inhabitants rome
knowledge of their arts and improvements.
While they extended their discoveries towards
the north and the weft, they did not neglet to
penetrate into the more opulent and fertile re-
gions of the south and eat. Having rendered
themselves maters of several commodious har-
bours towards the bottom of the Arabian
Gulph, they, after the example of the Egypti-
ans, established a regular intercourse with Ara-
bia and the continent of India on the one hand,
and with the eastern coast of Africa on the
other. From there countries they imported
many valuable commodities, unknown to the
reft of the world, and, during a long period,
engrofTcd that lucrative branch of commerce
without a rival'.

e See NOTE I. at the End of the Voumne.

TiHe

0ooK . THE vast wealth which the Phenicians ac.
Ot thl J'. quired by monopolizing the trade carried on

in the Red Sea, incited their neighbours the
Jews, under the prosperous reigns of David
and Solomon, to aim at being admitted to
fume hare of it. This they obtained, partly
by their conquest of Idumea, which firetches
along the Red Sea, and partly by their alli-
ance with Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon
fitted out fleets, which, under the direEtion of
Phenician pilots, failed from the Red Sea to
Tarfhiih and Ophir. These it is probable
were ports in India and Africa which their
conduaors were accustomed to frequent, and
from them the Jewifih hips returned with fich
valuable cargoes as suddenly diffused wealth
and splendour through the kingdom of Israel .
But the singular inffitutions of the Jews, the
observance of which was enjoined by their
divine ]egiflator, with an intention of prefcrv-
ing them a separate people, uninfeced by ido-
latry, formed a national character incapable of
that open and liberal intercouri with strangers
which commerce requires. Accordingly, this
unsocial genius of the people, together with
the dilfaters which besel the kingdom of IIracl,

d Memoire fur Ie Pays 'Ophir par M. D'Anville,
Mem. de 'Acadein, des Inrcript. &c. toni. xxx. 83.

preventcd

prevented the commercial spirit which theirB IOOK 0'
monarchs laboured to introduce, and to cherili,
from preading among them. The Jews can-
not be numbered among the nations which
contributed to improve navigation, or to ex-
tend discovery.

BUT though the inftru&icns and example of or the Car.

the Phenicians were unable to mould the man-
pers and temper of the Jews, in oppoition to
the tendency of their laws, they tranmitted
the commercial spirit with facility, and in full
vigour, to their own descendants the Cartha-
ginians. The commonwealth of Carthage ap-
plied to trade and to naval affairs, with no leIs
ardour, ingenuity, and success, than its parent
state. Carthage early rivalled, and oon fur-
palied Tyre, in opulence and power, but seems
not to have aimed at obtaining any flare in
the commerce with India. The Phenicians
had engrossed this, and had such a command
of the Red Sea as secured to them the excluc
five pofliion of that lucrative branch of trade.
The commercial aivicy of the Carthaginians
was exerted in another direcSion. WNithout
contending for the trade of the eall with their
mother-country, they extended their nivig.i-
tion chiefly towards the well and north. 1Fol-
lowing the course which the I'lhcicinin; hid

OFCj.:' ,

BOOK r. opened, they pafled the Streights of Gades,

and pulhing their discoveries far beyond thofc
of the parent Rate, viflted not only all the
coasts of Spain, but those of Gaul, and pene-
trated at last into Britain. At the fame time
that they acquired knowledge of new countries
in this part of the globe, they gradually car-
ried their researches towards the South. They
made considerable progress, by land, into the
interior provinces of Africa, traded with ome
of them, and fubjeAed others to their empire.
They failed along the western coast of that
great continent, almost to the tropic of Cancer,
and planted several colonies, in order to civi-
lize the natives, and accustom them to com-
merce. - They discovered the Fortunate Islands,
now known by the name of the Canaries, the
utmost boundary of ancient navigation in the
western ocean a.

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from one country to another. Com-
merce was followed by its usual effects among
both there people. It awakened curiosity, en-

Plinii Nat. Hill. lib, vi. . 37. edit, in pfum Delph.
4to. 685.

8 larged

larged the ideas and desires of men, and incited B oo K r.
them to bold enterprises. Voyages were un-
dertaken, the sole object of which was to dif-
cover new countries, and to explore unknown
seas. Such, during the prosperous age of the
Carthaginian republic, were the famous navi-
gations of Hanno and Himilco. Both their
fleets were equipped by authority of the senate,
and at public expence. Hanno was directed
to fleer towards the south, along the coast of
Africa, and he seems to have advanced muth
nearer the equinoaial line than any former
navigator'. Himilco had it in charge to pro-
ceed towards the north, and to examine the
western coasts of the European continent g. Of
the fame nature was the extraordinary naviga-
tion of the Phenicians round Africa. A Phe-
nician fleet, we are told, fitted out by Necho
king of Egypt, took its departure about fix
hundred and four years before the ChiAian
xra, from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the
southern promontory of Africa, and after a
voyage of three years, returned by the Streights

f Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. v. c. . Hannonis Periplus ap.

Geograph. minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol. i. p. .

A Plinii Nat. lill. lib. ii. c. 67. Fellus Avienus apud

Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. lib. i. c. 60. p. 6z. Oper. vol.
iii. L. Bat. 1707.

of

o O K 1. of Gades, to the mouth of the Nile h. Eudoxus

of Cyzicus is said to have held the fame course,
and to have accomplished the fame arduous
undertaking i,

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may justly be reckoned
the greatest effort of navigation in the ancient
world and if we attend to the imperfect state
of the art at that .time, it is difficult to deter-
mine, whether we should most admire the
courage and sagacity with which the design
was formed, or the conduct and good fortune
with which it was executed. But unfortunately,
all the original and authentic accounts of the
Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whether
undertaken by public authority, or in prose-
cution of their private trade, have perished.
The information which we receive concerning
them from the Greek and Roman authors, is
not only oblcure and inaccurate, but, f we
except a hort narrative of Hanno's expedition,
is of fulpicious authority . Whatever ac-
quaintance with the remote regions of the earli
the Phenicians or Carthaginians may have ac-

h Ilcrodot. lIh. iv. c. 4?.7

Plinii Nat. Hil. lii). ii. c. 67.
k Sec N OT I1.

quired,

quired, was concealed from the reft of mankindB K
with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing rela-
tive to the course of their navigation was not
only a mystery of trade, but a fcret of state.
Extraordinary fads arc recorded concerning
their solicitude to prevent other nations from
penetrating into what they wished should re-
main undivulged'. Many of their discoveries
leem, accordingly, to have been scarcely
known beyond the precincts of their own states.
The navigation round Africa, in particular, is
recorded by the Greek and Roman writers,
rather as a strange amusing tale, which they
did not comprehend, or did not believe, than
as a real tranfaRion, which enlarged their
knowledge and influenced their opinion m. As
neither the progress of the Phenician or Car-
thaginian discoveries, nor the extent of their
navigation, were communicated to the reft of
mankind, all memorials of their extraordinary
skill in naval affairs eem, in a great meafurc,
to have perished, when the maritime pcwer of
the former was annihilated by Alexander's con-
quefl of Tyre, and the empire of the latter
was overturned by the Roman arms.

Strab. Geogr. lib. iii. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. 1154.
m Sec NOTE 1II.

IE AVINO,

hoo I LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous
^Of t. accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian

voyages to the curifity. and conjectures of an-
tiquaries, history muf reft satisfied with relat-
ing the progress of navigation and discovery
among the Greeks and Romans, which, though
less splendid, is better ascertained. It is evident
that the Phenicians, who instructed the Greeks
in many other ufcful sciences and arts, did not
communicate to them that extensive knowledge
of navigation which they themselves pofffed;
nor did the Romans imbibe that commercial
spirit and ardour for discovery which dif-
tinguifhed their rivals the Carthaginians. Though
Greece be almost encompafed by the sea,
which formed many spacious bays and commo-
dious harbours, though it be surrounded by a
vast number of fertile islands, yet, notwith-
flanding such a favourable situation, which
seemed to invite that ingenious people to apply
themselves to navigation, it was long before
this art attained any degree of perfe&ion among
them. Their early voyages, the object of
which was piracy rather than commerce, were
so inconsiderable, that the expedition of the
Argonauts from the coast of Thcffaly to the
Euxine lea, appeared such an amazing effort
of skill and courage, as entitled the conducors
of it to be ranked among the demigods, and

exalted

exalted the vessel in which they failed to a BOOK .
place among the heavenly conltellations. Even
at a later period, when the Greeks engaged in
their famous enterprize against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have
been much improved. According to the ac-
count of Homer, the only poet to whom history
ventures to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous
accuracy in describing the manners and arts of
early ages, merits this ditinction, the science
of navigation, at that time, had hardly advan-
ced beyond its rudest state. The Greeks in the
heroic age seem to have been unacquainted with
the use of iron, the most erviceable of all the
metals, without which no considerable progress
was ever made in the mechanical arts. Their
vessels were of inconsiderable burthen, and
nmoftly without decks. These had only one
mast, which they ereced or took down at
pleasure. They were strangers to the use of
anchors. All their operations in failing were
clunify and unskilful. They turned their ob-
fcrvation towards fiars, which were improper
for regulating their course, and their mode of
observing them was inaccurate and fallacious.
When they had finished a voyage they drew
their paltry barks ashore, as favagcs do their
canoes, and thee remained on dry land until
the season of returnin, to sea approached. It

VOL. . C is

OOK ;. is not then in the early or heroic ages of

Greece, that we can expec to observe the
science of navigation, and the spirit of disco.
very, making any considerable progress. Dur-
ing that period of disorder and ignorance, a
thousand causes concurred in restraining cu-
riofity and enterprize within very narrow
bounds.

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to

a state of greater civilization and refinement,
Government, in its most liberal and perse
form, began to be established in the commu-
nities of Greece; equal laws and regular police
were gradually introduced ; the sciences and
arts which are ueful or ornamental in life were
carried to a high pitch of improvement, and
several of the Grecian commonwealths applied
to commerce with such ardour and success,
that they were confidered, in the ancient world
as maritime powers of the first rank. Ever
then, however, the naval victories of the
Greeks must be ascribed rather to the nativ
spirit of the people, and to that courage whicl
the onjoymeut of liberty inspires, than to an]
extraordinary progress in the science of navi
gation. In the Persian war, those exploit
which the eloquence of the Greek historian
has rendered so famous, were performed b.

fleets

fleets, composed chiefly of small vessels with- B

.

out decks ; the crews of which rushed forward
with impetuous valour, but little art, to board
those of the enemy. In the war of Pelo-
ponnefas, their ships seem still to have been
of inconsiderable burthen and force. The ex-
tent of their trade was in proportion to this
low condition of their marine. The maritime
states of Greece hardly carried on any com-
merce beyond the limits of the Mediterranean
sea. Their chief intercourse was with the
colonies of their countrymen, planted in the
lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They iome-
times visited the ports of Egypt, of Gaul, and
of Thrace, or pasing through the Hellespont,
they traded with the countries Situated around
the Euxine sea. Amazing instances occur of
their ignorance, even of those countries, which
lay within the narrow precincts to which their
navigation was confined. When the Greeks
had afferrbled their combined fleet against
Xerxes at Egina, they thought it unadvifable
to fail to Samos, because they believed the
distance between that ifand and Egina to be
as great as the distance between Egina and the
Pillars of Hercules°. They were either utterly

Thucyd. lib. i c. 14.
Herodot. lib. viii. c. 132.

C 2 unac-

ROOK_.I unacquainted with all the parts of the globe

beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what know-
ledge they had of them was founded on con-
jecture, or derived from the information of a
few persons, whom curiosity and the love of
science had prompted to travel by land into the
Upper Asia, or by sea into Egypt, the ancient
feats of wisdom and arts. After all that the
Greeks learned from them, they appear to have
been ignorant of the most important faas, on
which an accurate and scientific knowledge of the
globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great intc

the east, considerably enlarged the sphere ol
navigation and of geographical knowledg~
among the Greeks. That extraordinary man
notwithstanding the violent paflions which in
cited him, at some times, to the wildest actions
and the most extravagant enterprises, poffeffcc
talents which fitted him not only to conquer
but to govern the world. He was capable o
framing those bold and original schemes o0
policy, which give a new form to humar
altflirs. The revolution in commerce, brougll
about by the force of his genius, is hardly in
ferior to that revolution i empire, occasionec
by tha fucccls of his arms. It is probable
that the opposition and *cibrts of tle republic

ol

of Tyre, which checked him so long in the OO
career of his vi&ories, gave Alexander an op-
portunity of observing the vast resources of a
maritime power, and conveyed to him some
idea of the immense wealth which the Tyrians
derived from their commerce, especially that
with the East Indies. As soon as he had ac-
complifhed the deftruEtion of Tyre, and re-
duced Egypt to fubjetion, he formed the plan
of rendering the empire which he proposed to
establish, the centre of commerce as well as
the feat cf dominion. With this view he
founded a great city, which he honoured with
his own name, near one of the mouths of the
river Nile, that by the Mediterranean lea, and'
the neighbourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it
might command the trade both of the east and
weft P. This situation was chosen with such
dilcernment, that Alexandria oon became the
chief commercial city in the world. Not only
during the subsistence of the Grecian empire
in Egypt and in the east, but amidl: all the
fucceflive revolutions in those countries, from
the time of the Ptolemies to the discovery of
the navigation by the Cape of Good Hope,
commerce, particularly that of the East Indies,
continued to flow i the channel which the

P Srab. Gcogr. lib. xvii. p. 1143. l 1 9.

C 3 Ihgacity

BOK_ r. sagacity and forefiglt of Alexander had marked

out for it.

His ambition was not ftisfied with having

opened to the Greeks a communication with
India by sea; he aspired to the sovereignty of
thole regions which furniihed the reft of man.
kind with so many precious commodities, and
conductcd his army thither by land. Enter-
prifing, however, as he was, he may be said
rather to have viewed, than to have con-
quered that country. He did not, in his pro-
grefs towards the east, advance beyond the
banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus,
which is now the western boundary of the vast
continent of India. Amidst the wild exploits
which distinguish this part of his history, he
pursued measures that mark the superiority
of his genius, as well as the extent of his
views. He had penetrated as far into India
as to confirm his opinion of its commercial
importance, and to perceive that immense
wealth might be derived from intercourse with
a country, where the arts of elegance having
been more early cultivated, were arrived at
greater perfection than in any other part of
the earth '. Full of this idea, he resolved tc

q Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. . 1036. Q Curtius, lib
xvii. C. q.

examine

examine the course of navigation from the BOOK .
mouth of the Indus to the bottom of the Per-
fian Gulf; and if it should be found praCti-
cable, to establish a regular communication
between them. In order to effect this, he
proposed to remove the cataracts, with which,
the jealousy of the Persians, and their aversion
to correspondence with foreigners, had ob-
ftruaed the entrance into the Euphratesr; to
carry the commodities of the east up that river,
and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the
interior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while,
by the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the river
Nile, they might be conveyed to Alexandria,
and distributed to the reft of the world.
Nearchus, an officer of eminent abilities, was
entrusted with the command of the fleet fitted
out for this expedition. He performed this
voyage, which was deemed an enterprise so
arduous and important, that Alexander reckon-
ed it one of the most extraordinary events
which distinguished his reign. Inconsiderable
as it may now appear, it was, at that time, an
undertaking of no little merit and difficulty.
In the prosecution of it, striking instances
occur of the finall progrels which the Greeks
had made in naval knowledge '. Having never
'Scrab. Geogr. lib. xvi. p. 1075. * Scc NOTE IV.

C 4 failed

BOOK . failed beyond the bounds of the Mediterranean,

where the ebb and flow of the sea are hardly
perceptible, when they first observed this phae-
nomenon at the mouth of the Indus, it ap-
peared to them a prodigy, by which the gods
tcefitied the displeasure of Heaven against their
cnterprife'. During their whole course, they
seem never to have loft fight of land, but fol-
lowed the bearings of the coals so servilely,
that they could not much avail themselves of
those periodical winds, which facilitate navi-
gation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they
spent no les than ten months" in performing
this voyage, which, from the mouth of the
Indus to that of the Persian Gulf, does not
exceed twenty degrees. It is probable, that
amidit the violent convulsions, and frequent
revolutions in the East, occasioned by the con-
tefis among the successors of Alexander, the
navigation to India, by the course which Near-
chus had opened, was discontinued. The In-
dian trade carried on at Alexandria, not only
'rubFifted, but was to much extended under the
Grecian monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a
grcait ource of the wealth which dillinguiflcd
their kingdoa.

' :cc N O
' E \'. 'Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

7T1ii

THE progress which the Romans made in BOOK L

navigation and discovery, was still more in- f the Ro-
considerable than that of the Greeks. The
genius of the Roman people, their military
education, and the pi it of their laws, con-
curred in etranging them from commerce and
naval affairs. It was the necessity of opposing
a formidable rival, not the desire of extending
trade, which first prompted them to aim at
maritime power. Though they oon perceived
that, in order to acquire the universal domi-
nion after which they apired, it was necessary
to render themselves masters of the ea, they
still confidered the naval service as a fubordi-
nate flation, and reserved for it such ctizens
as were not of a rank to be admitted into the
legions x. In the history of the Roman re-
public, hardly one event occurs, that marks
attention to navigation any farther than as it
was instrumental towards conquest. When the
Roman valour and discipline had subdued all
the maritime states known in the ancient
world; when Carthage, Greece, and Egypt,
had submitted to their power, the Romans
did not imbibe the commercial fpilit of the
conquered nations. Amon, that people of
fkldiers, to have applied to trade would have

x Polyb. lib. v.

bcn

CooK T. been deemed a degradation of a Roman citizen.

They abandoned the mechanical arts, corn
merce, and navigation, to slaves, to freedmen,
to provincials, and to citizens of the lowest
class. Even after the subversion of liberty,
when the severity and haughtiness of ancient
manners began to abate, commerce did not rife
into high estimation among the Romans. The
trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other cn-
quered countries, continued to be carried on in
its usual channels, after they were reduced into
the form of Roman provinces. As Rome was
the capital of the world, and the feat of govern-
ment, all the wealth and valuable productions
of the provinces flowed naturally thither. The
Romans, satisfied with this, seem to have sus-
sered commerce to remain almost entirely in
the hands of the natives of the respective coun-
tries. The extent, however, of the Roman
power, which reached over the greatest part of
the known world, the vigilant infpetion of the
Roman magistrates, and the spirit of the Ro-
nan government, no less intelligent than aive,
gave such additional security to commerce, as
animated it with new vigour. The union
among nations was never so entire, nor the in-
tercourle so perfe6t, as within the bounds of
this vast empire. Commerce, under the Ro-
man dominion, was not obltrued by the jea-

louly

lousy of rival states, interrupted by frequent BOOK R.
hostilities, or limited by partial restrictions.
One superintending power moved and regulated
the industry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits
of their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt this influence, and imw

proved under it. As soon as the Romans ac-
quired a taste for the luxuries of the East, the
trade with India through Egypt was puthed
with new vigour, and carried on to greater ex.
tent. By frequenting the Indian continent,
navigators became acquainted with the periodi-
cal course of the winds, which, in the ocean
that separates Africa from India, blow with
little variation during one half of the year from
the east, and during the other half blow with
equal steadiness from the weft. Encouraged
by observing this, they abandoned their ancient
flow and dangerous course along the coast, and
as soon as the western monsoon set in, took
their departure from Ocelis, at the mouth of
the Arabian Gulf, and stretched boldly across
the ocean Y. The uniform direction of the
wind, supplying the place of the compass, and
rendering the guidance of the flars lcfs ne-
ccary, conducted them to the port of Mufiris,
on the weltern flore of the Indian continent.

y Plin. Hifc. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

'1 hcre

,OOK . There they took on board their cargo, and re:

turning with the eastern monsoon, finished their
voyage to the Arabian Gulf within the year.
This part of India, now known by the name of
the Malabar coast, seems to have been the ut-
most limit of ancient navigation in that quar-
ter of the globe. What imperfe& knowledge
the ancients had of the immense countries which
stretch beyond this towards the east, they re-
ceived from a few adventurers, who had vi-
fited them by land. Such excursions were
neither frequent nor extensive, and it is pro-
bable, that while the Roman intercourse with
India subsisted, no traveller ever penetrated
farther than to the banks of the Ganges '. The
fleets from Egypt which traded at Mufiris were
loaded, it is true, with the spices and other
rich commodities of the continent and ilands
of the farther India; but there were brought to
that port, which became the flaple of this com-
merce, by the Indians themselves, in canoes
hollowed out of one tree . The Egyptian and
Roman merchants, satisfied with acquiring thole
commodities in this manner, did not think it
nccefliry to explore unknown seas, and vcn-
ture upon a dangerous navigation, in quest of

Strab. Ccogr. lib. xv. p. 1oo6. ioio. See NOTE
VI.

'lin. Nat. HIil. lib. vi. c. 6.

t! e

the countries which produced them. But though BOOK .
the discoveries of the Romans in India were so
limited, their commerce there was such as will
appear considerable, even to the present age,
in which the Indian trade has been extended far
beyond the practice or conception of any pre-
ceding period. We are informed by one author
of credit b, th.t the commerce with India drained
the Roman empire every year of more than
four hundred thousand pounds ; and by another,
that one hundred and twenty ships failed annu-
ally from the Arabian Gulf to that country .

THE discovery of this new method of failing Dircoveries

of the an-

to India, is the most considerable improvement in lcents by
navigation made during the continuance of the
Roman power. But in ancient times, the know-
ledge of remote countries was acquired more fre-
quently by land than by sea ; and the Romans,
from their pecu'iar disinclination to naval affairs,
may be said to have negleed totlly the latter,
though a more easy and expeditious method of
discovery. The progress, however, of their vic-
torious armies through a considerable portion of
Europe, Aia, and Africa, contributed greatly
to extend discovery by land, and gradually

b Plin. Nat. I-ln. lib. vi. c. 26.

Strab. (eogr. lib. ii. p. 179.
" See N 1 L. V11.

opcned

P.0K J. opened the navigation of new and unknown

leas. Previous to the Roman conquests, the ci-
vilized nations of antiquity had little communi.
cation with those countries in Europe, which
now form its most opulent and powerful king.
doms. The interior parts of Spain and Gaul
were imperfe&ly known. Britain, separated from
the reft of the world, had never been visited,
except by its neighbours the Gauls, and by a
few Carthaginian merchants. The name of
Germany had scarcely been heard of. Into all
thee countries the arms of the Romans pene.
trated. They entirely subdued Spain and Gaul;
they conquered the greatest and most fertile part
of Britain; they advanced into Germany, as far
as the banks of the river Elbe. In Africa,
they acquired a considerable knowledge of the
provinces, which stretch along the Mediter-
ranean ea, from Egypt westward to the itraits
of Gades. In Asia, they not only fubje&ed to
their power most of the provinces which corn.
posed the Persian and Macedonian empires,
but, after their vitories over Mithridates and
Tigranesi they eem to have made a more ac-
curate survey of the countries contiguous to the
Euxine and Caspian eas, and to have carried
on a more extensive trade than that of the
Greeks with the opulent and commercial na-
tions, then feated around the Euxine sea.

FKOM,

FROM this succinct survey of discovery and OOK tL

navigation, which I have traced from the Imperfaei-
earliest dawn of historical knowledge to the full rnowhedo
cftablifhment of the Roman dominion, their amo"ngte
progress appears to have been wonderfully flow.
It seems neither adequate to what we might
have expected from the ativity and enterprise
of the human mind, nor to what might have
been performed by the power of the great em-
pires which successively governed the world. If
we rejet accounts that are fabulous and ob-
fcure; if we adhere fleadily to the light and
information of authentic history, without sub-
ftituting in its place the conjeftures of fancy,
or the dreams of etymologists, we must con-
clude, that the knowledge which the ancients
had acquired of the habitable globe was ex-
tremely confined. In Europe, the extensive
provinces in the eastern part of Germany were
little known to them. They were almost to-
tally unacquainted with the vailf countries which
are now fubjelt to the kinas of Denmark, Swe-
den, Prulfia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire.
The more barren regions, that firetch within
the arcic circle, were quite unexplored. In
Africa, their researches did not extend far be-
yond the provinces which border on the Medi-
terranean, and those situated on the wcftern
flore of the Arabian Gulf. In Asia, they were

4 unac-

.BOOK ;. unacquainted, as I formerly observed, with al

the fertile and opulent countries beyond thi
Ganges, which furnilh the molt valuable corn.
modities that, in modern times, have been the
great objec of the European commerce with
India; nor do they seem to have ever pene.
trated into those immense regions occupied by
the wandering tribes, which they called by the
general name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and
now poflffed by Tartars of various denomina-
tions, and by the Asiatic subjeCts of Ruflfia.

A remark- BUT there is one opinion, that universally
hble proof
of this. prevailed among the ancients, which conveys a

more striking idea of the small progress they
had made in the knowledge of the habitable
globe, than can be derived from any detail of
their discoveries. They supposed the earth to
be divided into five regions, which they di-
ftinguifhed by the name of zones. Two of
these, which were nearest the Poles, they termed
frigid zones, and believed that the extreme
cold which reigned perpetually there, rendered
them uninhabitable. Another, feated under
the line, and extending on either fide towards
the tropics, they called the torrid zone, and
imagined it to be so burnt up with unremitting
heat, as to be equally destitute of inhabitants.
On the two other zones, which occupied the

remainder

remainder of the earth, they bestowed the ap- BOOK .
pellation of temperate, and taught that thele,
being the only regions in which life could sub-
sift, were allotted to man for his habitation.
This wild opinion was not a conceit of the un-
informed vulgar, or a fanciful ficion of the
poets, but a iyftem adopted by the most en-
lightened philosophers, the most accurate hifto-
rians and geographers in Greece and Rome.
According to this theory, a vast portion of the
habitable earth was pronounced to be unfit for
ftftaining the human pecies. Those fertile
and populous regions within the torrid zone,
which are now known not only to yield their
own inhabitants the necefTries and comforts of
life, with most luxuriant profusion, but to
communicate their superfluous fores to the reft
of the world, were supposed to be the mansion
of perpetual sterility and desolation. As all the
parts of the globe, which the ancients had dif-
tovered, lay within the northern temperate
zone, their opinion that the other temperate
zone was filled with inhabitants, was founded
on realoning and conjcture, not on dilcovery.
They even believed tiat, by the intolerable
leat of the torrid zone, such an insuperable
barrier was placed between the two temperate
regions of the ea! tl, as would prevent for ever
any intercourse between their refpeclive inha-

VOL. I. D biirants.

BooK . bitants. Thus this extravagant theory not only

proves that the ancients were unacquainted with
the true state of the globe, but it tended to
render their ignorance perpetual, by represent.
ing all attempts towards opening a communi.
cation with the remote regions of the earth, as
utterly impracticable .

BUT, however imperfect or inaccurate tli

geographical knowledge which the Greeks and
Romans had acquired may appear, in refpec
of the present improved state of that science,
their progress in discovery will feern confider-
able, and the extent to which they carried na-
vigation and commerce muf be reckoned great,
when compared with the ignorance of early
times. As long as the Roman empire retained
such vigour as to preserve its authority over the
conquered nations, and to keep them united,
it was an obje& of public police, as well as ot
private curiosity, to examine and describe the
countries which compoled this great body.
Even when the other sciences began to decline,
geography, enriched with new oblcrvation,
and receiving some acceifion fronl the expe-
rience of every age, and the reports of every
traveller, continued to improve. It attaincd

f s NOTE VIII.

tu

to the highest point of perfecion and accuracy Io OK 1;
to which it ever arrived in the ancient world,
by the industry and genius of Ptolemy the phi- micts in
lofopher. He flouriflied in the econd century byo Vtopmy.
of the Christian ra and publiflied a defcrip-
tion of the terrefllial globe, more ample and
exac than that of any of his predecefIbrs.

BUT, soon after, violent convulsions began The inva-

s.on of he
to flake the Roman state; the fatal ambition Roman cm-

pire by br-

or caprice of Constantine, by changing the feat baro"' "a-
of government, divided and weakened its force;
the barbarous nations, which Providence pre-
pared as instruments to overturn the mighty
fabric of the Roman power, began to aflimble
and to muster their armies on its frontier; the
empire tottered to its fall. During this decline
and old age of the Roman state, it was impof-
fible that the sciences fiould go on improving.
The efforts of genius were, at that period, as
languid and feeble as those of government.
From the time of Ptolemy, no considerable ad-
dition seems to have been made to geographical
knowledge, nor did any important revolution
happen in trade, excepting that ConfRantinople,
by its advantageous situation, and the encou-
ragement of the eallern emperors, became a
commercial city of the first note.

D 2 Ar

,8 02 1. AT length, the clouds which had been so
teircon, long gathering round the Roman empire, burst
·mn,,'t°i.L into a storm. Barbarous nations rushed in from
intcrcur. several quarters with irresistible impetuoity,

and, in the general wreck, occasioned by the
inundation which overwhelmed Europe, the arts,
sciences, inventions and discoveries of the Ro-
rtans, perilied in a great measure, and disappear-
ed. All the various tribes, which fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman empire, were
uncivilized, strangers to letters, destitute of arts,
unacquainted with regular government, fubor.
dination, or laws. The manners and inftfiu-
tions of some of them were so rude, as to be
hardly compatible with a tate of social union.
Europe, when occupied by such inhabitants,
may be said to have returned to a second in-
fancy, and had to begin anew its career in im-
provement, science, and civility. The firfl
effec of the fetclement of those barbarous in-
vaders was to difTolve the union by which the
Roman power had cemented mankind together.
They parcelled out Europe into many small and
independent flates, differing from each other in
language and customs. No intercourle fubfitcd
between the members of those divided ant
holtile communities. Accustomed to a fimpl

Hilt. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 18. 72.

motl

mode of life, and averfc to industry, they had Boo I
few wants to fpply, and few superfluities to dif-
pose of. The names of stranger and of enemy
became once more words of the fame import.
Customs every where prevailed, and even laws
were established, which rendered it disagreeable
and dangerous to visit any foreign country b.
Cities, in which alone an excenfive commerce
can be carried on, were few, inconsiderable,
and destitute of those immunities which produce
security or excite enterprise. The lciences, on
which geography and navigation are founded,
were little cultivated. The accounts of ancient
improvements and discoveries, contained in the
Greek and Roman authors, were neglected or
misunderstood. The knowledge of remote re-
gions was loft, their situation, their commo-
dities, and almost their names, were unknown.

ONE circumstance prevented commercial in- Commerce
tercourfe with distant nations from ceasing al- er.,' in

the Eartern

together. Constantinople, though often threat- cml,,
ened by the fierce invaders, who lpre:dl defola-
tion over the reft of Europe, was o fortunate
as to escape their deftrucRive rage. In that
city, the knowledge of ancient arts nd dil-
coveries was preserved; a talte for splendour

h -ilt. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 77. 3 7.

3 and

BOK and elegance subsisted; the productions and

luxuries of foreign countries were in request;
and cmmerce continued to flourish there when
it was almost extin&t in every other part of Eu-
rope. The citizens of Constantinople did not
confine their trade to the islands of the Archi-
pelago, or to the adjacent coasts of Aia; they
took a wider range, and following the courle
which the ancients had marked out, imported
the commodities of the East Indies from Alex-
andria. When Egypt was torn fiom the Ro-
man empire by the Arabians, the industry of
the Greeks discovered a new channel, by which
the productions of India might be conveyed to
Constantinople. They were carried up the
Indus, as far as that great river is navigable;
thence they were transported by land to the
banks of the river Oxus, and proceeded down
its stream to the Carpian sea. There they en-
tered the Volga, and failing up it, were carried
by land to the Tanais, which conducted them
into the Euxine sea, where vessels from Con-
flantinople waited their arrival . This extra-
ordinary and tedious mode of conveyance merits
attention, not only as a proof of the violent
pafion which the inhabitants of Constantinople
had conceived for the luxuries of the east, anJ

Ramufio, vol. i. p. 37z, F.

as5

as a specimen of the ardour and ingenuity with BO .
which they carried on commerce; but because it
demonstrates, that, during the ignorance which
reigned in the reft of Europe, an extensive
knowledge of remote countries was still pre-
Ierved in the capital of the Greek empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and ad.b"
knowledge broke in upon the east. TJe Ara- as"
bians having contracted some relish for the
sciences of the people whose empire they had
contributed to overturn, translated the books
of several of the Greek philosophers into their
own language. One of the firit was that va-
luable work of Ptolemy, which 1 have already
mentioned. The study of geography became,
of consequence, an early objec of attention to
the Arabians. But that acute and ingenious
people cultivated chiefly the speculative and
scicntific parts of geography. In order to a-
certain the figure and dimnenions of the ter.
retrial globe, they applied the principles of
geometry, they had recourse to atronomical
observations, they employed experiments and
operations, which Europe, in more enlightened
times, has been proud to adopt and to imitate.
At that period, however, the fame of the im-
provements made y the Arabians did not reach
Europc. rhe knowledge of their discoveries

P 4 wa

BOOK
0 . was reserved for ages capable of comprehending

and of perfecting them.

Revivea of By degrees, the calamities and defolatior
commerce
tno, .",vu. brought upon the western provinces of the Ro.
rope. man empire by its barbarous conquerors, were

forgotten, and in some measure repaired. The
rude tribes which fettled there, acquiring in.
sensibly some idea of regular government, and
some relilh for the functions and comforts of
civil life, Europe began to awake from its
torpid and unaAive state. The first symptoms
of revival were discerned in Italy. The north.
ern tribes which took pofreffion of this coun-
try, made progress in improvement with greater
rapidity than the people fettled in other parts of
Europe. Various causes, which it is not the
object of this work to enumerate or explain,
concprred in restoring liberty and independence
to the cities of Italy k. The acquisition of these
routed industry, and gave motion and vigour
to all the aive powers of the human mind.
Foreign commerce revived, navigation was at-
tended to and improved. Constantinople be-
came the chief mart to which the Italians re-
forted. There they not only met with a fa-
vourable reception, but obtained Iuch mercan-

k flin. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 33-

tile privileges as enabled them to carry on trade BOO i.
with great advantage. They were supplied
both with the precious commodities of the eafl,
and with many curious manufaaures, the pro-
dut of ancient arts and ingenuity which till
fubfiftl among the Greeks. As the labour and
expence of conveying the productions of India
to Constantinople by that long and indirect
courle which I have dcribed, rendered them
extremely rate, and of an exorbitant price, the
industry of the Italians dilcovered other me-
thods of procuring them in greater abundance,
and at an easier rate. They fometines pur-
chaled them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other
ports on the coast of Syria, to which they were
brought by a route not unknown to the ancients.
They were conveyed from India by sea, up the
Persian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and
Tigris, as far as Bagdat, were carried by land
across the Desert to Palmyra, and from thence
to the towns on the Mediterranean. But from
the length of the journey, and the dangers to
which the caravans were cxpofed, this proved
always a tedious, and often a precarious mede
of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of
Egypt, having renewed the commerce with In-
dia in its ancient channel, by the Arabian Gulf,
the Italian merchants, notwith(tanding the vio-
lent antipathy to each other with which Clhri-

ftians

BOOK . ftians and the followers of Mahomet were thet

poflfeled, repaired to Alexandria, and enduring
from the love. of gain, the insolence and exac-
tions of the Mahometans, eftablilhed a lucrative
trade in that port. From that period, the corn.
mercial spirit of Italy became ative and enter.
priing. Venice, Genoa, Pisa, rose from incon.
fiderable towns, to be populous and wealthy ci.
ties. Their naval power increased; their veffcli
frequented not only all the ports in the Mediter-
ranean, but venturing sometimes beyond the
Streights, visited the maritime towns of Spain,
France, the Low Countries, and England; and,
by distributing their commodities over Europe,
began to communicate to its various nations
some talte for the valuable productions of the
east, as well as some ideas of manufactures and
arts, which were then unknown beyond the pre-
cints of Italy.

Their pro- WHILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing
,rei fr.a-
vourd by in their career of improvement, an event happen-
the Cu-
fades, ed the most extraordinary perhaps in the history

of mankind, which, instead of retarding the com-
mercial progress of the Italians, rendered it more
rapid. The martial spirit of the Europeans,
heightened and inflamed by religious zeal, prompt-
ed them to attempt the deliverance of the HIoly
Land from the dominion of infidels. Vil

arnlics

armies, conpofed of all the nations in Europe, B OOK .
marched towards Aia, upon this wild enter-
prile. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Vene-
tians furnilhed the transports which carried them
thither. They supplied them with provisions
and military itores. Beside the immenle fums
whith they received on this account, they ob-
tained commercial privileges and establish-
ments, of great confcquence in the settlements
which the Crusaders made in PalUlline, and in
other provinces of Asia. From those iburces,
prodigious wealth flowed into the cities which I
have mentiontd. This was accompanied with
a proportional increase of power, and by the
end of the loly War, Venice, in particular,
became a great maritime itate, poliCling an x-
tensive commerce, and ample terlcories '. Italy
was not the only country in which the Crusades
contributed to revive and'difFufe such a spirit as
prepared Europe for future dilcovcries. By
their expeditions into Arfa, the other European
nations became well acquainted with remote
regions, which formerly they knew only by
name, or by the reports of ignorant and cre-
dlulous pilgrims. 'They had an opportunity of
oblerving the manners, the arts, and the ac-
conodati)ns of people more polifl'ed than
'Lfi de l'liiftoire du Commerce de Vcnilc, p. ', c.

t! . t lk lvI s.

BOOK L themselves. This intercourse between the ea

and weft subsisted almost two centuries. Th
adventurers, who returned from Alia, commu
nicated to their countrymen the ideas whic
they had acquired, and the habits of life the,
had contracted by visiting more refined nations
The Europeans began to be sensible of wantl
with which they were formerly unacquainted
new desires were excited; and such a taste foi
the commodities and arts of other countries
gradually spread among them, that they not
only encouraged the reort of foreigners to their
harbours, but began to perceive the advantage
and necessity of applying to commerce thenm
selves

by the die. THIS communication, which was opened be-
coveriec of
travcllcrs by tween Europe and the weflern provinces of

land. Aia, encouraged several persons to advance far

beyond the countries in which the Crusaders
carried on their operations, and to travel by
land into the more remote and opulent regions
of the east. The wild fanaticism, which seems
at that period to have mingled in all the
schemes of individuals, no less than in all the
counsels of nations, first incited men to enter
upon those long and dangerous peregrinations.

" IIin. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 25, &c.

TIhcj

They were afterwards undertaken from profpe&s Boo i..
of commercial advantage, or from motives of
mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tudela,
in the kingdom of Navarre, possesed with a
superstitious veneration for the law of Moses,
and solicitous to visit his countrymen in the east,
whom he hoped to find in such a state of power
and opulence as might redound to the honour
of his set, set out from Spain in the year 1r 6o,
and travelling by land to Constantinople, pro-
ceeded through the countries to the north of
the Euxine and Caspian seas, as far as Chinese
Tartary. From thence he took his route to-
wards the south, and after traversing various
provinces of the farther India, he embarked on
the Indian ocean, visited several of its islands,
and returned at the end of thirteen years, by
the way of Egypt, to Europe, with much in-
formation concerning a large diftri& of the
globe, altogether unknown at that time to the
western world . The zeal of the head of the
Christian church co-operated with the fuperfti-
tion of Benjamin the Jew, in dilcove:-ing the
interior and remote provinces of Alia. All
Chrillendom having been alarcd with ac-
counts of the rapid progress of the 'Iartar arms
under Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who enter-

n Rergeron Recucil des Voyages. &c. tom. i p. i.

ui~41 - d

'00K . talined most exalted ideas concerning the plcni.

·a46. tude of his own power, and the submission due

to his injunscions, ent father John de Plan,
Carpini, at the head of a mission of Franciscan
monks, and father Afcolino, at the head ot
another of Dominicans, to exhort Kayuk Khan,
the grandlon of Zengis, who was then at the
head of the Tartar empire, to embrace ih;
Chriltin faith, and to desist from delola ti tl:
earth by his arms. The haughty delcendant oi
the greatest conqueror Asia had ever bchclJ,
astonished at this strange mandate from an It.l-
lian priefr, whore name and jurikiiction were
alike unknown to him, received it with the
contempt which it merited, though he dininltd
the mendicants who delivered it with impunity.
But as they had penetrated into the country by
different routs, and followed for some time the
Tartar camps, which were always in motion,
they had an opportunity of visiting a great part
of Asia. Carpini, who proceeded by the way
of Polind and RufTia, travelled through its
northern provinces as far as the extremities of
Thibet. Alfolino, who seems to have landed
fome'vherc in Syria, advanced through its
louuticrn provinces, into the interior parts of
Pfi.ro, tom.

° Ilakluyt, i. z1. ecrgcron, tom. i.

INo

NOT long after, St. Louis of France conrri- BOO. I.

blted farther towards extending the knowledge ,5s3.
which the Europeans had begun to acquire of
thole distant regions. Some designing im-
poftor, who took advan!age of the slender ac-
quaintance of Chrillendoni with the Rfate and
character of the Aiatic nations, having in-
formed him that a powerful Chan of the Tar-
tars had embraced the Christian faith, the
monarch liflened to the tale with pious credu-
lity, and instantly rblved. to fend ambassadors
to this illustrious convert, with a view of in-
citing him to attack their comn:on enemy the
Saracens in one quarter, whil- he fell upon
them in another. As monks were the only
persons in that age who pofifffed such a degree
of knowledge as qualified them for a service of
this kind, he employed in it father Andrew, a
Jacobine, who was followed by father William
de Rubruquis, a FranciScan. With refped to
the progress of the former, there is no memo-
rial extant. The journal of the latter has been
published. I-e was admitted into the pretlence
of Mangu, the third khan in fuccefion fro:n
Zengis, and made a circuit through the interior
parts of Asia, more extcnfive than tll.t of any
luropean who had hitherto explored .:hem r.
I' IIal.l i. . Rrcucil dep \'y.ges pr Bcrgron. torn. i.

.1 U

aBtOK K-. To those travellers, whom religious zeal eni

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ven.
tured into remote countries, from the profipae
of commercial advantage, or from motives of
mere curiosity. The first and most eminent of
thele was Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble
'69* family. laving engaged early in trade, ac-

cording to the custom of his country, his apir.
ing mind wilhed for a sphere of activity moe
extensive than was afforded to it by the llta.
blilhed traffic carried on in those ports of
Europe and Asia, which the Venetians fre-
quented. This prompted him to travel into
unknown countries, in expectation of opening
with them a commercial intercourse, more
suited to the sanguine ideas and hopes of a
young adventurer.

As his father had already carried 'ome

European commodities to the court of the
great Chan of the Tartars, and had dilflolcd
of them to advantage, he resorted thithr.
Under the protection of Kublay Chan, the
moit powerful of all the successors of Zen is,
he continued his mercantile peregrinations in
Asia upwards of twenty-fix years; and during
that time advanced towards the cat, far be-
yond the utn.oftl boundaries to which any
L.uropcan traveller had ever proceeded. In.

8 flad

tead of following the curle of Carpini and Boo r.
Rubruquis, along the vast unpeopled pliins
of Tartary, he passed through the chief trad-
ing cities in the more cultivated parts of A fia
and penetrated to Cambalu, or Pekihg, the
capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or
China, subjet at that time to the successors of
Zengis. He made more than one voyage on
the Indian ocean, he traded in many of the
islands; from which Europe had long received
fpiceries and other commodities, which it held
in high estimation, though unacquainted with
the particular countries to which it was in-
debted for those precious productions; and he
obtained information concerning several coun-
tries, which he did not viiit in person, parti-
cularly the island Zipangri, probably the fame
now known by the name of Japan P. On his
return, he astonished his contemporaries with
his descriptions of vast regions, whose names
had never been heard of in Europe, and with
such pompous accounts of their fertility, their
populodfnefs, their opulence, the variety of
their manufactures, and the extent of their
trade, as rose far above the conception of ai
uninformed age.

P Viaggi di Marco Polo. Ramus. ii. 2. Begeron,
tom. ii,

VOL. I. E ABOU

BOOK 1. ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Si

131. John Mandeville, an Englilhman, encourage

by his example, visited most of the countrie
in the east which be had described, and, lik
him, publised an account of them . Th
narrations of those early travellers abound wit
many wild incoherent tales, concerning giant!
enchanters, and monsters. But .they were noi
from that circumitance, less acceptable to a
ignorant age, which delighted in what wa
marvellous. The wonders which they told
moflly on hearsay, filled the multitude wit
admiration. The facts which they related fron
their own observation, attracted the attentio
of the more discerning. The former, whic
may be confidered as the popular tradition
and fables of the countries through whieh the
had pafled, were gradually disregarded a
Europe advanced in knowledge. The lattei
however incredible -some of them may hav
appeared in their own time, have been con
firmed by the observations of modern travellers
By means of both, however, the curioficya
mankind was excited with refpec to the re
mote parts of the earth, their ideas were en
larged, and they were not only insensibly dil
posed to attempt new discoveries, but receives

1 Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandeville.

fucl

such information as direEted to that particu- BOOK .
lar course in which there were afterwards car-
ried on.

WHILE this spirit was gradually forming in and hy the

In 'enion of

Europe, a fortunate discovery was made, which themaincru
contributed more han all the efforts and inge-
nuity of preceding ages, to improve and to
extend navigation. That wonderful property
of the magnet, by which it communicates such
virtue to a needle or slender rod of iron, as to
point towards the poles of the earth, was ob-
served. The use which might be made of this
in directing navigation was immediately per-
ceived. That most valuable, but now familiar
infrument, the mariners compass, was formed.
When, by means of it, navigators found that
at all seasons, and in every place, they could
discover the north and south with so much ease
and accuracy, it became no longer necessary
to depend merely on the light of the stars and
the observation of the ea coast. They gra-
dually.abandoned their ancient timid and lin-
gering course along the hore, ventured boldly
into he ocean, and relying on this new guide,
could Itcer in the darkest night, and under the
most cloudy sky, with a security and preifion
hitherto unknown. The compass may be said
to have opened to man (he dominion of the

E 2a fa,

OOK 1. lea, and to have put him in full pofefllion (

the earth, by enabling him to visit every pa
of it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi,
town of considerable trade in the kingdom
Naples, was the author of this great discover
about the year one thoutand thrte hundcre
and two. It hath been often the fate of tho
illustrious benefactors of mankind, who has
enriched cience and improved the arts by the
inventions, to derive more reputation tha
benefit from the happy efforts of their geniu
But the lot of Gioia has been still more cruel
through the inattention or ignorance of cor
temporary historians, he has been defrauds
even of the fame to which he had such a ju
title. We receive from them no information i;
respect to his profelfion, his character, th
precise time when he made this important di
covery, or the accidents and inquiries whic
led to it. The knowledge of this even
though productive of greater effe&s than an
recorded in the annals of the human race,
transmitted to us without any of those circurn
flances, which can gratify the curiosity that
naturally awakens'. But though the ufc c
the compass might enable the Italians to per
form the short voyages to which they wer

Collinas & Trombellus de Acus nauticx Inventori
Inftit. Acad. Bonon. tom. ii. part ii. p. 372.

aCCUl

iccuftomed, with greater security and expedi- BOOK 1.
tion, its influence was not so sudden or extensive,
as immediately to render navigation adventu-
rous, and to excite a spirit of discovery. Many
causes combined in preventing this beneficial
invention from producing its full effect intlan-
taneoufly. Men relinquish ancient habits
slowly, and with reluctance. They are averse
to new experiments, and venture upon them
with timidity. The commercial jealousy of
the Italians, it is probable, laboured to con-
ceal the happy discovery of their countryman
from other nations. The art of fleering by
the compass, with such skill and accuracy as
to inspire a full confidence in its direction, was
acquired gradually. Sailors, unaccustomed to
quit fight of land, durst not launch out at once
and commit themselves to unknown seas. Ac-
cordingly, near half a century elapsed, from
the time of Gioia's discovery, before navigators
ventured into any eas which they had not been
accustomed to frequent.

THE first appearance of a bolder spirit may Some ap-

pearanc of
be dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to · bolder

fpirlt in

the Canary or Fortunate Islands. By what navigation.
accident they were led to the discovery of those
small ies, which lie near five hundred miles
from the Spanish coast, and above a hundred

E 3 and

BOOK _. and fifty miles from the coast of Africa, con.

temporary writers have not explained. But about
the middle of the fourteenth century, the people
of all the different kingdoms into which Spain
was then divided, were accustomed to make
piratical excursions thither, in order to plunder
the inhabitants, or to carry them off as slaves.
Clement VI. in virtue of the right claimed by
the holy fee to dispose of all countries po(sesid
by infidels, erected hose iles into a kingdom,
in the year one thousand three hundred and
forty-four, and conferred it on Lewis de la
Cerda, descended from the royal family of
Castile. But that unfortunate prince, deffitute
of power to aflrt his nominal title, having
never visited the Canaries, John de Bethen-
court, a Norman baron, obtained a grant of
them from Henry III. of Castile'. Bethen.
court, with the valour and good fortune which
distinguished the adventurers of his country,
attempted and effected the conquest, and the
poefTflon of the Canaries remained for ome
time in his family, as a fief held of the crown
of Castile. Previous to this expedition of
Bethencourt, his countrymen fettled in Nor-
rmandy are said to have visited the coast of

* Viera y Clavijo Notic. dela Hiflor. de Canaria, I.
:68, &c. Glas Hil. c. i.

Africa,

Africa, and to have proceeded far to the fouhh BOOK .
of the Canary islands. But their voyages thither 1365.
seem not to have been undertaken in confc-
quence of any public. or regular plan for ex-
tending navigation and attempting new dico-
veries. They were either exctrfions fuggefled
by that roving piratical spirit, which defccnded
to the Normans from their ancestors, or the
commercial enierprifes of private merchants,
which attracted so little notice, that hardly any
memorial of them is to be found in contempo-.
rary authors. In a general survey of the pro.
grefs of discovery, it is sufficient to have men-
tioned this event; and leaving it among those
of dubious exiffence, or of small importance,
we may conclude, that though much additional
information concerning the remote regions of
the East had been received by travellers who
visited them by land, navigation, at the begin.
ning of the fifteenth century, had not advanced
beyond the Rtate to which it had attained before
the downfal of the Roman empire.

AT length the period arrived, when Provi- Firfi regular

plan ofdif-

dence decreed that men were to pass the limits covery,
within vhich they had been so long confined,
and open to themselves a more ample field
wherein to display their talents, their enter-
prise, and courage. The first considerable

E 4 efforts

BOOK . efforts towards this were not made by ay

of the more powerful states of Europe, or by
thole who had applied to navigation with the
greatest assiduity and success. The glory ot
leading the way in this new career was relrvtd

formed by for Portugal, one of the smallest and ait
the Portu-
suc(e. powerful of the European kingdoms. As

the attempts of the Portuguese to acquire the
knowledge of rhoie parts of the globe with
which mankind were then unacquainted, not
only improved and extended the art of naviga-
tion, but roused such a spirit of curiosity and
entcrprife, as led to the discovery of the New
World, of which I propose to write the history,
it is necessary to take a view of the rife, the
progress, and success of their various naval
operations. It was in this school that the lil-
coverer of America was. trained; and unless
we trace the fieps by which his inftrutors and
guides advanced, it will be impoflible to corn.
prehend the circumltances which suggested the
idea, or facilitated the execution of his grcat
design,

eircurtIn., VARIOUS ircurnmances prompted the Por.
ces which
bd o thit. tuguefe to exert their activity in this new

direcion, and enabled them to accomplish un.
dertakings apparently superior to the natural
force of their monarchy. The kings of Por.

tugal,

ruga,. having driven the Moors out of their BOOK .
dominions, had acquired power, as well as
glory, by the success of their arms against the
infidels. By their vitories over them, they
had extended the royal authority beyond the
narrow limits within which it was originally
circumscribed in Portugal, as well as in other
feudal kingdoms. They had the command of
tie national force, could rouse it to a with
united vigour, and, after the expulsion of the
Moors, could employ it without dread of in-
terruption from any domestic enemy. By the
perpetual hostilities carried on for several cen-
turies against the Mahometans, the martial and
adventurous spirit which distinguished all the
European nations during the middle ages, was
improved and heightened among the Portu-
guefe. A fierce civil war towards the close of
the fourteenth century, occasioned by a dif-
puted fuccellion, augmented the military ar-
dour of the nation, and formed or called forth
men of Iuch aive and daring genius, as are
fit for bold undertakings. The situation of
the kingdom, bounded on every fide by the
dominions of a mole powerful neighbour, did
not afford free scope to the aivity of the
Portuguese by land, as the firength of their
monarchy was no match for that of Castile.
But Portugal was a maritime state, in which

there

OOKI r. thea were many commodious harbours; the

people had begun to make some progress in
the knowledge and pra&ice of navigation and
the lea was open to them, presenting the only
field of enterprise in which they could diftin.
guith themselves.

Firn at- Suctr was the state of Portugal, and such
Icmpt. the difpoftion of the people, when John I.

surnamed the BEaftard, obtained secure polfff-
sion of the crown by the peace concluded with
Castile in the year one thousand four hundred
and eleven. He was a prince of great merit,
who, by superior courage and abilities, had
opened his way to athrone which of right did
not belong to him. He instantly perceived
that it would be impoffille to preserve public
order, or- domestic tranquillity, without find-
ing some employment for the restless spirit of
his fubjeds. With this view, he afembled a
numerous fleet at Lisbon, composed of all the
ships that he could fit out in his own kingdom,
and of many hired from foreigners. This
great armament was deffined to attack the
,412. Moors fettled on the coals of Barbary. While

it was equipping, a few vefiels were appointed
to fail along the western shore of Africa bounded
by the Atlantic ocean, and to dilcover the un-
known countries situated there. From this

in con-
5

inconfiderabde attempt, we may date the comr- ,_of.
mencnment of that spirit of discovery which
opened the barriers that had so long shut out
mankind from the knowledge of one half of the
tcrrcftrial globe.

AT the time when John sent forth there ships

on this new voyage, the art of navigation was
frill very imperfe&. Though Africa lay so
near to Portugal, and the fertility of the coun-
tries already known on that continent invited
men to explore it more fully, the Portuguese
had never ventured to fail beyond Cape Non.
That promontory, as its name imports, was
hitherto confidered as a boundary which could
not be passed. But the nations of Europe had
now acquired as much knowledge, as ernbokl-
cned them to disregard the prejudices and to
correct the errors of their ancestors. The long
reign of ignorance, the constant enemy of every
curious inquiry, and of every new undertak-
ing, was approaching to its period. The light
of science began to dawn. The works of the
ancient Greeks and Romans began to be read
with admiration and profit. The sciences cul-
tivated by the Arabians were introduced into
Europe by the Moors fettled in Spain and
Portugal, and by the Jews, who were very
numerous in both thele kingdoms. Geometry,

aftro-

0ocK l. altronomy, and geography, the ciences or

which the art of navigation is founded, became
objects of ftiidious attention. The memor)
of the discoveries made by the ancients war
revived, and the progress of their navigation
and commerce began to be traced. Some of the
causes which have obftruted the cultivation ol
science in Portugal, during this century and the
lafi, did not exilt, or did not operate in the
fame manner, in the fifteenth century'; and
the Portuguele, at that period, seem to have
kept pace with other nations on this fide of the
Alps in literary pursuits.
Its ruccers. As the genius of the age favoured the execu.

tion of that new undertaking, to which the
peculiar state of the country invited the Por.
tuguefe, it proved successful. The vessels sent
on the discovery doubled that formidable Cape,
which had terminated the progress of former
navigators, and proceeded a hundred and sixty
miles beyond it, to Cape Bojador. As irs
rocky cliffs, which stretched a considerable
way into the Atlantic, appeared more dreadful
than the promontory which they had passed,
the Portuguese commanders durst not attempt
to fail round it, but returned to Lisbon, more

* Sec NOTE IX.

satisficd

fitisfid with having advanced so far, than OOK .
ashamed of having ventured no farther.

INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it in- Prince

Henry the
creaecl the paflion for discovery, which began diretorof

the Portu-

to arise in Portugal. The fortunate iiTue gueicdico-
of the king's expedition against the Moors
of Barbary, added strength to that spirit in the 1417.
nation, and pushed it on to new undertakings.
In order to render these successful, i: was
necessary that they should be conducted by a
person who pofflcfed abilities capable of dif-
cerning what was attainable, who enjoyed
lcifure to form a regular system for prosecuting
discovery, and who was animated with ardour
that would persevere in spite of obstacles and
repulles. Happily for Portugal, she found all
those qualities in Henry duke of Viseo, the
fourth son of king John by Philippa of Lan-
caster, fitler of Henry IV. king of England.
That prince, in his early youth, having ac-
companied his father in his expedition to Bar-
bary, diltinguifhed himself by many deeds of
valour. To the martial spirit, which was the
characteristic of every man of noble birth at
that time, he, added all the accomplishments
of a more enlightened and polished age. He
cultivated the arts and sciences, which were
then unknown and delpifed by persons of his

rank.

OK iarlk. He applied with peculiar fondness to

the study of geography; and by the instruction
of able masters, as well as by the accounts of
travellers, he early acquired such knowledge
of the habitable globe as discovered the great
probability of finding new and opulent'coun-
tries, by failing along the coast of Africa.
Such an obje& was formed to awaken the en-
thufiafm and ardour of a youthful mind, and
he espoused with the utmost zeal the patronage of
a design which might prove as beneficial, as it
appeared to be splendid and honourable. In
order that he might pursue this great scheme
without interruption, he retired from court im-
mediately after his return from Africa, and
fiHed his residence at Sagres, near Cape Sr.
Vincent, where the prospect of the Atlantic
ocean invited his t-houghts continually towards
his favourite proje&, and encouraged him to
execute it. In this retreat he was attended
by ome of the mnoft learned men in his country,
who aided him in his researches. He applied
for information to the Moors of Barbary, who
.were accustomed to travel by land into the
interior provinces of Africa, in qelft of ivory,
gold-dufft, and other rich commodities. He
consulted the Jews etled in Portugal. By
promires, rewards, and marks of respect, he
allured into his service fe-vera persons, forign-

er3

ers as well as -ortugiefe, who were eminent 3BOO I.
for their kill in navigation. In caking those
preparatory teps, the great abilities of the
prince were seconded by his private virtues.
His integrity, his affability, .his refpet for
religion, his zeal for the honour of his country,
engaged persons of all ranks to applaud his
design, and to favour the execution of it. His
Schemes were allowed by the greater part of
his countrymen to proceed neither from ambi-
tion, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow
from the warm benevolence of a heart eager to
promote the happiness of mankind, ,and which
justly intitled him to affilme a motto for his
device, that described the quality, by which
he wished to be diftinguifhecl, the talent of
doing good.

His first effort, as is usual at the commence- Dircovey of

rorto Santo,

ment of any new undertaking, was extremely r418.
inconsiderable. He fitted out a single ship,
and giving the command of it to John Gon-
zalez Zarco and Triltan Vaz, two gentlemen
of his household, who voluntarily offered to
conduc the enterprise, he inftruted them to
use their utmost efforts to double Cape Boap-
dor, and thence to fleer towards the south.
They, according to the mode of navigation
which fill prevailed, held their cturfe along

the

BOOK L the lhore; 'and by following that direction

they must have encountered almost insuperable
difficulties in attempting to pass Cape Bojador
But fortune came in aid to their want of kill,
and prevented the voyage from being alto-
gether fruitless. A sudden squall of wind aroe,
drove them out to sea, and when they expeced
every moment to perish, landed them on an
unknown iand, which from their happy escape
they named Porto Santo. In the infancy of
navigation, the discovery of this small island
appeared a matter of uch moment, that they
inetantly returned to Portugal with the good
tidings, and were received by Henry with tie
applause and honour due to fortunate adven-
turers. This faint dawn of success filled a
mind ardent in the pursuit of a favourite object
with such sanguine hopes as were sufficient in-
'4'9* citements to proceed. Next year, Henry sent

out three ships under the fame commanders,
to whom he joined Bartholomew Perefirello,
in order to take poffefiori of the island which
they had discovered. When they began to
fettle in Porto Santo, they observed towards
the south a fixed spot in the horizon, like a
or Madeira. small black cloud. By degrees, they were led

to conjecture thYat it might be land, and steer-
ihg towards it, they arrived at a considerable
island uninhabited and covered with wood,

5 which

which on that account they called Madeirau. BoOK ;
As it was Henry's chief obje6t to render his
discoveries ureful to his country, he irnme- ,41o.
diately equipped a fleet to carry a colony of
Portuguese to these islands. By his provident
care, they were furnished not only with the
feeds, plants, and domestic animals common
in Europe; but as he foresaw that the warmth
of the climate and fertility of the foil would
prove favourable to the rearing of other pro-
dultions, he procured flips of the vine froni
the ifand of Cyprus, the rich wines of which
were then in great request, and plants of the
lugar-cane from Sicily, into which it had been
tirely introduced.' There throve so profpe-
roufly in this new country, that the benefit of
cultivating them was immediately perceived,
and the ifgar and wine of Madeira quickly
became considerable articles in the commerce
of Portugal .

As soon as the advantages derived from this DoubleCap

irfst ettlement to the weft of the European Boj""ad,
continent began to be felt, the pirit of disco-

u Hiforical Relation of the first Discovery of Madeira,
tranfated from the Portuguese of Fran. Alcafarana,
p Ai, &c.

Iud. Guicciardini Defcritt. de Paef Balfi, p. iSo, 181.
VOL. I. II very

oo K , very appeared less chimerical, and becamr

more adventurous. By their voyages to Nla
deira, the Portuguese were gradually accustom
ed to a bolder navigation, and inflead of creep
ing servilely along the coast, ventured into the
open ea. In consequence of taking this courl
Gilianez, who commanded one of prince I-Hn
ry's flips, doubled Cape Bojador, the boundai)
of the Portuguese navigation upwards of twent)
years, and which had hitherto been deemet
3433. unpaffable. This fuccelsful voyage, which te

ignorance of the age placed on a level witr
the most famous exploits recorded in hiltory,
opened a new Iphere to navigation, as it diico.
vered the vast continent of Africa, fill wafled
by the Atlantic ocean, and stretching towards
the south. Part of this was oion explored; the

Advance Portuguese advanced within the tropics, and in
within the
tropics. the space of a few years they discovered the

river Senegal, and all the coafi extending from
Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Afonifhed HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided
ditrchcred in their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt
there. them, by the light and information which they

received from the works of the ancient mathe-
maticians and geographers. But, when they
began to enter the torrid zone, the notion
which prevailed among the ancients, that the

heat,

heat, which reigned perpetually there, was so BOOK
excefive as to render it uninhabitable, deterred .
them, for some time, from proceeding. Their
own observations, when they first ventured
into this unknown and formidable region,
tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity con-
cerning the violent operation of the direc rays
of the fun. As far as the river Senegal, the
Portuguese had found the coast of Africa in-
habited by people nearly resembling the Moors
of Barbary. When they advanced to the south
of that river, the human form seemed to put
on a new appearance. They beheld men with
skins black as ebony, with hort curled hair,
flat notes, thick lips, and al the peculiar sea-
tures which are now known to diltinguifh the
race of negroes. This surprising alteration
they naturally attributed to the influence of
heat, and if they hould advance nearer to the
line, they began to dread that its effects would
be fill more violent. Those dangers were
exaggerated, and many other obje&ions against
attempting farther discoveries were proposed
by some of the grandees, who, from ignorance,
from envy, or from that cold timid prudence
which rejets whatever has the air of novelty
or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all prince
lenry's schemes. They represented, that it
was altogether chimerical to expec any advan-

1" 2 r.i;

0 0 K rage from countries situated in that rion

which the wildom and experience of antiquity
had proncunced to be unfit for the habitation
of men ; that their forefathers, satisfied wit
cultivating the territory which Providence had
allotted them, did not waste the trength of the
kingdom by fruitlels projects, in quell of new
Icttlements; that Portugal was already x.
hauflcd by the expence of attempts to dilcovrr
lands which either did not exist, or whih
nature deffined to remain unknown; and was
drained of men, who might have been em-
ployed in undertakings attended with more
certain success, and productive of greater bene.
fit. But neither their appeal to the authority
of the ancients, nor their reasonings concerr..
ing the interest of Portugal, made any inm
prefflon upon the determined philosophic mind
of prince Henry. The discoveries which e
had already made convinced him that the an-
cients had little more than a conjectural know-
ledge of the torrid zone. He was no less fatil!
sied that the political arguments of his oppo-
nents with refpeet to the int.:ri lt of Portutal
were malevolent and ill-founded. In thole
sentiments he was frenuoufly supported by his
brother Pedro, who governed the kingdom a1
guardian of their nephew Alponfo V. who had
V432 succeedcd to the throne during his minority;

. 1

and instead of slackening his efforts, Henry BOOKI.
continued to pursue his discoveries with frelh
ardour.

BUT, in order to silence all the murmurs of Papal rant

to Portugal

opposition, he endeavoured to obtain the f 3

hat
fan&ion of the highest authority in favour of ould di-

eover.

his operations. With this view, he applied to
the Pope, and reprelented, in pompous terms,
the pious and unwearied zeal, with which he
had exerted himself during twenty years, in
discovering unknown countries, the wretched
inhabitants of which were utter strangers to true
religion, wandering in heathen darkners, or led
stray by the delusions of Mahomet. He be-
ught the holy father, to whom, as the vicar
fChrift, all the kingdoms of the earth were
ibjea, to confer on the crown of Portugal a
ght to all the countries pofTeffed by Infidels,
vhich hould be discovered by the indulftry of
ts fubjets, and fubtdued by the force of its
ms. I-ic intreated him to enjoin all Chriffian
owers, under the highest penalties, not to
nolel Portugal while engaged in this laudable
ntrrprife, and to prohibit them from fettling
i any of the countries which the Portuguese
iould discover. He promired that, in all
heir expeditions, it should be the chief object
his countrymen to spread the knowledge of

F g the

BOOK . the Christian religion, to eRfablilh the autho

rity of the holy fee, and to increae the floc
of the universal pastor. As it was by improv
ing with dexterity every favourable conjunCtur
for acquiring new powers, that the court ¥:
Rome had gradually extended its usurpations,
Eugene IV. the pontiff to whom this app.ca.
tion was made, eagerly seized the opportunity
which now presented itielf. He initantly per.
ceived, that by complying with prince Henry's
request, he might exercie a prerogative no leli
flattering in its own nature, than likely to prove
beheficial in its consequences. A Bull was ;c.
cordingly ifTued, ira which, after applauding in
the strongest terms the past efforts of the Por.
tuguefe, and exhorting them to proceed in tra:
laudable career oh which they had entered, he
granted them an exclusive right to all the coun.
tries which they hould discover, from Cape
Non to the continent of India.

EXTRAVACANT as this donation, compre.

bending such a large portion of the habitable
globe, would now appear even in Catholic
countries, no person in the fifteenth ccntur
doubted that the pope, in the plenitude of lis
.ipoltolic power, had a right to confer it.
Prince Henry was soon sensible of the advnn-
sages which he derived from this tranfadion.

1 k

His schemes were authorised and fanatifled by BOOK .
the bull approving of them. The spirit of dif-
covery was conne&ed with zeal for religion,
which, in that age, was a principle of such
acivity and vigour, as to influence the conduct
of nations. All Ghriltian princes were deterred
from intruding into those countries which the
Portuguese had dilcovered, or from interrupting
the progress of their navigation and conquefis Y.

THE fame of the Portuguese voyages oon Fame and

tpradovr rpeprorefs of
spread over Europe. Men, long accustomed thePortu-

guefe dfco.

to circumscribe the acivity and knowledge of veans.
the human mind within the limits to which
they had been hitherto confined, were astonished
to behold the sphere of navigation so suddenly
enlarged, and aprofpet opened of visiting re-
gions of the globe, the existence of which was
unknown in former times. The learned and
speculative reasoned and formed theories con-
cerning those unexpected discoveries. The
vulgar inquired and wondered; while enter-
prifing adventurers crouded from every part of
Europe, soliciting prince Henry to employ
them in this honourable service. Many Vene-
tians and Genoese, in particular, who were, at
that time, superior to all other nations in the

' See NOTE X.

F 4 fcicnce

BOOK . science of naval affairs, entered aboard tlie For

tuguefe ships, and acquired a more perfect anc
extensive knowledge of their profession in tlhd
new school of navigation. In emulation ol
there foreigners, the Portuguese exerted theil
own talents. The nation seconded the dcfirrs
of the prince. Private merchants formcd co..
2446. panics, with a view to search for unknown coun.

tries. The Capz de Verd ifands, which lie
off the promontory of that name, were dilLo.
2449. vered, and oon after the iflcs called Azures.

As the former of there are above three hundre;
miles from the African coall, and the latter
nine hundred miles from any continent, it is
evident, by their venturing so boldly into tie
open seas, that the Portuguese had, by tisi
time, improved greatly in the art of naviga.
tion.

Death of WHILE the pafion for engaging in new t:n.
prince Henry. dertakings was thus warm and active, it re.

ceived an unfortunate check by the death cf
prince Henry, whose ftperior knowledge had
hitherto directed all the operations of the dil:
coverers, and whose patronage had cncouraecd
and proteced them. But notwith(landing ail
the advantages which they derived from thclir,
the Portoguefe, ding, his life, did not .J-
vance, in their utmot rogrefs towards te

so Ui'i,

south, within five degrees of the equinoctial BOOK .
line; and, after tleir continued exertions for
half a century, hardly fifteen hundred miles of From' 412
the coast of Africa were diifovered. To an
,;ge acquainted with the efforts of navigation in
its itate of maturity and improvement, thole
efcays of its early years must necessarily appear
feeble and unkilful. But, inconsiderable as
they may be deemed, they were lufficient to
turn the curiosity of the European nations into
a new channel, to excite an enterprising fpirir,
and to point tile way to future dilcoverics.

ALPHONSO, who poffrfed the throne of Por- The pion

for dlsover'
tugal at the time of prince Henry's death, was i ngi,.ines

for

* sonic

lo much engaged in supporting his own preten- tim.
sions to the crown of Castile, or in carrying on
his expeditions aganft the Moors in Barbary,
that the force of his kingdom being exerted in
other operations, he could not profccute the
uifcoveries in Africa with ardour. lie coni-
mitted the conduit of them to Fernando Go-
riez, a merchant in Lilbon, to whom he grantcd
an exclusive right of commrlcrce with all the
countries of wvlich pri;;ce lenry had taken polf
l.lion. Under tle rcllraint and opprciion of
a monopoly, the pirit of difiovcry languiflied.
It ceased to be a national olijc-:, and bcamne
the concern of a private man, more attentive

to

BOOK . to his own gain, than to the glory of his coun

try. Some progress, however, was made. Th
,,.7 Portuguese ventured at length to cross the line

and, to their astonishment, found that regior
of the torrid zone, which was fupp6fed to be
scorched with intolerable heat, to be not only
habitable, but populous and fertile.

,41i. JOHN II. who succeeded his father Alphonro,

with addi- possesscd talents capable both of forming and
lional ar-
lourl. executing great designs. As part of his reve.

nues, while prince, had arisen from duties on
the trade with the newly discovered countries,
this naturally turned his attention toward# them,
and fati.tfied him with refpe& to their utility and
importance. In proportion as his knowledge
of these countries extended, the poffefion of
them appeared to be of greater consequence.
While the Portuguese proceeded along the coast
of Africa, from Cape Non to the river of Sene-
gal, they found all that exLenfive trat to be
faLdy, barren, and ti;i:lly inhabited by a
wretched people, piofefling the Mahometan
religion, and lutject to the vast empire of Mo-
rocco. But to the ibuth of that river, the
power and religion of the Mahometans were
unknown. The country was divided into frnall
independent principalities, the population was

considerable,

considerable, the foil fertile ', and the Porfil- B6OO .
guee soon difcoveted that it produced ivory, rich
gums, gold, and other valuable conmmodities.
By the acquisition of these, commerce was en-
I.lrged, and became more adventuraus. Men,
alimated and rendered aive by the certain
profpec6 of gain, pursued discovery with greater
Critzrnefs, than when they were excited only by
curiosity and hope.

THIS spirit derived no fimall reinforcement of It progrda.

vi,;ur rom the countenance of such a monarch
as John. Declaring himself the patron of every
attempt towards discovery, he promoted it with
all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry,
and ith superior power. The effects of this
were imifiediately felt. A powerful fleet was 4144
fitted ut, which, after discovering the king-
doms of Benin ahd Congo, advanced above sis-
teen hundred miles beyond the line, and the
Portuguele, for the first time, beheld a new
heaven, and observed the flars of another he-
mirphere. John was not only solicitous to dif-
cover, but attentive to secure the poflf'ion of
thole countries. He built forts on the coast of

' Navigatio Aloyfii Cadamnfli apud Novum Orbem

Gryn;ti, p. z. 18. Navigat. all Ifola di San Tome per
un 'ilotto Portugh. Ramulio, i. 15.

Guinea;

Boo . Guinea; he sent out colonies to fettle there

he eftablilhed a commercial intercourle witl
the more powerful kingdoms; he endeavourec
to render such as were feeble or divided, :ri.
butary to the crown of Portugal. Some of the
petty princes voluntarily acknowledged them.
selves his vafials. Others were compelled to
do lo by force of arms. A regular and well
digested system was formed with -refpet to this
new object of policy, and by firmly adhering
to it, the Portugucee power and commerce in
Africa were established upon a solid founda-
tion.

Hopes o BY their constant intercourse with the people
dicovcrig
ancw route of Africa, the Portuguese gradually acquired
to the Ealt 0
Indim. some knowledge of those parts of that country

which they had not vificed. The information
which they received from the natives, added to
what they had obfcrved in their own voyages,
began to open profpeds more extensive, and to
suggest the idea of fchcmes more important,
than thole which had hitherto allured and oc-
cupied them. They had deteaed the error of
the ancients concerning the nature of the torrid
zone. They found, as they proceeded south-
wards, that the continent of Africa, instead of
cxtending in breadth, according to the doc-

trine

trine of Ptolemy , at that time the oracle and BOOK I.
guide of the learned in the science of geography,
appeared sensibly to contract itlcif, and to bend
towards the east. This induced them to give
credit to the accounts of the ancient Phenician
voyages round Africa, which had long been
deemed fabulous, and led them to conceive
hopes that by following the flme route, they
might arrive at the Eafs Indies, and engrols
that commerce which has been the ource of
wealth and power to every nation poflefTed of it.
The comprehensive genius of prince Henry, as
we may conjecure from the words of the pope's
bull, had early formed ome idea of this naviga-
tion. All the Portuguee pilots and mathema-
ticians now concurred in reprecfnting it as prac-
ticable. The king entered with warmth into
their sentiments, and began to concert meaflres
for this arduous and important voyage.

BEFORE his preparations fur this expedition Schemes r

accomplih-

were fini.shed, accounts were tranrmitted from in' t5s.
Africa, that various nations along the coast had
mentioned a mighty kingdom situated on their
continent, at a great distance towards the east,
the king of which, according to their dfcrip-

Vide Nov. Orbis T.abul. Georrapi. fecund. Ptolem.
Amfl. 1730.

tion,

SOOK 1. tion, profelcd the Christian religion. The P.

tuguefe monarch immediately concluded, thai
this muff be the emperor of Abyflinia, to whom
the Europeans, educed by a miltake of Rubru-
quis, Marco Polo, and other travellers to ;,c
east, absurdly gave the name Prester or l'rde
byter John; and as he hoped to receive informa-
tion and assistance from a Christian prince, in
prosecuting a scheme that tended to propag.tu
their common faith, he resolved to open, if p[I'l
fible, some intercourse with his court. 'Wili
this view, he made choice of Pedro de Covillai
and Alphonfo de Payva, who were perlect malf
ters of the Arabic language, and lent them into
the eaff, to search for the residence of this un-
known potentate, and to make him proffers of
friendliip. They had it in charge lilewife to pro-
cure whatever intelligence the nations which they
vilited could supply, with refpet to the trade of
India, and the course of navigation to that con-

tinent .

Voyage of WHILE John made this new attempt by land,
Bartholo-
mew Diaz. to obtain forie knowledge of the country, which

he wished so ardently to discover, he did not
neglet the prosecution of this great design by
1486. sea. The condut of a voyage for this purpose,

b Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. Laficau D-
couv. de Port. . 46.

the

the most arduous and important which the Por- BOOK I.
tuguefe had ever projecled, was committed to
Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whose sagacity,
experience, and fortitude rendered him equal
to the undertaking. He firetched boldly to-
wards the south, and proceeding beyond the
utmost limits to which his countrymen had
hitherto advanced, discovered near a thousand
miles of a new country. Neither the danger to
which he was exposed, by a succession of violent
tempests in unknown eas, and by the frequent
mutinies of his crew, nor the calamities of fa-
mine which he suffered from losing his store-
lhip, could deter him from prosecuting his en-
terprife. In recompence of his labours and
perseverance, he at last descried that lofty pro-
montory which bounds Africa to the south.
But to delcry it, was all that he had in his
power to accomplish. The violence of the
winds, the hattered condition of his ships, and
the turbulent Ifirit of his sailors, compelled
him to return, after a voyage of sixteen months,
in which he discovered a far greater extent of
country than any former navigator. Diaz had
called the promontory which terminated his
voyage Cabo Tormentofo, or the formy Cape
but the king, his mailer, as he now entertained
no doubt of having found the long desired route

5 to

BOOK .* to India, gave it a name more inviting, and o

better omen, The Cape of Good Hope c.

More cer- THOSE sanguine expeiations of success were
trin pro-
fpeaqof confirmed by the intelligence which John re

ceived over land, in conlequence of his em.
bafly to Abyflinia. Covillam and Payva, in
obedience to their maiter's inftru&ions, had
repaired to Grand Cairo. From that city, they
travelled along with a caravan of Egyptian mer.
chants, and embarking on the Red Sea, ar.
rived at Aden in Arabia. There they fepa-
rated; Payva failed directly towards Abyfinia;
Covillam embarked for the Eatt Indies, and
having visited Calecut, Goa, and other cities
on the Malabar coast, returned to Sofala, on
the east fide of Africa, and thence to Grand
Cairo, which Payva and he had fixed upon as
their place of rendezvous. Unfortunately the
former was cruelly murdered in Abyssinia, but
Covillam found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews,
whom John, whore provident agacity attended
to every circumstance that could facilitate the
execution of his schemes, had dispatched after
them, in order to receive a detail of their pro-
ceedings, and to communicate to them new in-
itrutions. By one of there Jews, Covillam

c Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26.

transmittcd

tranfrmitted to Portugal a journal of his travels no K .
by sea and land, his remarks upon the trade of
India, together with exaft maps of the coasts
on which he had touched; and from what he
himself had obfcrved, as well as from the in-
formation of kilful l-amen in different coun-
tries, he concluded, that by failing round Afri-
ca, a paflage might be found to the East In-
dies d.

THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opi- rrcrat-

nion and report, with the discoveries which a.'oi'ec
Diaz had lately made, left hardly any shadow
of doubt with refped to the pofiibility of failing
from Europe to India. But the vast length of
the voyage, and the furious storms which Diaz
had encountered near the Cape of Good Hope,
alarmed and intimidated the Porruguefe to f-uc,
a degree, although by long experience they
were now become adventurous and skilful ma-
riners, that some time was requifire to prepare
their minds for this dangerous and extraordi-
nary voyage. The courage, however, and au-
tlority of the monarch, gradually dilpelled the
vain fears of his fubjce.s, or made it neceflary
to conceal them. As John thought himnlfil
now upon the eve of accomplishing that great

d Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 27. Lafitau Dc.
couv. i. 48.

VoC, 1, .G dcfi;n,

BOOK . design, which had been the principal object ol

his reign, his earnestness in prosecuting it be.
came so vehement, that it occupied his thoughu
by day, and bereaved him of sleep through the
night. While he was taking every precaution
that his wisdom and experience could suggest,
in order to ensure the success of the expedition,
which was to decide concerning the fate of his
favourite project, the fame of the vast disco.
veries which the Portuguese had already made,
the reports concerning the extraordinary intel-

The atten- ligence which they had received from the East,
tion Gs rman r-
kuld fixcd and the profped of the voyage which they now
upon it.

meditated, drew the attention of all the Euro-
pean nations, and held them in fufpence and
expectation. By some, the maritime fill and
navigations of the Portuguese were compared
with those of the Phenicians and Carthaginians,
and exalted above them. Others formed con-
jecfures concerning the revolutions which the
success of the Portugucle chemes might occa-
sion in the course of trade, and the political
state of Europe. The Venetians began to be
disquieted with the apprchenfion of losing their
Indian commerce, the monopoly of which was
the chief source of their power as well as opu-
lence, and the Portuguese already enjoyed in
fancy, the wealth of the F.ast. But, during
this interval, which gave such scope to the va-

rioul

rious workings of curiosity, of hope and of B o

o .

fear, an account was brought to Europe of an Sur,dnl
event no less extraordinary than unexpected, ncw obja.
the discovery of a New World situated in the
weft; and the eyes and admiration of man-
kind turned immediately towards that great
objet.

G 2

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK II.

THE

HISTORY
H I S T O R Y

or
AM E R I C A.

BOOK II.

MONG the foreigners whom the fame BOOK JI.
of the discoveries made by the Portu- Birth and

eduation of

guefe had allured into their service, was Chri- Coiuubus.
ltopher Colon or Columbus, a subject of the
republic of Genoa. Neither the time nor place
of his birth are known with certainty a; but he
was descended of an honourable family, though
reduced to indigence by various misfortunes.
His ancestors having betaken themselves for
subsistence to a ea-faring life, Columbus dif-
covered, in his early youth, the peculiar cha-
rater and talents which mark our a man for
that profession. His parents, infteadof thwart-
ing this original propensity of his mind, seem
to have encouraged and confirmed it, by the

'See NOTE XL

G 3 education

BOOK 1f. education which they gave him. After ac.

quiring ome knowledge of the Latin tongue,
the only language in which science was taught
at that time, he was inftruled in geometry,
colinograhy, astronomy, and the art of draw.
ing. To there he applied with such ardour and
predilection, on account of their connection
with navigation, his favourite object, that lie
advanced with rapid proficiency in the study ,
1461. them. Thus qualified, he went to lea at the

age of fourteen, and began his career on that
element which conducted him to o nmuc!
glory. His early voyages were to those ports
in the Mediterranean which his countrymen
the Genoese frequented. This being a plire
too narrow for his active mind, he made an ex-
1467. curfion to the northern seas, and visited the

coasts of Iceland, to which the English and
other nations had begun to retort on account of
its fishery. As navigation, in every dirctio;,
was now become enterprising, he proceeded
beyond that island, the ThuTe of the ancients,
a;id advanced everal degrees within the polr
circle. -laving latisfied his curiosity by a
voyage which tended more to enlarge his know-
ledge of naval affairs, than to improve his for.
tune, he entered into the iervice of a famoui
fea-captain, of his own name and family. Tli s
man commanded a lin.ll c fqadrion, fitted ut

hl

his own expence, and by cruising sometimes BooK II
against the Mahometans, ometimes againif the
Venetians, the rivals of his country in trade,
hal acquired both wealth and reputation. With
him Columbus continued for everal years, no
lefi diftinguifed for his courage, than for his
experience as a ailor. At length, in an ob-
ftiiate engagement, off the coast of Portugal,
with some Venetian caravels, returning richly
laden from the Low Countries, the vessel on
board which he served took fire, together with
one of the enemy's ships, to which it was fast
grappled. In this dreadful extremity his intre-
pidity and presence of mind did not forsake
him. He threw himself into the efa, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and
his dexterity in swimming, he reached the
shore, though above two leagues distant, and
saved a life reserved for great undertakings h.

As soon as he recovered strength for the , enters

journey, he repaired to Liflbyn, where many of iPrtulue
his countrymen were fettled. They oon con- ""
ceived such a favourable opinion of his merit,
as well as talents, that they warmly solicitcd him
to remain in that kingdom, where his naval
Ikill and experience could not fail of rciulcring

b Life of Columbus, c. v.

G 4 lsin

BOOK . him conspicuous. To every adventurer, ani

mated either with curiosity to visit new coun
tries, or with ambition to diftinguif(l himlilf
the Portuguese service was at that time ex.
tremcly inviting. Columbus liltened widi a
favourable ear to the advice of his friends, and
having gained the esteem of a Portuguese laly,
whom he married, fixed his residence in Lisbon.
This alliance, instead of detaching him from a
sea-faring life, contributed to enlarge the 1phtre
of his naval knowledge, and to excite a desire
of extending it still farther. His wife was a
daughter of Bartholomew Pereftrello, one of
the captains employed by prince Henry in l.;s
early navigations, and who, under his protec-
tion, had discovered and planted the islands of
Porto Santo and Madeira. Columbus got pof.
fEiton of the journals and charts of this expe-
rienced navigator, and from them he learned
the course which the Portuguese had held in
making their discoveries, as well as the various
circumifances which uided or encouraged thne
in their attempts. The Rtudy of there footbed
and inflamed his favourite passion; and wlhil
he contemplated the maps, and read the defcrip-
tions of the new countries which Pereftrello iha
ieen, his impatience to visit them became irre-
filtible. In order to indulge it, he madc a
voyage to Madeira, and continued during i'

8 5#ty r|vc:;t

veral years to trade with that island, with the BOOK .1
Canaries, the Azores, the settlements in Guinea,
and all the other places which the Portuguese
had discovered on the continent of Africa'.

By the experience which Columbus acquired, The effeas

of their d-

during such a variety of voyages, to almolt every over, do
part of the globe with which, at that time, any upon him.
intercourse was carried on by ea, he was now
become one of the most kilful navigators in
Europe. But, not satisfied with that praifc,
his ambition aimed at omething more. The
successful progress of the Portuguese navigators
had awakened a spirit of curiosity and emula-
tion, which set every man of science upon ex-
amining all the circumstances that led to the
discoveries which they had made, or that afforded
a profpec of succeeding in any new and bolder
undertaking. The mind of Columbus, natu-
rally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection, and
turned to speculations of this kind, was so often
employed in revolving the principles upon which
the Portuguese had founded their chemes of dif-
covery, and the mode in which they had carried
them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of ac-
complifhing discoveries which hitherto they had
attempted in vain.

c Life of Columbus, c. iv. v.

To

BOOCK Ii. To find out a passage by sea to the East Ir
Hsc forms dies, was the great obje& in view at that perioc
tlhe idea f
, new From the time that the Portuguese double
Courf to
India. Cape de Verd, this was the point at which the)

aimed in all their navigations, and, in corn
parison with it, all their discoveries in Afric
appeared inconsiderable. The fertility and
riches of India had been known for many ages
its spices and other valuable commodities weri
in high request throughout Europe, and the
vast wealth of the Venetians arising from their
having engrossed this trade, had railed the env)
of all nations. But how intent soever the Por-
tuguefe were upon discovering a new route to
those desirable regions, they searched for it only
by steering towards the south, in hopes of ar.
riving at India, by turning to the ealt, after
they had failed round the farther extremity of
Africa. This course was still unknown, and,
even if discovered, was of such immense length,
that a voyage from Europe to India must have
appeared an undertaking extremely arduous,
and of very uncertain issue. More than half a
century had been employed in advancing from
Cape Non to the equator; a much longer space
of time might elapse before the more extensive
navigation from that to India could be accom-
plifhed. Thcfe reflections upon the uncertainty,
the danger and teclioufnefs of the course wich

the

the Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led BOOK 1.
Columbus to confider whether a shorter and
more direct passage to the East Indies might
not be found out. After revolving long and
seriously every circumstance suggested by his
superior knowledge in the theory as well as
practice of navigation, after comparing at-
tentively the observations of modern pilots with
the hints and conjectures of ancient authors,
he at last concluded, that by failing diretly
towards the weft, across the Atlantic ocean, new
countries, which probably formed a part of the
vast continent of India, must infallibly be dilf
covered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, The princi-

pies on
and derived from different sources, induced him which his

tiheory was

to adopt this opinion, seemingly as chimerical fo"undd.
as it was new and extraordinary. The fpheri-
cal figure of the earth was known, and its mag-
nitude ascertained with some degree of accuracy.
From this it was evident, that the conicnts of
liurope, Asia, and Africa, as far as tlhey were
known at that time, formed but a finall por-
tion of the terraqueous globe. It was suitable
to our ideas concerning the wifdloi and bene-
ficence of the Author of Nature, to believe that
thcvafi flace, fill unexplored, was not covered
cntirely by a walce unprofitable ocean, but oc-

cupied

O0OK 11. cupied by countries fit for the habitation of mar

It appeared likewise extremely probable, that th
continent, on this fide of the globe, was balan
ced by a proportional quantity of land in h
other hemisphere. These conclusions concerning
the exillence of another continent, drawn fron
the figure and ftruaure of the globe, were con
firmed by the observations and conjecures o0
modern navigators. A Portuguese pilot, havinE
Wretched farther to the weft than was usual ai
that time, took up a piece of timber artificially
carved, floating upon the sea; and as it was
driven towards him by a westerly winds he con-
cluded that it came from ome unknown land,
situated in that quarter. Columbus's brother-
in-law had found, to the weft of the Madeira
isles, a piece of timber fashioned in the fame
manner, and brought by the fame wind and had
seen likewise canes of an enormous size floating
upon the waves, which resembled those dcfcribed
by Ptolemy as productions peculiar to the Eaf
Indies d. After a course of westerly winds, trees,
torn up by the roots, were often driven upon
the coafis of the Azores, and at one time the
dead bodies of two men, with singular features,
refmbling neither the inhabitants of Europe nor
of Africa, were cast ashore there.

d Lib. i. c. 17.

Al

As the force of this united evidence, arising BOOK n.

from theoretical principles and practical obfer-
vations, ed Columbus to expe& the discovery
of new countries in the Western Ocean, other
reasons induced him to believe that there must
be conneted with the continent of India.
Though the ancients had hardly ever pene-
trated into India farther than the banks of the
Ganges, yet some Greek authors had ventured
to describe the provinces beyond that river.
As men are prone, and at liberty, to magnify
what is remote or unknown, they represented
them as regions of an immense extent. Ctefias
affirmed that India was as large as all the reft
of Asia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny the natu-
ralift follows , contended that it was equal to
a third part of the habitable earth. Nearchus
afterted; that it would take four months to
march in a straight line from one extremity of
it to the others. The journal of Marco Polo,
who had proceeded towards the East far beyond
the limits to which any European had ever
advanced, seemed to confirm theie exaggerated
accounts of the ancients. By his magnificent
descriptions of the kingdoms of Cathay and
Cipango, and of many other countries, the

' Nat. Hilt. lib. vi. c. 17.
; Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. Iol1.

names

BOOK 1. names of which were unknown in Europe,

India appeared to be a region of vast extent
From these accounts, which, however defecive,
were the mofl accurate that the people ol
Europe had received at that period, with re.
spec to the remote parts of the East, Columbus
drew a just conclusion. He contended, that,
in proportion as the continent of India stretched
out towards the East, it mufd, in consequence
of the pherical figure of the earth, approach
nearer to the islands which had lately been di-f
covered to the weft of Africa; that the distance
from the one to the other was probably not
very considerable; and that the most direct, as
well as shortest course, to the remote regions
of the East, was to be found by failing due
weft r. This notion concerning the vicinity
of India to the western parts of our continent,
was countenanced by some eminent writers
among the ancients, the fan6ion of whose
authority was necessary, in that age, to pro-
cure a favourable reception to any tenet.
Aristotle thought it probable that the Columns
of Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not
far removed from the East Indies, and that
there might be a communication by sea between

r See NOTE XII.

them,

themb. Seneca, in terms still more explicit, BOOK 1.
aftirms, that, with a fair wind, one might fail
from Spain to India in a few days'. The
famous Atlantic iland described by Plato, and
supposed by many to be a real country, beyond
which a vast unknown continent was situated,
is represented by him as lying at no great
difance from Spain. After weighing all thel:
particulars, Columbus, in whose characer the
modesty and diffidence of true genius was
united with the ardent enthusiasm of a pro-
jrtor, did not reft with such absolute assurance
either upon his own arguments, or upon the
authority of the ancients, as not to consult
such of his contemporaries as were capableof
comprehending the nature of the evidence
which he produced in support of his opinion.
As early as the year one thousand four hundred
and feventy-four, he communicated his ideas
concerning the probability of discovering new
countries, by failing westwards, to Paul, a
physician of Florence, eminent for his know-
ledge of cosmography, and who, from the
learning as well as candour which he discovers
in his reply, appears to have been well intitled
to the confidence which Columbus placed in

'Ariftot. de Cmlo, lib. ii. c. I4. edit. Du Val, Par.
1629, vol. i. p. 47z.

Senec. Qux:f . Natur. lib. i. in proem.

hiLrr.

oo Pr. him. He warniIy approved of the plan, fug.

gested several fa&s in cohfirmation of it, and
encouraged Columbus to pefevere in an un.
dbrtaking so laudable, and whith must redr und
so much to the honour of his country, and the
benefit of Europe k.

His cheme, To a mind less capable of forming and of
tor carrying
itintocxc- executing great designs than that of Columbus,

all those reasonings, and observations, and
authorities, would have served only as the
foundation of some plausible and fruitless theory,
which might have furnilhed matter for inge.
nious discourse, or fanciful conjecture. But
with his sanguine and enterprising temper, fpe.
culation led directly to action. Fully satisfied
himself with refpet to the truth of his fyffem,
he was impatient to bring it to the test of ex-
periment, and to set out upon a voyage of
discovery. The first fep towards this ws to
secure the patronage of ome of the confider.
able powers in Europe, capable of undertaking
such an enterprise. As long absence had not
extinguished the affieion which he bore to his
native country, he wished that it flihold rcap
the fruits of his labours and invention. With

toth. Ec- this view, he laid his scheme before the fenlte
o of Coumu c. vi

¥ Life of Columbus, c. viii.

td

of Genoai and making his country the first BOOK ,
tender of his service, offered to fail under the
banners of the republics in quest of the new
regions which he expeed to discover. But
Columbus had resided for so many years in
foreign parts, that his countrymen were unac-
quainted with his abilities and character and,
though a maritime people, were o little accuf-
torned to distant voyages, that they could form
nojuft idea of the principles on which he founded
his hopes of success. They inconsiderately re-
jeced his proposal, as the dream of a chimerical
projector, and loft for ever the opportunity of
restoring their commonwealth to its ancient
plendour '.

HAVING performed what was due to his to the king
country, Columbus was so little discouraged °t' Prtut}g
by the repulse which he had received, that, in-
stead of relinquiffing his undertaking, he pur-
sued it with fresh ardour. He made his next
overture to John II. king of Portugal, in
whose dominions he had been long established,
and whom he confidered, on that account, as
having the second claim to his service. Here
every circunftance seemed to promise him a
more favourable reception. I le applied to a

Ilerrera IHilt. de las Indias Occid. Dec. . Jib. i. c. 7.
VoL. I. II monarch

gooK Ir. monarch of an enterprising genius, no incomr

petent judge in naval affairs, and proud of
patronising every attempt to discover new
countries. His subje&s were the most expe.
rienced navigators in Europe, and the leaf
apt to be intimidated either by the novelty
or boldness of any maritime expedition. In
Portugal, the profeflional skill of Columbus,
as well as his personal good qualities, were
thoroughly known; and as the former ren.
dered it probable that his scheme was not alto-
gether chimerical, the latter exempted him
from the ffpicion of any sinister intention in
proposing it. Accordingly, the king Hilened
to him in the most gracious manner, and
referred the consideration of his plan to Diego
Ortiz, bishop of Ceuta, and two Jewiih phy-
ficians, eminent comnographers, whom he
was accustomed to conflt in matters of this
kind. As in Genoa, ignorance had opposcd
and disappointed Columbus; in Lisbon, he
had to combat with prejudice, an enemy no
less formidable. The persons, according to
whose decision his clheme was to be adopted
or rejected, had been the chief directors of the
Portuguese navigations, and had adviled to
fcarch for a paflage to India, by fleering a
course direCtly opposite to that which Columbu
rccommeclea as shorter and more certain,

T'lhey

They could not, therefore, approve of his pro- BOOK 11
pofal, without submitting to the double mor-
tification, of condemning their own theory,
and of acknowledging his superior sagacity.
After teasing him with captious questions, and by whom h
starting innumerable objections, with a view of
betraying him into such a particular expla-
nation of his system, as might draw from him
a full discovery of its nature, they deferred
pafling a final judgement with refpe& to it.
In the mean time, they conspired to rob him
of the honour and advantages which he ex-
peced from the success of his scheme, advising
the king to dispatch a vessel, secretly, in order
to attempt the proposed discovery, by follow-
ing exatly the course which Columbus seemed
to point out. John, forgetting on this occa-
sion the sentiments becoming a monarch,
meanly adopted this perfidious counsel. But
the pilot, chosen to execute Columbus's plan,
had neither the genius, nor the fortitude of its
author. Contrary winds arose, no fight of ap-
proaching land appeared, his courage failed,
and he returned to Lisbon, execrating the pro-
jeA as equally extravagant and dangerous .

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranf- He elvet
action, Columbus felt the indignaticn natural and iclpi.i

to he cou t
o Spain.
"Life of Columbus, c. xi. Herrera, decad. . lib. i. c. 7.

2 to

B OOK I. to an ingenuous mind, and in the warmth of

his resentment determined to break off all in-
tercourfe with a nation capable of such flagrant
treachery. He instantly quitted the kingdom,
and landed in Spain towards the close of the
year one thousand four hundred and eighty.
four. As he was now at liberty to court the
proteAion of any patron, whom he could en-
gage to approve of his plan, and to carry it
into execution, he resolved to propose it in
person to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that
time governed the united kingdoms of Castile

Sends his and Aragon. But as he had already expe-
brolher into
England. ricnced the uncertain issue of applications to

kings and ministers, he took the precaution of
fending into England his brother Bartholomew,
to whom he had fully communicated his ideas,
in order that he might negociate, at the fame
time, with Henry VII. who was reputed one
of the most sagacious as well as opulent princes
in Europe.

hi raClct in I was not without reaforr that Columbus en-
Spain. tertained doubts and fears with refpe& to the

reception of his proposals in the Spanish court.
Spain was, at that juncture, engaged in a dan-
gerous war with Granada, the last of the Moorifi
kingdoms in that country. The wary and fufpi-
cious temper of Ferdinand was not formed to

Icliflf

relish bold or uncommon designs. Isabella, BooK i
though more generous and enterprising, was
under the influence of her husband in all her
a&ions. The Spaniards had hitherto made no
efforts to extend navigation beyond its ancient
limits, and had beheld the amazing progress
of discovery among their neighbours the Por-
tuguefe, without one attempt to imitate or to
rival them. The war with the Infidels afforded
an ample field, to the national ativity and
love of glory. Under circumstances so unfa-
vourable, it was impossible for Columbus to
make rapid progress with a nation, naturally
flow and dilatory in forming all its resolutions.
His characer, however, was admirably adapted
to that of the people, whose confidence and
prote&ion he solicited. He was grave, though
courteous in his deportment; circumfpe& in
his words and aions; irreproachable in his
morals; and exemplary in his attention to
all the duties and functions of religion. By
qualities so refpeetable, he not only gained
many private friends, but acquired such gene-
ral eeem, that, notwithstanding the plainness
of his appearance, suitable to the mediocrity
of his fortune, he was not confidered as a mere
adventurer, to whom indigence had suggested
a visionary projet, but was received as a per-

lII son

"OOK 1w. son to whose propositions serious attention

was due.

examinhe FERDINAND and Isabella, though fully occu.
by unlkilful Mo
judges, pied by their operations against the Moors,

paid so much regard to Columbus, as to remit
the conlideration of his plan to the queen's
confessor, Ferdinand de Talavera. He con.
fulted such of his countrymen, as were sup.
poled best qualified to decide with respect to a
subject of this kind. But true science had,
hitherto, made so little progress in Spain, that
the pretended philosophers, feleaed to judge
in a matter of such moment, did not compre-
hend the first principles, upon which Columbus
founded his conjectures and hopes. Some of
them, from mnitaken notions concerning the
dimensions of the globe, contended that a
voyage to thole remote parts of the east, which
Columbus expected to discover, could not be
performed in less than three years. Others
concluded, that either he would find the ocean
to be of infinite extent, according to the opi.
nion of ome ancient philosophers; or, if he
should persist in fleering towards the weft be.
yond a certain point, that the convex figure
of the globe would prevent his return, and
that le mull inevitably periffi, in the vain

attempt,

attempt, to open a communication between the BOOK I1.
two opposite hemispheres, which nature had for
ever disjoined. Even without deigning to
enter into any particular discussion, many re-
jected the scheme in general, upon the credit
of a maxim, under which the ignorant and
unenterprifing shelter themselves in every age,
" That it is presumptuous in any perlbn, to
suppose that he alone polcffes knowledge fupe-
rior to all the reft of mankind united." They
maintained, that if there were really any such
countries as Columbus pretended, they could
not have remained so long concealed, nor
would the wisdom and sagacity of former ages
have left the glory of this invention to an ob-
fcure Genoese pilot.

IT required all Columbus's patience and who mak

an unfa-

address to negociate with men capable of ad- vourahle
vancing such frange propositions. He had to c"r"Cit.
contend not only with the obstinacy of igno-
rance, but with what is still more intractable, the
pride of false knowledge. After innumerable
conferences, and wafting five years in fruitless
endeavours to inform and to satisfy judges so
little capable of deciding with propriety, Tala-
vera, at last, made such an unfavourable report
to Ferdinand and Isabella, as induced them to
acquaint Columbus, that until the war with

I 4 the

!ooe . the Moors lhould be brought to a period, it

would be imprudent to engage in any new and
expensive enterprise.

WHATEVER care was taken to soften the

harlhnefs of this declaration, Columbus con-
fidered it as a final rejetion of his proposals.
But happily for mankind, that superiority of
genius, which' is capable of forming great and
uncommon designs, is usually accompanied
with an ardent enthusiasm, which can neither
be cooled by delays, nor damped by dirap-
pointment. Columbus was of this sanguine
temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel
blow given to his hopes, and retired immedi.
ately from a court, where he had been amused
so long with vain expectations, his confidence
in the justness of his own system did not dimi-
nifh, and his impatience to demonirate the
truth of it by an actual experiment became
greater than ever. Having courted the pro-
tetion of sovereign Rfates without success, he
applied, next, to perfors of inferior rank, and
addressed fuccefively the dukes of Medina
Sidonia, and Medina Celi, who, though ub-
jecs, were poffTffed of power and opulence
more than equal to the enterprise which he
projeted. His negotiations with them proved
as fruitlcfs, as those in hich he had been

hitherto

hitherto engaged; for these noblemen were BOOK 1I.
cither as little convinced by Columbus's argu.
mcnts as their superiors, or they were afraid
of alarming the jealousy, and offending the
pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a fchcmc
which he had rejected .

AMID the p3inful sensations occasioned by '"gccit'on

of his bro-

such a fuccefion of disappointments, Columbus the'in En"-
had to sustain the additional distress, of having
cceived no accounts of his brother, whom he
had ent to the court of England. In his
voyage to that country, Bartholomew had been
of unfortunate as to fall into the hands of
pirates, who having firipped him of every
thing, detained him a prisoner for several years.
At length, he made his escape, and arrived in
London, but in such extreme indigence, that
he was obliged to employ himself during a
considerable time, in drawing and felling maps,
in order to pick up as much money as would
purchase a decent dress, in which he might
venture to appear at court. He then laid be-
fore the king the proposals, with which he had
been entrusted by his brother, and, notwith-
sanding Henry's exceive caution and parsi-
piony, which rendered him averse to new or
. Life of olumb. c. 13. Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 7.

expen five

BOOK 1. expensive undertakings, he received Colum.

bus's overtures, with more approbation, than
any monarch to whom they had hitherto been
presented.

Columbus MEANWHILE, Columbus being unacquainted
profpet of with his brother's fate, and having now no
mnct in profpe& of encouragement in Spain, reloived
Spai. to vifi the court of England in person, in

hopes of meeting with a more favourable
reception there. He had already made pre-
parations for this purpose, and taken mealures
for the disposal of his children during his
absence, when Juan Perez, the guardian of
the monastery of Rabida, near Palos, in which
they had been educated, earnestly solicited him
to defer his journey for a short time. Perez
was a man of considerable learning, and of
some credit with Queen Isabella, to whom he
was known personally. He was warmly attach.
ed to Columbus, with whose abilities as well as
integrity he had many opportunities of being
acquainted. Prompted by curiosity or by
friend hip, he entered upon an accurate exa-
mination of his system, in conjuntion with a
physician fettled in the neighbourhood, who
was a considerable proficient in mathematical
knowledge. This invefRigation satisfied them
lo t;horoughly, with rerpect to the solidity of

the principles on which Columbus founded his BOOK
opinion, and the probability of success in exe-
cuting the plan which he propofedi that Perez,
in order to prevent his country from being
deprived of the glory and benefit, which must
accrue to the patrons of fuich a grand enter-
prise, ventured to write to Isabella, conjuring
her to confider the matter anew, with the
attention which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a person
whom (he rfpeed, Isabella desired Perez to
repair immediately to the village of Santa Fe,
in which, on account of the siege of Granada,
the court resided at that time, that ihe might
confer with him upon this important subjet.
The first effet of their interview was a gracious
invitation of Columbus back to court, accom- 49'
panied with the present of a frall fum to equip
him for the journey. As there was now a
certain profpeft, that the war with the Moors
would speedily be brought to an happy issue
by the reduction of Granada, which would
leave the nation at liberty to engage in new
undertakings; this, as well as the mark of
royal favour, with which Columbus had been
lately honoured, encouraged his friends to ap.
pear with greater confidence than formerly in
Support of his scheme, The chief of there,

\lonfo

0ooK l. Alonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the

finances in Castile, and Luis de Santangel,
receiver of the ecclefialtical revenues in Aragon,
whose meritorious zeal in promoting this great
design entitles their names to an honourable
place in history, introduced Columbus to many
persons of high rank, and interested them
warmly in his behalf.

I Again dif. BUT it was not an easy matter to inspire
appointed.

Ferdinand with favourable sentiments. He
still regarded Columbus's project as extrava-
gant and chimerical, and in order to render
the efforts of his partizans ineffetual, he had
the address to employ in this new negociation
with him, some of the persons who had for-
merly pronounced his scheme to be impra'i-
cable. To their aftonifiment, Columbus ap-
peared before them with the fame confident
hopes of success as formerly, and insisted upon
the fame high recompence. He proposed that
a small fleet hould be fitted out, under his
command, to attempt the difeovery, and de-
manded to be appointed hereditary admiral
and viceroy of all the eas and lands which he
ffould discover, and to have the tenth of the
profits arising from them, fettled irrevocably
upon himself and his descendants. At the
fame time, he offered to advance the eighth

par;

part of the fum necessary for accomplishing his sOOK
design, on condition that he hould be entitled
to a proportional share of benefit from the
adventure. If the enterprise hould totally
mircarry, he made no stipulation for any reward
or emolument whatever. Initead of viewing
this conduc as the clearest evidence of his full
persuasion with respect to the truth of his own
siftem, or being struck with that magnanimity,
which, after so many delays and repulles,
would stoop to nothing inferior to its original
claims, the persons with whom Columbus
treated, began meanly to calculate the expence
of the expedition, and the value of the reward
which he demanded. The expence, moderate
as it was, they represented to be too great for
Spain, in the present exhausted state of its
finances. They contended, that the honours
and emoluments claimed by Columbus, were
exorbitant, even if he should perform the
utmost of what he had promised; and if all his
sanguine hopes hould prove illusive, such valt
conceflions to an adventurer would be deemed
not only inconsiderate, but ridiculous. In this
impoting garb of caution and prudence, their
opinion appeared so plausible, and was so
warmly supported by Ferdinand, that Isabella
declined giving any countenance to Columbus,

anll

BOOK i. and abruptly broke off the negociation witt

him which Ihe had begun.

THIS was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the disappointments which he had hitherto
met with. The invitation to court from lla-
bella, like an unexpeced ray of light, had
opened such profpe&s of success, as encouraged
him to hope that his labours were at an end;
but now darkness and uncertainty returned,
and his mind, firm as it was, could hardly fop.
port the hock of such an unforeseen reverse. He
withdrew in deep anguish from court, with an
intention of prosecuting his voyage to England,
as his last resource.

ProTatlant ABOUT that time Granada surrendered, and
successful.

S492.' Ferdinand and Isabella, in triumphal pomp,
lanuary ,

took poffefion of a city, the redu&tion of which
extirpated a foreign power from the heart of
their dominions, and rendered them malters
of all the provinces, extending from the bottom
of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal,
As the flow of spirits which accompanies lbc.
cess elevates the mind, and renders it enter-
prifing, Quintanilla and Santangel, the vigilant
and dilcerning patrons of Columbus, took ad-
vantage of this favourable situation, in or'er
to make one effort more in behalf of their

fricend.
*

friend. They addressed themselves to Isabella, BooK n.
and, after exprefling fore surprise, that she,
who had always been the munificent patroness
of generous undertakings, should hesitate so
long to countenance the most splendid scheme
that had ever been proposed to any monarch;
they represented to her, that Columbus was a
man of a found understanding and virtuous
chara&er, well qualified, by his experience in
navigation, as well as his knowledge of geo-
metry, to form just ideas with respect to the
ftruture of the globe and the situation of its
various regions; that, by offering to risk his
own life and fortune in the execution of his
scheme, he gave the most satisfying evidence
both of his integrity and hope of success; that
the fum requisite for equipping such an arma-
ment as he demanded was inconsiderable, and
the advantages which might accrue from his
undertaking were immense; that he demanded
no recompence for his invention and labour,
bat what was to arise from the countries which
he hould discover; that, as it was worthy
of her magnanimity to make this noble attempt
to extend the sphere of human knowledge, and
to open an intercourse with regions hitherto
unknown, ft it would afford the highest satis-
faftion to her piety and zeal, after re-eftablifl-

8 ing

.

BOOK I. ing the Christian faith in those provinces (

1491. Spain from which it had been long banished,

to discover a new world, to which the mig;,
communicate the light and bleflings of divirn
truth; that if now he did nor decide nltantly,
the opportunity would be irretrievably loft;
that Columbus was on his way to foreign coun.
tries, where some prince, more fortunate or
adventurous, would close with his propoflsl
and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timi.
dity which had excluded her from the glory
and advantages that he had once in her power
to have enjoyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons

of such authority, and at a jun6ture so well
chosen, produced the desired effect. They
dispelled all Isabella's doubts and fears; he
ordered Columbus to be instantly recailed,
declared her resolution of employing hi on
his own terms, and regretting the low state of
her finances, gcneroufly offered to pledge her
own jewels, in order to raile as much money
as might be needed in making preparations fr
the voyage. Santangel, in a tranfporr of gr.i-
titude, kissed the queen's hand, and in order
to five her from having recourse to such a
mortifying expedient for procuring money, en-

G ',d

gaged to advance immediately the fum that was i OOK .
requisite . 1491.

COLUMBUS had proceeded forne leagues on The condi-

tlions of hi,
his journey, when the messenger from Ifabcll a greemcnt

J '*

_ D with Spain.

overtook him. Upon receiving an account of
the unexpetet revolution in his favour, he
returned dirctly to Santa F, though some
remainder of diffidence flill mingled itself with
his joy. But the cordial reception which he
met with from Isabella, together with the near
prolped of setting out upon that voyage which
had so long been the object of his thoughts and
wiflles, oon eftaced the remembrance of all
that he had suffered in Spain, during eight
tedious years of solicitation and suspense. The
negociation now went forward with facility and
dipatch, and a treaty or capitulation with
Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of
April, one thousand four hundred and ninety-
two. The chief articles of it were, . Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, as fovercigns of the ocean,
constituted Columbus their high admiral in
all the seas, islands, and continents which lhould
be discovered by his indutfry; and flipulated,
that he and his heirs tor ever should enjoy this
office, with the fame powers and prerogatives

Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8.
VOL. J. I whlic

*

B oo . which belonged to the high admiral of Caftik,

*49a. within the limits of his jurifdition. 2. They

appointed Columbus their viceroy in all the
islands and continents which he should dif.
cover; but if, for the better adminifltration of
affairs, it should hereafter be necessary to efla.
blith a separate governor in any of those coun-
tries, they authorised Columbus to name three
persons, of whom they would chafe one for
that office ; and the dignity of viceroy, with
all its immunities, was likewise to be hereditary
in the family of Columbus. 3. They granted
to Columbus and his heirs for ever the tenth
of the free profits accruing from the pro-
duions and commerce of the countries which
he should discover. 4. They declared, that if
any controversy or law-suit shall arise with
refpe& to any mercantile tranfaaion in the
countries which should be discovered, it should
be determined by the sole authority of Colum-
bus, or of judges to be appointed by him.
5. They permitted Columbus to advance one-
eighth part of what hould be expended in pre-
paring for the expedition, and in carrying on
commerce with the countries which he thould
discover, and intitled him, in return, to an
eighth part of the profit P.
P Life of Columbus, c. 15. Herrcra, dec. . lilb. i. c. 9.

TiMovCI!

THOUGoC the name of Ferdipand appears BOOK";

conjoined with that of Isabella in this tranf- 1491.
ation, his distrust of Columbus was ill o
violent that he refused to take any part in the
cnterprife as king of Aragon. As the whole
expence of the expedition was to be defrayed
by the crown of Castile, Ifabclla reserved for
her subjes of that kingdom an exclusive right
to all the benefits which might redound from
its success.

As oon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, 'Tie prepa.

rations for

by her attention and activity in forwarding the his voya.e.
preparations for the voyage, endeavoured to
make ome reparation to Columbus for the
time which he had loft in fruitless solicitation.
By the twelfth of May, all that depended upon
her was adjutfed; and Columbus waited on the
king and queen, in order to receive their final
inftruclions. Every thing refpeding the delli-
nation and conduct of the voyagej they com-
mitted implicitly to the disposal of his pru-
dence. But, that they might avoid giving any
just cause of offence to the king of Portugal,
they ftricly enjoined hii not to approach near
to the Portuguese settlements on the coast of
Guinea, nor in any of the other countries to
which the Portuguese claimed right as disco-
verers. Isabella had ordered the ships, of

I 2 which

oKc n. which Cohlmbus was to tke the command, to
'4»». be fitted out in the port of Palos, a fnmall ma-

ritime town in the province of Andalusia, As
the guardian Juan Perez, to whom Columbus
had already been so much indebted, resided in
the neighbourhood of this place, he, by the in.
fluence of that good ecclesiastic, as well as by
his own connection with the inhabitants, nt
only raised among them what he wanted of the
fum that he was bound by treaty to advance,
but engaged several of them to accompany him
In the voyage. The chief of there associates
were three brothers of the name of Pinzon, of
considerable wealth, and of great experience in
naval affairs, who were willing to hazard their
lives and fortunes in the expedition.

BUT, after all the efforts of Isabella and Co-

lumbus, the armament was-not suitable, either
to the dignity of the nation by which it was
equipped, or to the importance of the service
for which it was destined. It confifed of three
vessels. The largest, a ship of no considerable
burden, was commanded by Columbus, as ad-
miral, who gave it the name of Santa AlMarid,
out of refpe't for the Blessed Virgin, whom he
honoured with singular devotion. Of the fc-
conel, called the Pinta, Martin Pinzon was cap-
tain, and his brother Francis pilot. The third,

named

named the Nigna, was under the command of BOOK
Vincent Yatez Pinzon. These two were light "49"
vessels, hardly superior in burden or force to
large boats. This fsuadron, if it merits that
name, was victualed for twelve mionths, and had
on board ninety men, moflly sailors, together
with a few adventurers who followed the fortune
of Columbus, and some gentlemen of Iabella's
court, whom she appointed to accompany him.
Though the expence of the undertaking was
one of the circumstances which chiefly alarmed
the court of Spain, and retarded so long the ne-
gociation with Columbus, the fum employed
in fitting out this squadron did not exceed four
thousand pounds.

As the art of ship-building in the fifteenth

century was extremely rude, and the bulk of
velils was accommodated to the short and easy
voyages along the coast which they were accuf-
tomed to perform, it is a proof of the courage
as well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that
he ventured, with a fleet Ib unfit for a distant
navigation, to explore unknown leas, where he
had no chart to guide him, no knowledge of
the tides and currents, and no experience of the
dangers to which he might be exposed. His
cagernels to accomplish the great dcfign which
had so long engrossed his thoughts, made him

I 3 ovcrl'ook

oo0 K i. overlook or disregard every circumstance that
149X. would have intimidated a mind less adven.

turous, He pushed forward the preparations
with such ardour, and was seconded so effecually
by the persons to whom Isabella committed the
superintendence of this business, that every
thing was oon in readinelss for the voyage. But
as Columbus was deeply impreffd with senti.
ments of religion, he would not set out upon
an expedition so arduous, and of which one
great obje& was to extend the knowledge of the
Christian faith, without imploring publickly
the guidance and protection of Heaven. With
this view, he, together with all the persons
under his command, marched in solemn pro-
celTion to the monastery of Rabida. After con.
fessing their fins, and obtaining absolution, they
received the holy sacrament from the hands of
the guardian, who joined his prayers to theirs
for the success of an enterprise which he had so
zegloufly patronized.
4His depr. NEXT morning, being Friday the third day

Sin. of August, in the year one thousand four hun-

dred and ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little
before sun-rise, in presence of a vast crowd of
fpedlators, who ftnt up their supplications to
H-eaven for the prosperous issue of the voyage,
which they vilhed, rather than expcced. Co-

lumbus
*

lumbus steered directly for the Canary Ifands, BooK I1
and arrived there without any occurrence that ^A19.
would have deserved notice on any other occa-
sion. But, in a voyage of such expectation and
importance, every circumstance was the objec
of attention. The rudder of the Pinta broke
loose, the day after he left the harbour, and
that accident alarmed the crew, no less super-
flitious than unflkilful, as a certain omen of the
unfortunate destiny of the expedition. Even
in the hort run to the Canaries, the hips were
found to be so crazy and ill appointed, as to be
very improper for a navigation which was ex-
pected to be both long and dangerous. Co-
lumbus refitted them, however, to the best of
his power, and having supplied himself with
frefl provisions, he took his departure from
Gomera, one of the most westerly of the Ca.
nary islands, on the sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly The courf

which ho

be said to begin; for Columbus holding his held.
course due weft, left immediately the usual track
of navigation, and ftrerched into unfrequented
and unknown seas, The first day, as it was
very calm, he made but little way; but on the
second, he loft fight of the Canaries; and many
of the sailors, dejected already and difinayed,
when they contemplated the bollnefs of the un-

J 4 dertal ing,

BOOK ." dcrtakipg, began to beat their breasts, and to

349u flhed tears, as if they were never more to behold

land. Columbus comforted them with affur.
ances of fuccels, and the prolpet of vast wealth,
in those opulent regions whither he was con.
duding them. This early dicovery of the
spirit of his followers aughr Columbus, that
he nmuf prepare to struggle, not only with the
unavoidable difficulties which might b rx-
pedted from the nature of his undertaking, but
with such as were likely to arile from the ig-
norance and timidity of the people under his
command and he perceived that the art of go-
verning the minds of men would be no lels re-
quifite for accomplifijing the dilfoveries which
he had in view, than, naval lkill and undaunted
courage. Happily for himielf, and for the
country by which he ws employed, he joinel
to the ardent temper and inventive genius of a
projeator, virtues of another species, which arc
rarely united with them. SHe poinflfcd a
thorough knowledge of mankind, an infinuatil;;
address, a patient perf ve'rance in executing ny
plan, the perfct government of his own paflions,
and the talent of acquiring an ascendant over
those of other men. All thef qualities, lwhich
formied hi n for coni:and, were accompaniicd
with that superior knowledge of his profellion,
which brgets confidence in times of difficulty

5 i, T.1,

and danger. To unskilful Spanilh sailors, ac- BOOK U.
cuflomed only to coasting voyages in the Me- vi'i'4ce
diterranean, the maritime cience of Columbus, and of'c-
the fruit of thirty years experience, improved lumbus.
by an acquaintance with all the inventions of
the Portuguese. appeared immense. As soon
as they put to ea, he regulated every thing by
his sole authority; he superintended the exe-
cution of every order; and allowing himlelf
only a few hours for sleep, he was at all other
tunes upon deck. As his course lay through
leas which had not formerly been visited, the
founding-line, or instruments for observation,
were continually in his hands. After the ex-
ample of the Portuguese dilcoverers, he at-
tended to the motion of tides and currents,
watched the flight of birds, the appearance of
fishes, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that
floated on the waves, and entered every occur-
rence, with a minute exaanefs, in the journal
which he kept. As the length of the voyage
could not fail of alarming sailors habituated
only to hort excursions, Columbus endeavoured
to conceal from them the real progress which
they made. With this view, though they run
eighteen leagues on the iecond day after they
lct Gomera, he gave out that they had ad-
vanced only filtcen, and he uniformly elployed
the fame artifice of reckoning short during the

X· ,~~~ whole

3OOK n. whole voyage. By the fourteenth of Septem.

4~. ber, the fleet was above two hundred league

to the weft of the Canary Isles, at a greater
distance from land than any Spaniard had ben

Apprehen- before that time. There they were firuck with
Sons and
alarm, of an appearance no less atonifhing than new,

They observed that the magnetic needle, in
their compalfes, did not point exactly to the
polar star, but varied towards the weft; and as
they proceeded, this variation increased. This
appearance, which is now familiar, though it
still remains one of the mysteries of nature, into
the cause of which the sagacity of man hath not
been able to penetrate, filled the companions
of Columbus with terror. They were now in
a boundless unknown ocean, far from the usual
course of navigation; nature itself seemed to
be altered, and the only guide which they had
left was about to fail them. Columbus, with
no less quickness than ingenuity, invented a
reason for this appearance, which, though it did
not satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to them,
that it dispelled their fears, or silenced their
murmurs.

HE still continued to seer due weft, nearly

in the fame latitude with the Canary islands. In
this course he came within the sphere of the
trade wind, which blows invariably from taft

i0

to weft, between the tropics and a few degrees BOOK 11.
beyond them. He advanced before this steady s49o
gale with such uniform rapidity, that it was
seldom necessary to hist a fail. When about
four hundred leagues to the weft of the Ca-
,aries, he found the lea so covered with weeds,
that it resembled a meadow of vast extent; and
in rome places they were so thick, as to retard
the motion of the velfels. This strange appear-
ance occasioned new alarm and disquiet. The
sailors imagined that they were now arrived at
the utmost boundary of the navigable ocean;
that these floating weeds would obftruc their
farther progress, and concealed dangerous
rocks, or some large tra& of land, which had
funk, they knew not how, in that place. Co-
lumbus endeavoured to persuade them, that
what had alarmed, ought rather to have en-
couraged them, and was to be confidered as a
sign of approaching land. At the fame time;
a brisk gale arose, and carried them forward.
Several birds were seen hovering about the
Thip P, and direted their flight towards the weft.
The delponding crew resumed ome degree of
spirit, and began to entertain frelh hopes.

UION the first of October they were, ac- Thre in-
Fording to the admiral's reckoning, seven hun-

t See NOTE X111.

dJred

BOOlK I. dred and seventy leagues to. the weft-of the Ca.

naries; but.:!lct his men should be intimidated
by the prodigious length of the navigation, he
gave out that they had proceeded only five
hundred and eighty-four. leagues; and, for-
tunately for Columbus, nither his own pilot,
nor thoiie of the other ships, had skill iufficii;it
to corret this error, and discover the deceir.
They had now been above three weeks at fd;
they had proceeded far beyond what former ra-
vigators bad attempted or deemed pofiible;
all their prognostics of discovery, drawn from
the flight of birds and other circumstances, had
proved fallacious ; the appearancesof land, with
which their own credulity or the artifice of their
commander had from time to time flattered and
amused them,. had been altogether illusive, nd
their profped of success Jleem.ed now to be as
distant as ever. Thefi reflections occurred often
to men, who had no other object or occupation,
than to reason and difourfe concerning the in-
tention and circumstances of their expedition.
They made impreflion, at firit, upon the ig-
norant and timid, and extending, by degrees,
to fucl as were better informed or more r-
lute, the contagion spread at length from Ihip
to hil). From secret whlilpers or murmur-
ings, they proceeded to open.cabals and public
complaints. They taxed their overeign Kith

inconlidlcr'.c

inconsiderate credulity, in paying such regard BOOK h
to the vain promises and rath conjecures of an 149'
indigent foreigner, as to hazard the lives of so
many of her own fubjeas, in prolecuting a
chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they
had fully performed their duty, by venturing
so far in an unknown and hopeless coure, and
could incur no blame, for refusing to follow, any
longer, a desperate adventurer to certain de-
iru&ion. They contended, that it was ne-
ceffary to think of returning to Spain, while
their crazy vefils were still in a condition to
keep the sea, but exprefled their fears that the
attempt would prove vain, as the wind, which
had hitherto been so favourable to their course,
must render it impoflible to fail in the opposite
direction. All agreed that Columbus hould
be compelled by force to adopt a measure on
which their common safety depended. Some
of the more audacious proposed, as the mos:
expeditious and certain method for getting rid
at once of his remonstrances, to throw him into
the lia, being persuaded that, upon their re-
turn to Spain, the death of an unsuccessful pro-
jedor would excite little concern, and be in-
quired into with no curiosity.

COLUMBUS was fully sensible of his perilous T'e nd.dref
fiuation. He had observed, with great uneafi- in oolhng

nets,

BOOK It ners, the fatal operation of ignorance and o0

P49*' fear in producing difaffedion among his crew,

and saw that it was now ready to burst out into
open mutiny. He retained, however, perici
pretence of mind. He asseted to seem i.
norant of their machinations. Notwithfland.
ing the agitation and solicitude of his own
mind, he appeared with a cheerful countenance,
like a man satisfied with the progress which he
had made, and confident of success. Some.
times he employed all the arts of inlinuation to
soothe his men. Sometimes he endeavoured to
work upon their ambition or avarice, by mag.
nificent descriptions of the fame and wealth
which they were about to acquire. On other
occasions, he assumed a tone of authority, and
threatened them with vengeance from their so.
vereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour, they
should defeat this noble effort to promote the
glory of God, and to exalt the Spanish name
above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious sailors, the words of a man whom
they had been accuftorhed to reverence, were
weighty and persuasive, and not only restrained
them from those violent excesses, which they
meditated, but prevailed with them to accom-
pany their admiral for bome time longer,

Ja, iA %
jBIC:tA^

As they proceeded, the indications of ape ooK
roaching land seemed to be more certain, and 49*
xciced hope in proportion. The birds began
appear in flocks, making towards the south-
eft. Columbus, in imitation of the Portu-
guce navigators, who had been guided, in fe-
veral of their discoveries, by the motion of
birds, altered his course from due weft towards
that quarter whither they pointed their flight.
But, after holding on for several days in this
new direction, without any better success than
formerly, having seen no obje&, during thirty
days, but the ea and the sky, the hopes of his
companions subsided faster than they had risen;
their fears revived with additional force; im- Tleir fan
patience, rage, and despair, appeared in every
countenance. All sense of ubordination was Danger of
loft: the officers, who had hitherto concurred .uny.
with Columbus in opinion, and supported his
authority, now took part with the private men;
they assembled tumultuously on the deck, ex-
postulated with their commander, mingled
threats with their expostulations, and required
him instantly to tack about and to return to
Europe. Columbus perceived that it would be
of no avail to have recourse to any of his former
arts, which having been tried so often, had loft
their effet ; and. that it was impossible to re-
kindle any zeal'for the success of the expedition

among

BOOK 11. among men, in whose breats fear had cxt.
Di,49 githed every generous fenuinent. He f2a
Colulibub. that it was no less .vain to think of empluylin

either gentle or severe measures, to quell a mu.
tiny so general and so violent. It was ncfiary,
on all these accounts, to soothe pafioris which
he could no longer command, and to give ay
to a torrent too impetuous to be checked. He
promised solemnly to his men that he woult
comply with their request, provided they would
accompany him, and obey his commands for
three days longer, and if, during that time,
land were not discovered, he woul4 then aban.
don the enterprise, and diret his course towards
Spain r.

Encouraging ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient
appearances
of fucers. to turn their faces again towards their native

country, this proposition did not appear to them
unreasonable. Nor did Columbus hazard much
in confining himself to a term so short. The
presages of difcovcring land were now so nu-
merous and promising, that he deemed them
infallible. For ome days the founding line
reached the bottom, and the foil which it
brought up indicated land to be at no great dil'
tance. The flocks of birds increased, and were

' Ovicdo, Hill. ap. Ramus. vol. iii. p. 81. E.

conipofcd

composed not only of sea fowl, but of such land BOOK f
birds as could not be supposcd to fly far from 49,'
the hore. The crew of the Pinta observed a
cane floatingt which seemed to have been newly
cut, and likewise a piece of timber artificially
carved. The ailors aboard the Nigna took up
the branch of a tree with red berriesh perfealy
fresh. The clouds around the setting fun as-
fumed a new appearance the air was more
mild and warm, ands during night, the wind
became unequal and variable. From all these
symptoms Columbus was so confident of being
near land, that oh the evening of the eleventh
of Oober, after public prayers for success, he
ordered the fails to be furled, and the flips to
lie by, keeping stria watch, left they should be
driven ahore in the night. During this inter-
val of fufpence and expectation, no man fliTt
his eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently
towards that quarter where they expedcd to dif-
cover the land, which had been so long the ob-
jet of their wishes.

ABOUT two hours before tiidnight, Colum- r nd dirfge

bus standing on the forccaftle, obfelvcd a light
at a distance, and privately pointed it out to
Pedro Guttierez, a page of the queen's ward-
robe. Guiticrez perceived it, and calling to

VOL. 1. K Salccdo,

BooK 1. Salcedo, comptroller of the fleet, all three saw

1492. it in motion, as if it were carried from place to

place. A little after midnight, the joyful found
of land, land, was heard from the Pinta, vwhich
kept always ahead of the other hips. Bur,
having been o often deceived by fallacious ap
pearances, every man was now become flow
belief, and waited, in all the anguilh of unce.
tainty and impatience, for the eturn of dav.
Friday, As oon as morning dawned, all doubts arn

fears were dirpclled. From every hip an iflnd
was fen about two leagues to the north, wlhc!
flat and verdant fields, well tored with wood,
-and watered with many rivulets, presented the
afpe& of a delightful country. The crew o:
the Pinta instantly began the Te Deur, as a
-hymn of thanksgiving to God, and were joined
by those of the other ships, with tears of joy
and transports of congratulation. This office
of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an ad
of justice to their commander. They threw
thenmflves at the feet of Columbus, with feel.
ings of felf-condemnation mingled with reve-
rence. They implored him to pardon their ig-
norance, incredulity, and insolence, which had
created him so much unnecessary disquiet, and
had so often obftru&cd the prosecution of his
well-concerted plan; and passing, in the warmth

of

of their admiration, from one extreme to BOOK It.
another, they now pronounced the man. whom r9»
they had so lately reviled and threatenea, to be
a person inspired by Heaven with fagucity and
fortitude more than human, in order to accom-
plilh a design, so far beyond the ideas and con-
ception of all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose all their boats were Firn ;nt&

manned and armed. They rowed towards the the latvtl
island with their colours displayed, with warlike
music, and other martial pomp. As they ap-
proached the coast, they saw it covered with a
multitude of people, whom the novelty of the
spectacle had drawn together, whose attitudes
and gestures expressed wonder and astonish-
ment at the ilrange objects which presented
themselves to their view. Columbus was the
first European who set foot in the New World
which he had discovered. He landed in a rich
dress, and with a naked sword in his hand. J-iis
men followed, and kneeling down, they all
kilfed the ground which they had so long cefired
to fee. They next erected a crucifix, and. pro-
itrating themselves before it, returned thanks to
God for conduaing their voyage to such an
happy iffuc. They theo took solemn poftfrfion
of the country for the crowr of Castile and
Leon, with all the formalities which the Portu-

K a guefe

0OOK "11 guefe were accuomed to.obferve in as of thi

kind, in their new dficoveries.

Their mu- THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were
~- tl alto-

nithmcnt. surrounded by many of the natives, who gazed,

in silent admiration, upon aions which they
could nor comprehend, and of which they dd
not foresee the consequences. The dress of the
Spaniards, tile whiteness of their skins, their
beards, their arms, appeared strange and fur.
priing. The vast machines in which they had
traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon
the waters with wings, and uttered a dreadful
bfund resembling thunder, accompanied with
lightning and smoke, struck them with irch
terror, that they began to refpe& their new
guests as a superior order of beings, and con.
cluded that they were children of the Sun, who
had descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at

the scene now before them. Every herb, and
Ihrub, and tree, was different from those which
flourihed in Europe. The foil seemed to be
rich, but bore few marks of cultivation. Tlh
climate, even to Spaniards, felt warm, though
extremely delightful. The inhabitants appeared

* Life of Columbus, c. 22, 23. Hrrera, dec. i. lib.
i.c. 13.

in

in the fimpke innocence of nature, entirely Bo oK I.
naked. Their black hair, long and uncurled, '4"-
floated upon their houlders, or was bound in
tresses around their heads. They had no beards,
and every part of their bodies was perfectly
smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky
copper colour, their features singular, rather
than disagreeable, their aspeCt gentle and timid.
Though not tall, they were well haped, and
a&ive. Their faces, and several parts of their
body, were fantastically painted with glaring
colours. They were hy at first through fear,
but oon became familiar with the Spaniards,
and with transports of joy received from them
hawks-bells, glass beads, or other baubles, in
return for which they gave such provisions as
they had, and some cotton yarn, the only com-
modity of value that they could produce. To-
wards evening, Columbus returned to his ships,
accompanied by many of the ilanders in their
boats, which they called canoes, and though
rudely formed out of the trunk of a single tree,
they rowed them with surprising dexterity. Thus,
in the first interview between the inhabitants of
the old and new worlds, every thing was con-
dued amicably, and to their mutual fatisfa&ion.
The former, enlightened and ambitious, formed
already vail ideas with refpeA to the advan-
tages which they might derive from the regions

K 3 that

RIP o. 1, that beganto n
to open to their view. The latter, fimpl

'149 and undifcerning, had no foresight of the caLa,

mities and dcfQla.ion which were approaching their
country,

F'tlumhus COLUMBUS, who now aumed the title and
afrum *s he
ttl, t ad- authority of admiral and viceroy, called the
rnn a and-
y ycQloY- ifand which he had discovered San Sal-adcr,

It is better known by the name of Guanara,ni,
which the natives gave to it, and is one of thit
large cluster of ilands called the Lucaya or Ba.
hama illes. -It is situated above three thouand
miles to the weft of Gomera, fom which the
squadron took its departure, and only four de-
grees to the south of it; so little had Columbus
deviated from the westerly course, which he had
chosen as the most proper.

rdoceci to. COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting

ward;s the
uo.ta-. the coasts of the island; and from the universal

poverty of the inhabitants, he perceived that
this was not. the rich country for which he
fought. But, conformably to his theory con-
cerning the discovery of thole regions of Asia
which stretched towards the eaf, he concluded
that San Salvador was one of the isles which
geographers deicribed as situated in the vast
ocean adjacent to India . Having observcd

Pet. Mart. epift. x35.

thait

that most of the people whom he had seen wore BOOK II.
f.nall plates of gold, by way of ornament, in 349».
their nofirils, he eagerly inquired where they
got that precious metal. They pointed to-
wards the south, and made him comprehend
by signs, that gold abounded in countries
ficuated in that quarter. Thither he imme-
diately determined to diret his course, in full
confidence of finding there those opulent re-
gions which had been the object of his voyage,
and would be a recompence for all his toils and
dangers. He took along with him seven of the
natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring the
Spanish language, they might serve as guides
and interpreters; and those innocent people
confidered it as a mark of diftintion when they
were feleEted to accompany him.

HE aw several islands, and touched at three Dircover,

of the largest, on which he bestowed the names cub'.
of St. Mary of the Conception, Fernandina,
and Isabella. But as their foil, productions,
and inhabitants, nearly resembled those of San
Salvador, he made no flay in any of them. He
inquired every where for gold, and the signs that
were uniformly made by way of answer, con-
firmed him in the opinion that it was brought
from the fiuth. Ile followed that course, and
luon d.;cjv.,red a country of vast extent, not

K 4 pcrfeltly

RooK perfectly level, like those which he had already

4a? visitfd, but so diverrified with rising grounds,

hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that he was
uncertain whether it might prove an ifand, or
part of the continent. The natives of San Sal.
vador, whom he had on board, called it Cuba;
Columbus gave it the name of Juanna. He
entered the mouth of a large river with his fqua.
dron, and all the inhabitants fled to the moun.
tains as he approached the hore. But as he
resolved to careen his ships in that place, he
sent some Spaniards, together with one of the
people of San Salvador, to view the interior
parts of the country, They, having advanced
above sixty miles from the hore, reported,
upon their return, that the foil was richer and
more cultivated than any they had hitherto dif-
covered; that, belides many scattered cottages,
they had found one village, containing above a
thousand inhabitants; that the people, though
naked, seemed to be more intelligent than those
of San Salvador, but had treated them with the
fame refpe&ful attention, killing their set, and
honouring them as sacred beings allied to Hea.
yen that they had given them to eat a certain
root, the tafle of which rcfembled roasted chef-
nuts, and likewise a singular fl'ecies of corn
called maize, which, either when roasted whole
or ground iro meal, was abundantly palatable;

that

that there seemed to be no four-footed animals sOOz n.
in the country, but a species of dogs, which 4.
could not bark, and a creature resembling a
rabbit, but of a much smaller size; that they
had observed rome ornaments of gold among the
people, but of no great value".

THESE mefengers had prevailed with fme of ciornde
the natives to accompany them, who informed regardt
Columbus, that the gold of which they made
their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By
this word they meant the middle or inland part
of Cuba; but Columbus, being ignorant of
their language, as well as unaccustomed to their
pronunciation, and his thoughts running con-
tinually upon his own theory concerning the
discovery of the East Indies, he was led, by the
resemblance of found, to suppose that they
spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined that
the opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by
Marco Polo, was not very remote. This in-
duced him to employ ome tine in viewing the
country. He visited almost every harbour,
from Porto del Principe, on the north coast of
Cuba, to the eastern extremity of the island;
but, though delighted with the beauty of the

" Life of Columbus, c. 24-~8. Herrcra, dec. . lib.
i. c, 14.

scenes,

o° i. scenes, -which every where presented themfelvcs,
' 4s ' and amazed at the luxuriant fertility of the foil,

both which, from their novelty, made a more
lively imprefllon upon his imagination x, he did
not find gold in such quantity as was sufficient
to satisfy either the avarice of his followers, or
the expetations of the court to which he was to
return. The people of the country, as much
aftonilhed at his eagerness in quest of gold, as
the Europeans were at their ignorance and fim.
plicity, pointed towards the east, where an
island which they called Hayti was situated, in
which that metal was more abundant than
among them. Columbus ordered his squadron
to bend its course thither; but Martin Alonfo
Pinzon, impatient to be the first who hould
take poffeflion of the treasures which this coun-
try was supposcd to contain, quitted his com.
panions, regardless of all the admiral's signals
to flacken fail until they hould come up with
him.

Tirconrn COLUMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, did
Hlfpanuia. not reach Hayti till the sixth of December. He

called the port where he first touched St. Ni-
cholas, and the illand itfclf Efpagnola, in ho-
nour of the kingdom by which he was cm-
ployed; and it is the only country, of those he

See NOTE XIV.

had

had yet discovered, which has retained the name BOOK if.
that he gave it. As he could neither meet with '.4,
the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the in-
habitants, who fled in great consternation to-
wards the woods, he oon quitted St. Nicholas,
and ailing along the northern coast of the
iland, he entered another harbour, which he
called Conception. Here he was more for
tunate; his people overtook a woman who was
flying from them, and after treating her with
great gentlonefs, dismissed her with a present
of uIch toys as they knew were molt valued in
tlofe regions. The def ription which he gave
to her countrymen of the humanity and won-
derful qualities of the trangers; their admira-
tion of the trinkets, which she hewed with
exultation; and their eagerncfs to participate
of the ame favours; removed all their fears,
and induced many of them to repair to the har-
bour. The strange objecs which they beheld,
and the baubles which Columbus bestowed
upon them, amply gratified their curiosity and
their wishes. They nearly resembled the peo.
ple of Guanahani and Cuba. They were naked
like them, ignorant, and simple; and seemed
to be equally unacquainted with all the arts
which appear mofit ecefiary in polished focie.
tiesi but they were gentle, credulous, and ti-
mid, to a degree which rendered i cafy to ac.

quire

oo r. t. quire the acendant over them, especially as
Go»* their excessive admiration led them into th

fame error with the people of the other islands,
in believing the Spaniards to be more than
mortals, and descended immediately from
Heaven. They possetsed gold in greater abun.
dance than their neighbours, which they readily
exchanged for bells, beads, or pins; and in
this unequal traffic, both parties were highly
pleased, each confidering themselves as gainers
by the tranfadtion. Here Columbus was vifted
by a prince or azique of the country. He
appeared with all the pomp known among a
simple people, being carried in a fort of palan.
quin upon the houlders of four men, and
attended by many of his subjects, who servcd
him with great refpe&. His deportment was
grave and flately, very reserved towards his
own people, but with Columbus and the Spa.
niards extremely courteous. He gave the ad-
miral ome thin plates of gold, and a girdle of
curious workmanship, receiving in return pre.
sents of small value, but highly acceptable to
him Y.

COLUMBUS, ill intent on discovering the
mines which yielded gold, continued to inter-

Y Life of Columbus, c. 32. Herrera, dec. . lib. i.
C. t1, kc.

rogate

rogatc all the natives with whom he had any _Oo _H
intercourse concerning their situation. They mes.
concurred in pointing out a mountainous
country, which they called Cibao, at some
distance from the sea, and farther towards the
cast. Struck with this found, which appeared
to him the fame with Cipango, the name by
which Marco Polo, and other travellers to the
east, distinguished the iands of Japan, he no
longer doubted with refpe& to the vicinity of
the countries which he had discovered to the
remote parts of Asia and, in full expe&tation
of reaching soon thole regions which had been
the object of his voyage, he direced his course
towards the east. He put into a commodious
harbour, which he called St. Thomas, and
found that diftrit to be under the government
of a powerful cazique, named Guacanabari,
who, as he afterwards learned, was one of the
five sovereigns among whom the whole island
was divided. He immediately sent messengers
to Columbus, who, in his name, delivered to
him the present of a mask curiously falhioned,
with the ears, nose, and mouth of beaten gold,
and invited him to the place of his residence,
near the harbour now called Cape Francois,
some leagues towards the east. Columbus dif-
patched orne of his officers to visit this prince,
who, as he behaved himself with greater dig-

5 nity,

oo^K . nity, seemed to claim more attention. Thti

493. returned, with such favourable accounts boil

of the country and of the Feople, as ma.,
Columbus impatient for that interview i;r
Guacanahari to which he had been invited.

one of his HE failed for this purpose from Sr. Thon:as,
Ships Jolt.

on the twenty-fourth of December, with a ran
wind, and the ea perfecly alm; and a,
amidll the multiplicity of his occupations, 1;
had not hut his eyes for two days, he retire.
at midnight ,in order to take some rpofe, h\-
ing committed the helm to the pilot, \i:,
ftrit injunctions not to quit it for a momt::
The pilot, dreading no danger, carelcfsly le1s
the helm to an unexperienced cabin-boy, an:
the hip, carried away by a current, was dafe,
against a rock. The violence of the hocs
awakened Columbus. He ran up to the dcck
There, all was confusion and despair. H
alone retained pretence of mind. He ordlret
,tome of the ailors to take a boat, and carr)
out an anchor astern; but, inflead of obeying
they made off towards the Nigna, which wa,
about half a league distant. He then corn
manded the malts to be cut down$ in order t
lighten the (hip; but all his endeavours wern
too late the veffl opened near the keel, ant
filled so fal: with water, that its loss was in

evitablc

rvitable. 'Ihe fnoothnefs of the ea, and 'the ooa.
timely afiftance of boats from the Nigna, 1'*9
enabled the crew to save their lives. As Ioo;i
as the islanders heard of this dilaftr, they
trowded to the hore, with their prince Gua-
canahari at their he2d. Inflead of taking ad-
vantage of the diltrcfs in which they beheld
the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to their
detriment, they lamented their misfortune with
tears of sincere condolance. Not iatisfied with
this unavailing expreftion of their sympathy,
they put to sea a vast number of canoes, and,
tnder the diretion of the Spaniards afifted
in saving whatever could be got out of the
wreck; and, by the united labour of so many
hands, almost every thing of value was carried
ashore. As fast as the goods were landed,
Guacanahari in person took charge of them.
Ey his orders, they were all deposited in one
place, and armed centinels were ported, who
kept the multitude at a distance, in order to
prevent them not only from embezzling, but
from inflpcting too curiously what belonged
to their guelts'. Next morning this prince
visited Columbus, who was now on board the
Nigna, and endeavoured to console him for
his lols, by offering all that he pofTeffcd to
repair it '.

Sec NOTE XV. ' Herrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 8.

T HZ

0oo0 m TaL condition of Columbus was such, tha
L000-*~ he stood in need of consolation. He ha
coubus. hitherto procured no intelligence of the Pinta

and no longer doubted but that his treacherou
afociate had set fail for Europe, in order
have the merit of carrying the frft tidings
the extraordinary discoveries which had beer
made, and to preoccupy so far the ear of thed
sovereign, as to rob him of the glory anc
reward to which he was justly intitled. Ther
remained but one vessel, and that the fmalldl
and most crazy of the squadron, to traverf:
such a vast ocean, and carry so many mer
back to Europe. Each of those circumstance!
was alarming, and filled the mind of Columbu!
with the utmost solicitude. The desire of over.
taking Pinzon, and of effacing the unfavour
able impreflions which his misrepresentation
might make in Spain, made it necessary tc

erolvesto return thither without delay. The difficult
of his crew of taking such a number of persons aboard th
on the iand.

Ine Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which

the frtility of the country, and the gentle
temper of the people, had already induced
him to form. He resolved to leave a part ol
his crew in the island, that, by residing there,
they might learn the language of the natives,
fludy their disposition, examine the nature of
the country, search for mines, prepare for the

commo-

commodious settlement of the colony, with which BC K 1
he purposed to return, and this icure and faci- 's,.
litate the acquilition of'thofe advantages xi;.l,-
he expeced from his discoveries. When hie
mentioned this to his men, all approved of
the design; and from impatience under the
fatigue of a long voyage, from the levity na-
tural to ailors, or from the hopes of amafl-
ing vast wealth in a country which afforded such
promising specimens of its riches, many offered
voluntarily to be among the number of those
who should remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the exe- Obtains te

consent ot

cution of this scheme, but to obtain the con- thcnativcs.
lent of Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious fim-
plicity soon prefenced to the admiral a favourable
opportunity of proposing it. Columbus hav-
ing, in the belt manner he could, by broken
words and signs, exprefled ome curiosity to
know the cause which had moved the iland-
ers to fly with such precipitation upon the
approach of his ships, the cazique informed
him that the country was much infested by
the incursions of certain people, whom he called
Can-ibeans, who inhabited several islands to the
south east. These he described as a fierce and
warlike race of men, who delighted in blood,
and devoured the flesh of the priloners who

VOL. I. L were

OOK IT were so ilnhappy as to 'fall into their '.:
'02- and as the Spaniards, at their first appearance

were supposed to be Carribeans, whom th
natives, however numerous, durst not face !:
battle, they had recourse to their ul;lal metho:
of tecuring their safety, by flying into til
thickest and molt impenetrable woods. Guj
canahari, while speaking of those dreadful in
vaders, dilcoveRed such symptoms of terrur
as well as such consciousness of the inabili;,
of his own people to resist them, as led Colunl.
bus to conclude that he would not be alarme:
at the proposition of any scheme which affordc,
him the profpet of an additional fecurit
againfl their attacks. He inflantly offered hin
the assistance of the Spaniards to repel hi!
enemies; he engaged to take him and hi,
people under the prote&tion of the powerfL
monarch whom he served, and offered to leav(
in the island such a number of his men as fhoulc
be sufficient, not only to defend the inhabiran
from future incursions, but to avenge their pal

wrongs.

ii * TIE credulous prince closed eagerly wviii
Lsrr the propolal, and thought himself alreadly fs

under the patronage of beings sprung frit,
Fleaven, and superior in power to mortal nlt
The ground was marked out for a finall l r:

vl':

which Columbus called Navidad, because he BOOK I.
had landed there on Christmas day, A deep 140'
ditch was drawn around it. The ramparts
were fortified with pallifades, and the great
guns, saved out of the admiral's hip, were
planted upon them. In ten days the work
was finiflied; that simple race of men labour-
ing with inconsiderate affiduicy in erecting this
first monument of their own servitude. During
this time Columbus, by his caresses and libe-
rality, laboured to increase the high opinion
which the natives entertained of the Spaniards.
But while he endeavoured to inspire them with
confidence in their disposition to do good, he
wished likewise to give them some tfriking
idea of their power to punish and destroy such
as were the objects of their indignation. With
this view, in presence of a vast assembly, he
drew up his men in order of battle, and made
an ostentatious but innocent display of the
lharpnefs of the Spanish swords, of the force
of their pears, and the operation of their
cross-bows. These rude people, strangers to
the uife of iron, and unacquainted with any
hostile weapons, but arrows of reeds pointed
with the bones of fishes, wooden swords, and
javelins hardened in the fire, wondered and
trembled. Before this surprise or fear had
time to abate, he ordered the great guns to be

L 2 fired.

SgooK _f fired. The sudden explosion truck them with

4912. such terror, that they fell flat to the ground,

covering their faces with their hands; and when
they beheld the astonishing effect of the bullets
among the trees, towards which the cannon had
been pointed, they concluded that it was im-
pofible to resist men, who had the command of
such destructive instruments, and who came
armed with thunder and lightning against their
enemies.

tions to AFTER giving such imprellons both of th
i h left beneficence and power of the Spaniards, as

might have rendered it easy to preserve an
ascendant over the minds of the natives, Co-
lumbus appointed thirty-eight of his people
to remain in the island. He entruffed the
command of these to Diego de Arada, a gen-
tleman of Cordova, inveting him with the
fame powers which he himlelf had received
from Ferdinand and Isabella; and furniflied
him with every thing requisite for the sub-
fiftence or defence of this infant colony. He
ftritly enjoined them to maintain concord
among themselves, to yield an unrel'erved obe-
dience to their commander, to avoid giving
offence to the natives by any violence or
exacion, to cultivate the friendship of (a-
canahari, but not to put themselves in his

power

power by straggling in small parties, or march- BOO -i.
ing too far from the fort. He promised to ,49-
revisit them oon, with such a reinforcement
of trength as might enable them to take full
pofferion of the country, and to reap all the
fruits of their discoveries. In the mean time,
he engaged to mention their names to the king
and queen, and to place their merit and services
in the most advantageous light b.

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the

security of the Colony, he left Navidad on the
fourth of January, one thousand four hundred 1493.
and ninety-three, and fleering towards the
ealt, discovered, and gave names to most of
the harbours on the northern coast of the island.
On the sixth, he descried the Pinta, and soon
came up with her, after a eparation of more
than fix weeks. Pinzon endeavoured to justify
his conduct, by pretending that he had been
driven from his course by stress of weather,
and prevented from returning by contrary
winds. The admiral, though he still fufpeded
his perfidious intentions, and knew well what
he urged in his own defence to be frivolous as
well as false, was so sensible that this was not
a proper time for venturing upon any high

Oviedo ap. Ramufio, iii. p. 8z, E. Herrera, dec. .
lil i. . 20. Life of Columbus, c. 34.

L 3 iraii

BOOK i. 1train of authority, and felt such fatisfalion

'493 in this jun&tion with his consort, which deli-

vered him from .many disquieting apprehen.
sions, that lame as Pinzon's apology was, he
admitted of it without difficulty, and restored
him to favour. During his absence from the
admiral, Pinzon had visited several harbours
in the island, had acquired some gold by traf-
sicking with the natives, but had made no dil
covery of any importance.

Resolves to FROM the condition of his ships, as well as
Europe. the temper of his men, Columbus now found

it necessary to haften his return to Europe.
The former, having suffered much during a
voyage of such an unusual length, were ex-
tremely leaky. The latter expresscd the utmolt
impatience to revisit their native country, from
which they had been so long absent, and where
they had things so wonderful and unheard-of
to relae. Accordingly, on the sixteenth of
January, he directed his courie towards the
north-east, and soon loft fight of land. lle
had on board some of the natives, whom he
had taken from the different islands which he
discovered; and betides the gold, which was
the chief object of research, he had collected
specimens of all the produtions which were
likely to become fubjeds of commerce in the

fcvcral

several countries, as well as many unknown BOOK .
birds, and other natural curiosities, which :493.
might attra& the attention of the learned, or
excite the wonder of the people. The voyage
was prosperous to the fourteenth of February,
and he had advanced near five hundred leagues
across the Atlantic Ocean, when the wind A violent

storm anrces.

began to rife, and continued to blow with
increasing rage, which terminated in a furious
hurricane. Every expedient that the naval
skill and experience of Columbus could devise
Was employed, in order to save the ships. But
it was impossible to withstand the violence of
the storm, and as they were still far from any
land, deftrufion seemed inevitable. The
sailors had recourse to prayers to Almighty
God, to the invocation of faints, to vows and
charms, to every thing that religion diEtates,
or superstition suggests, to the affrighted mind
of man. No prospect of deliverance appearing,
they abandoned themselves to despair, and ex-
pected every moment to be swallowed up in
the waves. Besides the passions which natu-
rally agitate and alarm the human mind in
such awful ituations, when certain death, in
one of his most terrible forms, is before it,
Columbus had to endure feelings of distress
peculiar to himnfelf. I e dreaded that all o co-
knowledge of the amazing discoveries wlhiic lu'lLus

L 4 lie

BoK It. he had made was now to perish; mankind wes

t'93 to be deprived of every benefit that might

have been derived from the happy success of
his schemes, and his own name would dcend
to poterity as that of a rash deluded advtn.
turer, instead of being transmitted with the
honour due to the author and conductor of the
mos. noble entcrprife that had ever been under.
taken. These refections extinguished all fnf
of his own personal danger. Less affected
with the loss of life, than solicitous to preserve
the memory of what he had attempted and
achieved, he retired to his cabbin, and wrote,
upon parchment, a short account of the voyage
which he had made, of the course which he
had taken, of.the situation and riches of the
countries which he had discovered, and of the
colony that he had left there. Having wrapt
up this in an oiled cloth, which he inclosed in
a cake of wax, he put it into a cask carefully
flopped up, and threw it into the sea, in hopes
that some fortunate accident might preserve a
depofic of so much importance to the world '.

Takes hel. AT length Providence interposed, to save a
ter in the
Azorcs. life reserved for other services. The wind

abated, the sea became calm, and on the even-

Life of Columbus, c. 37. Herrcra, dec. . lib. ii.
c. , z. Sec NOTE XVI.

ing

ing of the fifteenth, Columbus and his CQrn- BooK n.
panions discovered land and though uncer- 493.
rain what it was, they made towards it. They
soon knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores
or western illes, subjet to the crown of Por-
tugal. There, after a violent contest with the
governor, in which Columbus displayed no
ess spirit than prudence, he obtained a supply
of fresh provisions, and whatever else he needed.
One circumstance, however, greatly disquieted
him. The Pinta, of which he had loft fight
on the first day of the hurricane, did nor ap-
pear; he dreaded for some time that he had
foundered at ea, and that all her crew had
perished: afterwards, his former suspicions re-
curred, and he became apprehensive that Pin-
zon had borne away for Spain, that he might
reach it before hirn, and, by giving the first
account of his discoveries, might obtain some
share of his fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores Feb.,4.

Arrives at

as oon as the weather would permit. At no Lisbon.
great diltance from the coast of Spain, when
near the end of his voyage, and seemingly
beyond the reach of any disaster, another storm
arose, little inferior to the former in violence;
and after driving before it during two days
and two nights, he was forced to take shelter

in

BOOK I. in the river Tagus. Upon application to th:

1493. king of Portugal, he was allowed to come up

' to Lisbon; and, notwithstanding the envy

which it was natural for the Portuguese to feel,
when they beheld another nation entering upon
that province of discovery which they had
hitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and in
its first essay, not only rivalling but eclipsing
their fame, Columbus was received with all the
marks of diftinftion due to a man who had
performed things so extraordinary and unex-
pected. The king admitted him into his pre.
fence, treated him with the highest refpet,
and listened to the account which he gave of
his voyage with admiration mingled with re-
gret. While Columbus, on his part, enjoyed
the fatisfaCion of describing the importance
of his discoveries, and of being now able to
prove the solidity of his schemes to those very
persons, who, with an ignorance disgraceful to
themselves, and fatal to their country, had
lately rejected them as the projects of a vifionay
or designing adventurer d.

ectums to COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to
Gpain

Spain, that he remained only five days in Lisbon.
On the fifteenth of March he arrived in the

d Life of Columbus, c. 40, 41. Hcrrera, dec. i. lib.
ii c. 3.

Fort

port of Palos, seven months and eleven days BOOK I.
from the time when he set out thence upon his '493.
voyage. As loon as his hip was discovered
approaching the port, all the inhabitants of
Palos ran eagerly to the shore, in order to
welcome their relations and fellow-citizens,
and to hear tidings of their voyage. When
the prosperous issue of it was known, when
they beheld the strange people, the unknown
animals, and singular produ&ions brought from
the countries which had been discovered, the
effusion of joy was general and unbounded.
'Ihe bells were rung, the cannon fired; Co-
lumbus was received at landing with royal
honours, and all the people, in folernn pro-
ceflion, accompanied him and his crew to the
church, where they returned thanks to Heaven,
which had so wonderfully conducted and crown-
ed with success, a voyage 9f greater length
and of more importance, than had been at-
tempted in any former age. On the evening
of the fame day, he had the satisfaction of
secing the IPinta, which the violence of the
tempcft had driven far to the north, enter the
harbour.

THE first care of Columbus was to inform il recep.

the king and queen, who were then at Barce-
lona, of his arrival and luccefs. Ferdinand

and

BooK II. and Isabella, no less altonifhed than delightc

493. with this unexpeded event, desired Columbus

in terms the most refpeaful and flattering, tc
repair immediately to court, that from his owr
mouth they might receive a full detail of hii
extraordinary services and discoveries. During
his journey to Barcelona, the people crowded
from the adjacent country, following hiln every
where with admiration and applause. His en-
trance into the city was conducted, by order
of Ferdinand and Isabella, with pomp suitable
to the great event, which added such dillin.
guifhing lustre to their reign. The people
whom he brought along with him from the
countries which he had discovered, marched
first, and by their singular complexion, the
wild peculiarity of their features, an uncouth
finery, appeared like men of another species.
Next to them were carried the ornaments of
gold, fashioned by the rude art of the natives,
the grains of gold found in the mountains, and
dust of the fame metal gathered in the rivers.
After thee appeared the various commodities
of the new discovered countries, together with
their curious productions. Columbus himniil
closed the procession, and attracted the eyes of
all the spectators, who gazed with admiration
on the extraordinary man, whose superior fga-
city and fortitude had conducted their county

mcr,

men, by a route concealed from past ages, to BOOKIl.
the knowledge of a new workl. Ferdinand 140.
and Isabella received him clad in their royal
robes, and feated upon a throne, under a mag-
nificent canopy. When he approached they
flood up, and railing him as he kneeled to kifs
their hands, commanded him to take his feat
upon a chair prepared for him, and to give a
circumstantial account of his voyage. He de-
livered it with a gravity and composure no
lels suitable to the dilpofition of the Spanifi
nation, than to the dignity of the audience in
which he spoke, and with that modest fimpli-
city which charaEterilfs men of superior minds;
who, satisfied with having performed great
a&ions, court not vain applause by an oftenca-
tious dilplay of their exploits. When he had
finished his narration, the king and queen,
kneeling down, offered up solemn thanks to
Almighty God for the discovery of those new
regions, from which they expeaed so many ad-
vantages to flow in upon the kingdoms sub-
ject to their government'. Every mark of
honour that gratitude or admiration could fug-
gest was conferred upon Columbus. Letters
patent were issued, confirming to him and to
his heirs all the privileges contained in the

See NOTE XVII.

capitulation

BOOK - capitulation concluded at Santa F ; his famil

2493- was ennobled; the king and queen, and, after

their example, the courtiers, treated him, on
every occasion, with all the ceremonious refped
paid to persons of the highest rank.' But what
pleased him most, as it gratified his aive
mind, bent continually upon great objects, wi
an order to equip, without delay, an arma.
ment of such force, as might enable him nt
only to take poffefiion of the countries which
he had already discovered, but to go in iearch
of those more opulent regions, which he itll
confidently expected to find .

Aflonih.- WHILE preparations were n.aking for this
ment of
mankind at expedition, the fame of Columbus's fuccellif
his disco-
wcricr. voyage pread over Europe, and excited gne.

ral attention. The multitude, struck w:.
amazement when they heard that a new worid
had been found, could hardly believe an ever!
so much above their conception. Men er
science, capable of comprehending the nature,
and of discerning the effects, of this great dif
covery, received the account of it with admi-
ration and joy. They spoke of his voyage
with rapture, and congratulated one another
upon their felicity, in having lived in the

f Life of Columbus, c. 42, 43. Herrera, dec. I.
lib. ii. c. 3.

pcril

period when, by this extraordinary event, the Boe f.
boundaries of human knowledge were so much '491.
extended, and such a new field of inquiry and
observation opened, as would lead mankind to
a perfect acquaintance with the ftruture and
producions of the habitable globe . Various
opinions and coijecures were formed concern-
ing the new-found countries, and what divi-
sion of the earth they belonged to. Columbus
adhered tenaciously to his original opinion,
that they hould be reckoned a part of those
valt regions in Asia, comprehended under the
general name of India. This sentiment was
confirmed by the observations which he made
concerning the produtions of the countries he
had discovered. -Gold was known to abound
in India, and he had met with such promising
samples of it in the islands which he visited, as
led him to believe that rich mines of it might
be found. Cotton, another produ&ion of the
East Indies, was common there. The pimento
of the islands he imagined to be a species of
the Ealt-Indian pepper. He mistook a root,
somewhat resembling rhubarb, for that valu-
able drug, which was then supposed to be a
plant peculiar to the East Indiesh. The birds
brought home by him were adorned with the

IP. Mart. epift. 133, 134. 135. See NOTE XVIII.
h llerrcra, dec. . lib. i. c. o2. Gomara Hit. c. 17.

5 fame

JOOK at fame rich plumage which diftinguilhes those

3-m. of India. The alligator of the one country

appeared to be the fame with the crocodile
of the other. After weighing all there circtum.
fiances, not only the Spaniards, but the other
nations of Europe, seem to have adopted the
opinion of Columbus. The countries which
he had discovered were confidered as a part of
India. In consequence of this notion, the
name of Indies is given to them by Ferdinand
and Isabella, in a ratification of their former
agreement, which was granted to Columbus
upon his return '. Even after the error whih
gave rife to this opinion was deteeed, and the
true position of the New World was afcer.

Ditinguith- tained, the name has remained, and the apptl
ler f the lation of Weft Indies is given by all the people
Weea Indica. of Europe to the country, and that of Inda;s

to its inhabitants.

Prepara- THE name by which Columbus dillinguifled
fiOcnd' a the countries which he had discovered was b
voyage. inviting, the specimens of their riches and ser.

tility, which he produced, were so conlider.
able, and the.reports of his companions, deli.
vered frequently with the exaggeration natural
to travellers, so favourable, as to excite a
wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spa.

i Life of Columbus, c. 44.

niard;

hiards. Though little accustomed to naval B30K I".
expeditions, they were impatient to et out 1493.
upon the voyage. Volunteers of every rank
solicited to be employed. Allured by the vast
profpe&s which opened to their ambition and
avarice, neither the length nor danger of the
navigation intimidated them. Cautious as Ser-
dinand was, and averse to every thing new or
adventurous, he seems to have catched the
fame spirit with his subjects. Under its in-
fluence, preparations for a second expedition
were carried on with a rapidity unuflal in
Spain, and to an extent that would be deemed
not inconsiderable in the present age. The
fleet confiltcd of seventeen hips, ome of which
weie of good burden. It had on board fifteen
hundred perlbns, among whom were many of
noble fatniiiet, who had served in honourable
ftacions. T'l'e greater part of there being
delined to remain in the country, were fur-
nifled with every thing rcquifire for conquef or
srtlement, with all kinds of European domeflic
animals, with luch leeds and plants as Were molt
likely to thrive in the climare of the Welt
liices, with utensils and instruments of every
fort, and with such artiliccrs as might be molt
tilful in an infant colony'

Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. ;. Life of Columbus, c. 4.5
'VoC I. i. BUVT

Bo OK . BUT, formidable and well provided as th
T rit 4Qo fleet was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not r.

oain to 'rh their title to the possession of the newly-difcc

N.cw World
tlPopme" by vered countries upon its operations alone. T

example of the Portuguese, as well as ti
fuperfition of the age, made it necenfarv t
obtain from the Roman pontiff a grant of t!
territories which they wished to occupy. T!
Pope, as the vicar and representative of Jll:
Chrifl, was supposcd to have a right of don.
nion over all the kingdoms of the earsh
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for evce
crime which disgraces humanity, filled t,
papal throne at that time. As he was be::
Ferdinand's subject, and very solicitous r,
secure the protection of Spain, in order r
facilitate the execution of his ambitious fcheire:
in favour of his own family, he was extren:r;i
willing to gratify the Spanilh monarchs.
an at of liberality which cost him notli;^
and that fcrved to establish the jurisdiction ar.
pretensions of the papal fee, he grantedLi
full right to Ferdinand and Isabella all tih
countries inhabited by Infidels, which they ha
discovered, or should discover; and, in vi:r!L
of that power which he derived from 1'-.
Christ, hc confctrred on tle crown of C' :::
v;ft regions, to the pofl'ciion of whiclh hc li;.
ielf was so far from having any title, ti :t

i.,s.

was unacquainted with their situation, and BOOK 1.
ignorant even of their existence. As it was 3493'
necefary to prevent this grant from interfering
with that formerly made to the crown of Por-
tugal, he appointed that a line, supposed to
be drawn from pole to pole, a hundred leagues
to the westward of the Azores, hould erve
as the limit between them; and, in the pleni-
tude of his power, bellowed all to the east of
this imaginary line upon the Portuguese, and
all to the weft of it upon the Spaniards m. Zeal
for propagating the Christian faith was the
consideration employed by Ferdinand in solicit-
ing this bull, and is mentioned by Alexander
as his chief motive for issuing it. In order
to manifest some concern for this laudable ob-
je, several friars, under the direction of
Father Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great repu-
tation, as apoftolical vicar, were appointed to
accompany Columbus, and to devote thenm-
selves to the infirudion of the natives. The
Indians whom Columbus had brought along
with him, having received some tincture of
Christian knowledge, were baptized with much
solemnity, the king himself, the prince his son,
and the chief persons of his court, standing as
their godfathers. Thole first fruits of the New

" Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. Torqucmada Mon.
Ind. lib. xviii. c. 3.

M 2 World

·B oOK-. World have not beep followed by such an in-

'493- create as pious men wilhed, and had reason to

expet.

Second voy- FERDINAND and Isabella having thus ac-
age of Co-
lumbus. quired a title, which was then deemed com-

pletely valid, to extend their discoveries, andt
to establish their dominion over such a valt por-
tion of the globe, nothing now retarded the
departure of the fleet. Columbus was ex.
tremely impatient to revisit the colony which
he had left, and to pursue that career of glory
upon which he had entered. He set fail from
the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth of Sep-
tember, and touching again at the island of
Gomera, he fleered farther towards the south
than in his former voyage. By holding this
course, he enjoyed more Rteadily the benefit or
the regular winds, which reign within the tro-
pics, and was carried towards a large cluter or
islands, situated considerably to the east of those
which he had already discovered. On the
Nov. 2. twenty-fixth day after his departure from Go-

mera, he made land ". It was one of the Ca-
ribbce or Leeward islands, to which he gave the
name of Defeada, on account of the impatience
of his crew to discover some part of the New

Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. S;. .

\ orlu

World. After this he visited successively Do- BOOK 11.
minica, Marigalante, Guadalupe, Antigua, San _ 149
Juan de Puerto Rico, and fcveral other illands,
scattered in his way as he advanced towards the
north-west. All these he found to be inhabited
by that fierce race of people whom Guacanahari
had painted in such frightful colours. His
descriptions appeared not to have been exagge-
rated. The Spaniards never attempted to land
without meeting with such a reception, as dif-
covered the martial and daring spirit of the na-
tives; and in their habitations were found re-
lics of those horrid feais which they had made
upon the bodies of their enemies taken in war.

BUT as Columbus was eager to know the state Arrives at

of the colony which he had planted, and to sup- Novp. ^;.
ply it with the necessaries of which he supposed
it to be in want, he made no flay in any of those
ilands, and proceeded directly to Hispaniola°.
When he arrived off Navidad, the flation in
which he had left the thirty-eight men under
the command of Arada, he was astonished that
none of them appeared, and expeced every
moment to fee them running with transports of
joy to welcome their countrymen. Full of so-

o P. Martyr, dec. p. 15. 18. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii.
c. 7. Life of Columbus, c. 46, &c.

M 3 licitude

BOOK I licitude about their safety, and foreboding in

Z493- his mind what had befallen them, he rowed in-

flantly to land. All the natives from whom he
might have received information had fled. But
the fort which he had built was entirely dc.
molifhed, and the tattered garments, the broken
arms and utensils scattered about it, left no room
to doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the
garrison P. While the Spaniards were hedding
tears over those fad memorials of their fellow.
citizens, a brother of the cazique Guacanahari

The fate of arrived. From him Columbus received a par.
the mn
who he ticular detail of what had happened after his

dleparture from the island. The familiar in-
tercourfe of the Indians with the Spaniards
tended gradually to diminish the fuperflitious
veneration with which their firfi appearance had
inspired that firple people. By their own in-
discretion and ill condu&, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impreflions, and oon
convinced the natives, that they had all the
wants, and weaknesses, and passions of men.
As soon as the powerful refiraint which the
presence and authority of Columbus imposed
was withdrawn, the garrison threw off all re-
gard for the officer whom he had invested with
command. Regardless of the prudent inftruc-

P Hilt. de Cara de los Palacios. MS.

tions

tions which he had given them, every man be- BOOK I.
came independent, and gratified his defircs 1493.
without controul. The gold, the women, the
provisions of the natives, were all the prey of
those licentious oppressors. They roamed in
small parties over the island, extending their
rapacity and insolence to every corner of it.
Gentle and timid as the people were, those un-
provoked injuries at length exhaufled tir pa;
tience, and rouzed their courage. The cazique
of Cibao, whose country the Spaniards chiefly
infested on account of the gold which it con-
tained, surprised and cut off several of them,
while they Dtraggled in as perfect security as if
their conduct had been altogether inoffensive.
He then assembled his subjects, and surrounding
the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards
were killed in defending it, the reft perished in
attempting to make their escape by crofling an
arm of the sea. Guacanahari, whom all their
exations had not alienated from the Spaniards,
took arms in their behalf, and, in endeavouring
to protect them, had received a wound, by
which he was fRill confined .

THOUt; this account was far from removing Hisprudent

condu'.

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained

q P. Martyr, decad. p. 2, &c. Herrera, dec. . lib. ii.
c. 7 9. Life of olumbus, c. 49, 5o.

M4 \it!

BOOK IL with refpea to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Co.

1493. lumbus perceived so clearly that this was not-

proper juncture for inquiring into his conduct
with scrupulous accuracy, that he rejedcl thli
advice of several of his officers, who urged him
to seize the person of that prince, and to reveng;
the death of their countrymen by attacking h;s
fubjeds. He represented to them the neceftiy
of lecuring the friendlhip of some potentate of
the country, in order to facilitate the fettlenmc.t
which they intended, and the danger of driving
the natives to unite in ome desperate attempt
against them, by such an ill-timed and unavail-
ing exercise of rigour. Instead of wafting his
time in punishing past wrongs, he took precau-
tions for preventing any future injury. With
this view, he made choice of a fiuuation mole
healthy and commodious than that of Navidad.
He traced out the plan of a town in. a large plain
near a pacious bay, and obliging every perlbn
to put his hand to a work on which their com-
mon flfety depended, the houses and ramparts
were oon so far advanced by their united la-
bour, as to afford& them shelter and feciuit).
7'his riing city, the first that the Europeans
founded in the New World, he named llb-
bella, in honour of his patrones the queen of
Caffilc .

LifeofColumbus, c. . Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. V.

rl carrying on this necessary work, Colum- BOOK n
bus had not only to sustain all the hardlhips, ,493.

Difcontcnt
and to encounter all the difficulties, to which oC 1"' olo-

low;rs.

infant colonies are exposed when they fettle in
an uncultivated country, but he had to contend
with what was more insuperable, the laziness,
the impatience, and mutinous disposition of his
followers. By the enervating influence of a hot
climate, the natural inactivity of the Spaniards
teemed to increase. Many of them were gen-
ticmen, unaccustomed to the fatigue of bodily
lIbour, and all had engaged in the enterprise
wish the sanguine hopes excited by the splendid
and exaggerated descriptions of their country-
mcn who returned from the first voyage, or by
the mistaken opinion of Columbus, that the
country which he had discovered was either the
Cipango of Marco Polo, or the Ophir', from
which Solomon imported thole precious com-
modities which suddenly diffused such extraor-
dinary riches through his kingdom. But when,
inltead of that golden harvest which they
had expected to reap without toil or pains, the
Spaniards saw that their prospect of wealth was
remote as well as uncertain, and that it could
not be attained but by the flow and persevering
chfrts of indulfry, the dilappointment of thole

' P. Martyr, dec. p. 29.

chimerical

BOOK 11 chimerical hopes occasioned such dejetion oj

1493. mind as bordered on despair, and led to genera

discontent. In vain did Columbus endeavour
to revive their fpirits.by pointing out the ferti.
lity of the foil, and exhibiting the pecimens ot
gold daily brought in from different parts of tl,
island. 'hey had not patience to wait for the
gradual returns which the former might yild,
and the latter they despised as scanty and incon.
fiderable. The spirit of difaffe&ion spread,
and a conspiracy was formed, which might have
been fatal to Columbus and the colony. Hap.
pily he discovered it, and seizing the ring.
leaders, punished ofme of them, ent others
prisoners into Spain, whither he difpatcled
twelve of the ships which had served as trar.f
ports, with an earnest request for a reinforce.
ment of men and a large supply of provisions'.

:494C. MEANWHILE, in order to banilh that idle.
re Ofthe ness which, by allowing his people leisure to
country, brood over their disappointment, nouriflie; the

spirit of dicontent, Columbus planned everal
expeditions into the interior part of the country,
He sent a detachment, under the comm.indtl c
Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enterprifig,
officer, to visit the district of Cibao, which Jia

' Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. to, 11.

said to yield the greatet quantity of gold, and BOOK .
followed him in person with the main body of ,94.

Mlarch aa.

his troops. In this expedition, he displayed all
the pomp of military magnificence that he could
exhibit, in order to strike the imagination of
the natives. -Ie marched with colours flying,
with martial music, and with a small body of
cavalry that paraded ometimes in the front and
sometimes in the rear. As those were the first
horses which appeared in the New World, they
were objects of terror no less than of admiration
to the Indians, who having no tame animals
themselves, were unacquainted with that vast
accefflon of power, which man hath acquired
by subjecting them to his dominion. They
supposed them to be rational creatures. They
imagined that the horse and the rider formed
one animal, with whose speed they were afto-
nilhed, and whose impetuosity and strength they
confidered as irresistible. But while Columbus
endeavoured to inspire the natives with a dread
of his power, he did not neglect the arts of
gaining their love and confidence. He adhered
scrupulously to the principles of integrity and
justice in all his tranfacions with them, and
treated them, on every occasion, not only with
humanity, but with indulgence. The diftri(
of Cibao answered the description given of it by
the natives. It was mountainous and unculti-

vated,

BOOK II. vated, but in every river and brook gold wa

494 gathered either in dust or in grains, rome ofwhic

were ofconfiderable size. The Indians had neve
opened any mines in search of gold. To pen;
trate into the bowels of the earth, and to resin
the rude ore, were operations too complicated and
laborious for their talents and industry, and tlic
had no such high value for gold as to put the,
ingenuity and invention upon the stretch
order to obtain it ". The small quantity of th
precious metal which they possessed, was ei:hr
picked up in the beds of the rivers, or wafhe,
from the mountains by the heavy rains that fal
within the tropics. But, from those indica
tions, the Spaniards could no longer doubt tha
the country contained rich treasures in i
bowels, of which they hoped soon to be masters"
In order to secure the command of this va
Juable province, Columbus ereted a finai
fort, to which he gave the name of St. Thomas
by way of ridicule upon ome of his incredulou
followers, who would not believe that the coun
try produced gold, until they saw it with thc.
own eyes, and touched it with their hands'.

Oviedo, lib, ii. p. 90. A.
Pv '. Martyr, dec. p. 32.
x Hcrrcra, dec. . lib. ii. c. z. Life of Columbus,

1-

TE4 account of those promising appearances BooK In.

of wealth in'the country of Cibao came very The:?,trer
seasonably to comfort the defporiding colony, aind diaffc-

tion of the

which was affected with diftrefes of various crolaf i"-
kinds. The flock of provisions which had been
brought from Europe was mostly consumed;
what remained was so much corrupted by the
heat and moifture.of the climate, as to be almost
unfit for use; the natives cultivated so small a
portion of ground, and with so little'fkill, that
it hardly yielded what was suffi'cient for their
own subsistence; the Spaniards at Ilabella had
hitherto neither time nor leisure to clear the foil,
fb as to reap any considerable fruits of their own
industry. On all there accounts, they 'becafme
afraid of perishing with hunger, and were re--
duced already to a scanty allowance. At the
fame time, the diseases predominant in the tor-
rid zone, and which rage chiefly in those un-
cultivated countries, where the hand of industry
has not opened the woods, drained' the marshes,
and confined the rivers within a certain chan-
nel, began to spread among them. Alarmed
at the violence and unusual symptoms of thore
maladies, they exclaimed against Columbus and
his companions in the former voyage, who, by
their splendid but deceitful dcfcriptions of lif-
paniola, had allured them to quit Spain for a
barbarous uncultivated land, where they must

5 either

nOOK- I either be cut off by famine, or die of unknow

-494. distempers. Several of the officers and person

of note, instead of checking, joined in thofi
seditious complaints. Father Boyl, the apoflo
lical vicar, was one of the most turbulent anc
outrageous. It required all the authority and
address of Columbus to re-cftablifh fubordina.
tion and tranquillity in the colony. Threats and
promises were alternately employed for this pur.
poe; but nothing contributed more to sooth te
malcontents than the profpe& of finding, in the
mines of Cibao, such a rich store of trealure as
would be a recompence for all their sufferings,
and efface the memory of former dilappoin
ments.

Columbus WHEN, by his unwearied endeavours, con-
,wdico.- cord and order were so far restored, that he could

venture to leave the iland, Columbus resolved
to pursue his discoveries, that he might be able
to acertain whether those new countries with
which he had opened a communication were
conneaed with any region of the earth already
known, or whether they were to be confidered
as a separate portion of the globe hitherto unvi-
fited. He appointed his brother Don Diego,
with the afiftance of a council of officers, to
govern the island in his abfcnce; and gave th'
command of a body of soldiers to Don 'cdo

1Margar..'.,

Margarita, with which he was to visit the diffe- BooK 1,
rent parts of the ifand, and endeavour to efta- 1494
blifh the authority of the Spaniards among the
inhabitants. Having left them very particular
instructions with rcfpec to their condut, he
weighed anchor on the twenty-fourth of April,
with one ship and two small barks under his
command. During a tedious voyage of full five
months, he had a trial of almost all the nume-
rous hardships to which persons of his profeiion
are exposed, without making any dilcovery of
importance, except the island of Jamaica. As
he ranged along the southern coast of CubaY, he
was entangled in a labyrinth formed by an in-
credible number of small islands, to which he
gave the name of the Queen's Garden. In this
unknown courfc, among rocks and shelves, he
was retarded by contrary winds, assaulted with
furious storms, and alarmed with the terrible
thunder and lightning which is often almost in-
reffint between the tropics. At length his pro-
visions fell hort; his crew, exhaulled with fa-
tigue, as well as hunger, murmured and threat-
ened, and were ready to proceed to the mot
desperate extremities against him. Belet with
danger in such various forms, he was obliged to
ikccp continual watch, to obfctve every occur-

Y See NOTE XIX.

rence

OOK Ji rence with his own eyes, to issue every order, and
'494. to superintend the execution of it. On no occa.

sion, was the extent of his skill and experience
as a navigator so much tried. To there the fqua.
dron owed its safety. But this unremitted fatigue
of body, and interife application of mind, over-
powering his constitution, though naturally igo-
rous and robust, brought on a feverith dilbrdor,
which terminated in a lethargy, that deprived
him of sense and memory, and had almost prove!
fatal to his life.

Sept. 27. BuT, on his return to Hispaniola, the fudde.
On his re-
turn, finds emotion of joy which he felt upon meeting wit;
his brother
Bartholo- his brother Bartholomew at Iabella, occaliornd
new at Ifa-
belia such a ow of spirits as contributed greatly to

his recovery. It was now thirteen years fincc
the two brothers, whom similarity of talents
united in close friendlhip, had separated fron;
each other, and during that long period there
had been no intercourse between them. Ba.
tholomew, after finishing his negbciation in t;.
court of England, had set out for Spain by t::
way of France. At Paris he received an ac
count of the extraordinary discoveries which i
brother had made in his firfl voyage, and tl'.

' Life of Columbus, c. 54, &c. Herrera, dec. . lil i
c. 13, 14. 1'. Martyr, dec. p. 34, &c.

he was then preparing to embark on a second BOOR I.
expedition. Though this naturally induced '494.
him to pursue his journey with the utmost dif-
patch, the Admiral had failed for Hispaniola
before he reached Spain. Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella received him with the refpet due to the
nearest kinsman of a person whole merit and
services rendered him so conspicuous; and as
they knew what consolation his pretence would
afford to his brother, they persuaded him to
take the command of three ships, which they
had appointed to carry provisions to the colony
at Isabella '.

HE could not have arrived at anyjun&ure The Indi-

when Columbus flood more in need of a friend nms'akein
capable of assisting him with his counsels, or tahSPa1'"
of dividing with him the cares and burden of
government. For although the provisions
now brought from Europe, afforded a tem-
porary relief to the Spaniards from the calami-
ties of famine, the supply was not in such quan-
tity as to support them long, and the island did
not hitherto yield what was sufficient for their
sustenance. They were threatened with another
danger, still more formidable than the return
of scarcity, and which demanded more imms-

1 Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. * 15.
VOL. I. N diate

30OK ml. diate attention. No sooner did Columbus leave

the island on his voyage of dicovery, than the
soldiers under Margarita, as if they had been
set free from discipline and subordination
scorned all reltraint. Instead of conforming to
the prudent inftruRions of Columbus, they dif.
perfed in straggling parties over the island, lived
at discretion upon the natives, wafted their pro
visions, sized their women, and treated that
inoffensive race with all the insolence of military
oppression '.

As long as the Indians had any profped that

their sufferings might come to a period by the
voluntary departure of the invaders, they sub-
mitted in silence, and dissembled their sorrow;
but they now perceived that the yoke would be
as permanent as it was intolerable. The Spa.
niards had built a town, and surrounded it with
ramparts. They had ereRed forts in different
places. They had enclosed and sown several
fields. It was apparent that they came not to
visit the country, but to fettle in it. Though
the number of those strangers was inconfider-
able, the state of cultivation among this rude
people was so imperfet, and in such exat pro.
portion to their own consumption, that it was

P. Martyr, dec. p. 47.

Wit:

with difficulty they could afford subsistence to gBó
their new guctIs. Their owh mode of life was
so indolent and inative, the warmth of the cli-
mate so enervating, the constitution of their
bodies naturally so feeble, and so unatcuftomned
to the laborious exertions of indullry, that
they were satisfied with a proportion of food
amazingly small. A handful of maize, or a
little of the insipid bread made of the caffada-
root, was sufficient to support men, whose
strength and spirits were not exhausted by any
vigorous efforts either of body or mind. The
Spaniards, though the most abstemious of all
the Europeah nations, appeared to them ex-
ceflively voracious. One Spaniard consumed
as much as several Indians. This keenness of
appetite surprised them so much, and eemed
to them to be so insatiable, that they fappofed
the Spaniards had left their own country; be-
taufe it did not produce as much as as requi-
lite to gratify their immoderate desire of food,
and had come among them in qteft of nourish-
ment b. Self- preservation prompted them to
wish for the departure of guests who wafted so
fast their slender stock of provisions. The in-
juries which they suffered; added to their im-
patience for this event. They had long ex-

b Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 17.

N 2 pcScd

oo0K . peaed that the Spaniards would retire of their

494 own accord, They now perceived that, in

order to avert the deftru&ion with which they
were threatened, either by the flow consumption
of famine, or by the violence of their oppref.
fors, it was necessary to alfume courage, to at.
tack those formidable invaders with united force,
and drive them from the settlements of which
they had violently taken pofeffion.

War with SUCH were the sentiments which universally
them.

prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus
returned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unpro.
voked outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree
of rage of which their gentle natures, formed
to susser and submit, seemed hardly fufceptibl,
they waited only for a signal from their leader
to fall upon the colony. Some of the caziqua
had already furiprifed and cut off several ftrag.
glera. The dread of this impending danger
united the Spaniards, and re-eftablifed the
authority of Columbus, as they saw no prospect
of safety but in committing themselves to hi
prudent guidance, It was now necessary to
have recourse to arms, the employing of which
againfl the Indians, Columbus had hitherto
avoided with the greatest solicitude. Unequal
as the conflic may seem, between the naked
inhabitants of the New World, armed wit!l

8 clubi

clubs, fRicks hardened in the fire, wooden BOO l
fiords, and arrows pointed with bones or flints; 34.
and troops accustomed to the discipline, and pro-
vided with the infiruments of deftrution known
in the European art of war, the situation of the
Spaniards was far from being exempt from
danger. The vast superiority of the natives in
number, compensated many defets. An hand-
ful of men was about to encounter a whole na-
tion. One adverse event, or even any unforeseen
delay in determining the fate of the war, might
prove fatal to the Spaniards. Confcibus that fuc-
cess depended on the vigour and rapidity of his
operations, Columbus instantly aembled his
forces. They were reduced to a very finall num-
ber. Diseases, engendered by the warmth and
humidity of the country, or occasioned by their
own licentiousness, had raged among them with
much violence; experience had not yet taught
them the art either of curing there, or the precau-
tions requisite for guarding against them; two-
thirds of the original adventurers were dead, and
many of those who survived were incapable of ser-
vice'. The body which took the field confided ,45.

- Marcl 14.

only of two hundred foot, twenty orfe, and
twenty large dogs; and how strange focver it
may seer, to mention the lafl as cornpofing part

C¢ ife of Columbus, c. 61,

N 3 of

;P'K 1' of a military force, they were not perhaps the

49S- least formidable and deftruaive of the whole,

when employed againlt naked and timid Indians,
All the caziques of the island, Guacanahari ex-
cepted, who retained an inviolable attachment
to the Spaniards, were in arms tp oppose Co-
lumbus, with forces amounting, if we may be-
lieve the Spanish historians, to a hundred thou-
sand men. Intead of, attempting to draw the
Spaniards into the faftneffTs of the woods and
mountains, they were so imprudent as to take
their station in the Vga Real, the most open
plain in the country. Columbus did not allow
them time to perceive their error, or to alter
their position. He attacked them during the
night, when undisciplined troops are least ca-
pable of aing with union and concert, and
obtained an easy and bloodless vi&ory. The
consternation with which the Indians were filled
by the noise and havoc made by the fire-arms,
by the impetuous force of the cavalry, and the
fierce onet of the dogs, was so great, that they
threw down their weapons, and fled without at-
tempting refiflance. Many were slain; more
were taken prisoners, and reduced to servitude;
and so thoroughly were the reft intimidated,
that from that moment they abandoned them-

d See NOTE XX.

fclvcI

flves to despair, relinquishing all thoughts of B o oK
contending with aggrerolrs whom they deemed 45
invincible.
COLUMBUS employed several months in A x im-

poed upoa

marching through the island, and in subjecting them.
it to the Spanilh government, without meeting
with any opposition. He imposed a tribute
upon all the inhabitants above the age of four-
teen. Each person who lived in those diftrias
where gold was found, was obliged to pay quar-
terly as much gold dust as filled a hawk's bell;
from those in other parts of the country, twenty-
five pounds of cotton were demanded. This
was the first regular taxation of the Indians, and
served as a precedent for exations fill more
intolerable. Such an imposition was extremely
contrary to those maxims which Columbus had
hitherto inculcated with refpeEt to the mode of
treating them. But intrigues were carrying on
in the court of Spain at this juncture, in order
to undermine his power and discredit his opera-
tions, which constrained him to depart from his
own system of administration. Several unfa-
vourable accounts of his condut, as well as of
the countries discovered by him, had been
tranfiitted to Spain. Margarita and Father
Boyl were now at court; and in order to juflify
;heir wn conduct, or to gratify thcir resent-

N ,J menta

BOOK n. menrt, watched with malevolent attention for

1495- every opportunity of spreading insinuations to

his detriment. Many of the courtiers viewed
his growing reputation and power with envious
eyes. Fonseca, archdeacon of Seville, who was
intruled with the chief direction of Indian as.
fairs, had conceived such an unfavourable opi.
nion of Columbus, for some reason which the
contemporary writers have not mentioned, that
he lilfened with partiality to every inveeive
againe him. It was not easy for an unfriended
stranger, unpra&ifed in courtly arts, to couc.
tera& the machinations of so many enemies.
Columbus saw that there was but one method
of supporting his own credit, and of silencing
all his adversaries. He must produce such a
quantity of gold, as would not only juflify
what he had reported with relpect to the rich-
ness. of the country, but encourage Ferdinand
and Isabella to persevere in prosecuting his
plans. The necefity of obtaining it, forced
him not only to impose this heavy tax upon the
Indians, but to exac payment of it with extrene
rigour; and may be pleaded in excuse for his
deviating on this occasion from the mildners and
humanity with which he uniformly treated thai
unllp~J- i :cople'.

· }errera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 17.

Tmr

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the B OOK I.
Indians were obliged to employ in procuring the -tfcs,
tribute demanded of them, appeared the molt of that mia-
intolerable of all evils, to men accustomed to
pals their days in a careless, improvident indo-
lence. They were incapable of such a regular
and persevering exertion of industry, and felt it
such a grievous restraint upon their liberty, that
they had recourse to an expedient for obtaining
deliverance from this yoke, which demonstrates
the excess of their impatience and despair. They
formed a scheme of starving those oppressors
whom they durst not attempt to expel; and
from the opinion which they entertained with
refpet to the voracious appetite of the Spa-
niards, they concluded the execution of it to be
very practicable. With this view they suspended
all the operations of agriculture, they sowed no
maize, they pulled up the roots of the manioc
or caiada which were planted, and retiring to
the molt inacceflible parts of the mountains, left
the uncultivated plains to their enemies. This
desperate resolution produced in ome degree the
effects which they expected. The Spaniards were
reduced to extreme want; but they received
such eafonable supplies of provisions from Eu.
rope, and found so many resources in their own
ingenuity and industry, that they suffered no
great loss of men. The wretched Indians were

the

aOOK 11. the vi&ims of their own ill-concerted policy. A

*495- vast multitude, shut up among barren moun.

tains, without any food but the spontaneous
productions of the earth, soon felt the utmost
distresses of famine. This brought on conta.
gious difeafcs; and, in the course of a few
months, more than a third part of the inhabit-
ants of the island perified, after experiencing
misery in all its various forms .

Intrigues BUT while Columbus was thus successfully
*gain(t Co-
u.hbuRs in eftablilhing the foundations of the Spanish gran.
he Court of
Spain. deur in the New World, his enemies laboured

with unwearied assiduity to deprive him of the
glory and rewards, which by his services and
sufferings he was intitled to enjoy. The hard-
llips unavoidable in a new settlement, the cala-
mities occasioned by an unhealthy climate, the
disasters attending a voyage in unknown seas,
were all represented as ihe effets of his restless
and inconsiderate ambition. His prudent atten-
tion to preserve discipline and subordination was
denominated excess of rigour; the punishments
which he inflicted upon the mutinous and dif-
orderly were imputed to cruelty. These ac-
cufations gained such credit in a jealous court,

( Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. xi. c. 8. Life of Columbus, c. 61.

Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93. D. Benzon Hill. Novi Orbis, lib.i,
c. 9. P. Martyr, dec. p. 48.

thal

that a commifioner was appointed to repair BOOK "l
to Hispaniola, and to infpe: into the con- '49,.
du& of Columbus. By the recommendation
of his enemies, Aguado, a groom of the bed-
chamber, was the person to whom this import-
ant trust was committed. But in this choice
they leem to have been more influenced by the
obsequious attachment of the man to their in-
terest, than by his capacity for the station.
Puffed up with such sudden elevation, Aguado
displayed, in the exercise of this office, all the
frivolous felf-importance, and aced with all
the disgusting insolence, which are natural to
little minds, when railed to unexpected dignity,
or employed in functions to which they are not
equal. By listening with eagerness to every
accusation against Columbus, and encouraging
not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even
the Indians, to produce their grievances, real
or imaginary, he fomented the spirit of diflen-
tion in the island, without establishing any re-
gulation of public utility, or that tended to re-
dress the many wrongs, with the odium of
which he wished to load the admiral's admini-
Itration. As Columbus felt sensibly how humi-
liating his situation must be, if he hould re-
main in the country while such a partial in-
fpetor observed his motions, and controuled
his jurifdistion, he took the resolution of re-

turning

BOOK u. turning to Spain, in order to lay a full account

,9. of all his tranfa&ions, particularly with refpef

to the points in dispute between him and his
adversaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from
whose justice and discernment he expeced an
equal and a favourable decision. He corn
mitted the administration of affairs, during his
496. absence, to Don Bartholomew, his brother,

with the title of Adelantado, or Lieutenant
Governor. By a choice less fortunate, and which
proved the source of many calamities to the co-
lony, h appointed Francis Roldan chief justice,
with very extensive powers ,

Xcturn to IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a
span. course different from that which he had taken

in his former voyage. He steered almost due
east from Hispaniola, in the parallel of twenty-
two degrees of latitude; as experience had not
yet discovered the more certain and expeditious
method of stretching to the north, in order to
fall in with the south-west winds. By this ill-
advifd choice, which, in the infancy of navi-
gation between the New and Old Worlds, can
hardly be imputed to the admiral as a defect in
naval kill, he was exposed to infinite fatigue
and danger, in a perpetual itruggle with the

s Hcrrca, dec. . lib. ii. c. 8. lib. iii. c. .

tr;L'e-

trade-winds, which blow without variation from BOOK .
the east between the tropics. Notwithstanding 496.
the almost insuperable difficulties of such a na-
vigation, he perfilted in his course with his
usual patience and firmness, but made so little
way, that he was three months without feeing
land. At length, his provisions began to fail,
the crew was reduced to the scanty allowance of
fix ounces of bread a-day for each person. The
admiral fared no better than the meanest ailor.
But, even in this extreme difirefs, he retained
the humanity which distinguishes his charater,
and refused to comply with the earnest folicita-
tions of his crew, bome of whom proposed to
feed upon the Indian prisoners whom they were
carrying over, and others insisted to throw
them over-board, in.order to lesen the con-
fumption of their small stock. He represented
that they were human beings, reduced by a
common calamity to the fame condition with
themselves, and intitled to hare an equal fate.
His authority and remonstrances diflipated those
wild ideas fuggeffed by despair. Nor had they
time to recur, as he came soon within fight of
the coast of Spain, when all their fears and fut-
ferings ended h.

h Herrera, dec. . lib. iii c. . Life of Colombus,
c. 64.

COLUNMBUS

BOOK II. COLUMBUS appeared at court with the modet

1496. but determined confidence of a man conscious

His recep-
tiontthe. not only of integrity, but of having performed

great services. Ferdinand and Isabella, ashamed
ds their own facility in lending too favourable
an ear to frivolous or ill-founded accusations,
received him with such distinguished marks of
refpeEt, as covered his enemies with shame.
Their censures and calumnies were no more
heard of at that juncture. The goldj the pearls,
the cotton, and other commodities of value
which Columbus produced, seemed fully to
refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpet to the poverty of the country. By
reducing the Indians to obedience, and imposing
a regular tax upon them, he had securcd to
Spain a large accession of new subjes, and the
establishment of a revenue that prornifed to be
considerable. By the mines which he had found
out and examined, a source of wealth still more
copious was opened. Great and unexpected ai
those advantages were, Columbus represented
them only as preludes to future acquisitions,
and as the earnest of more important discoveries,
which he still meditated, and to which those lIe
had already made would conduct him with ease
and certainty'.

i Life of Columbus, c. 65. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii.
C. I.

Ti

THE attentive consideration of all these cir- BooK It.

cumftances made such impreflion, not only A pi,4n96.
upon Isabella, who was flattered with the idea formed for

the more re-

of being the patroness of all Columbus's enter- bii/mcr.nt of
prises, but even upon Ferdinand, who having a coloy.
originally exprefed his disapprobation of his
schemes, was fill apt to doubt of their success,
that they resolved to supply the colony in His-
paniola with every thing which could render it
a permanent establishment, and to furnish Co-
lumbus with such a fleet, that he might proceed
to learch for those new countries, of whose
existence he seemed to be confident. The
measures most proper for accomplilhing both
these designs were concerted with Columbus.
Discovery had been the sole object of the first
voyage to the New World; and though, in the
second, settlement had been proposcd, the pre-
cautions taken for that purpose had either been
insufficient, or were rendered ineffectual by the
mutinous spirit of the Spaniards, and the un-
forefcen calamities arising from various causes.
Now a plan was to be formed of a regular co-
lony, that might serve as a model in all future
eftablilhments. Every particular was confidered
with attention, and the whole arranged with a
scrupulous accuracy. The precise number of
adventurers who hould be permitted to embark
was fixed. They were to be of different ranks

and

oocK u. and profellions; and the proportion of each was

1496. established, according to their usefulness and

the wants of the colony. A suitable number of
women was to be chosen to accompany thefi
new settlers. As it was the first objct to raise
provisions in a country where scarcity of food
had been the occasion of so much diftrels, a
considerable body of husbandmen was to be
carried over. As the Spaniards had then no
conception of deriving any benefit from those
productions of the New World which have since
yielded such large returns of wealth to Europe,
but had formed magnificent ideas, and enter.
tained sanguine hopes with refpet to the riches
contained in the mines which had been disco.
vered, a band of workmen, skilled in the various
arts employed in digging and refining the pre.
cious metals, was provided. All these emigrants
were to receive pay and subsistence for some
years, at the public expence k.
Adefceain THus far the regulations were prudent, and

well adapted to the end in view. But as it was
foreseen that few would engage voluntarily to
fettle in a country, whose noxious climate had
been fatal to so many of their countrymen, Co.
lumbus proposed to transport to Hifl)aniola

k Herrera, dec. x. lib. iii. c. a.

fLIllh

such malefactors as had been convicted of BOO.
crimes, which, though capital, were of a less 496.
atrocious nature; and that for the future a
certain proportion of the offenders usually sent
to the gallies, should be condemned to labour
in the mines which were to be opened. This
advice, given without due reflection, was as
inconsiderately adopted. The prisons of Spain
were drained, in order to collect members for
the intended colony; and the judges were in-
itruted to recruit it by their future sentences.
It is not, however, with such materials, that
the foundations of a society, destined to be
permanent, hould be laid. Industry, iobriety,
patience, and mutual confidence are indifpin-
fably requifire in an infant settlement, where
purity of morals mufi contribute more towards
eftablilhing order, than the operation or autho-
rity of laws. But when such a mixture of
what is corrupt is admitted into the original
constitution of the political body, the vices of
those unsound and incurable members will pro-
bably insea the whole, and must certainly be
produftive of violent and unhappy effects.
This the Spaniards fatally experienced; and
the other European nations having fucceflively
imitated the practice of Spain in this parti-
!ular, pernicious consequences have followed

VOL. I, Q

BOOK 1. in their settlements, which can be imputed to

1496. no other caul '.
floxted THOUGH Columbus obtained, with grea

facility and dispatch, the royal approbation
every mcalure and regulation that he propol1.!
his endeavours to carry them into exccutio:
were so long retarded, as mull have tired 0t;
the patience of any man, less accustomed t
encounter and to surmount difficulties. Tho0i
delays were occasioned partly by that tdious
formality and spirit of procratfination, \svi
which the Spaniards conduc business; air
partly by the exhausted state of the trealury
which was drained by the expence of celebra:
ing the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella'!
only son with Margaret of Austria, and that o
Joanna, their second daughter, with Phi'l;
archduke of Austria "; but must be chiefly im
puted to the malicious arts of Columbus's
enemies. Astonishcd at the reception which
he met with upon his return, and overawed by
his preience, they gave way, for some time, to
a tide of favour too strong for them to oose
Their enmity, however, was too inveterate t

i Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. z. Tourin IIit. Ccncr
de 1'Amerique, i. p. 51.

P. Martyr, cpift. 168.

ro.ci~
i

remain long inacive. They resumed their BOOK
operations, and by the affiflance of Fonseca, the X496.
minister for Indian affairs, who was now pro-
moted to the bishopric of Badajos, they threw
in so many obtacles to protract the prepara-
tions for Columbus's xpedition, that a year
elapsed before he ° could procure two Ihips to
carry over a part of the supplies destined for
the colony, and almost two years were spent
before the small squadron was equipped of
which he himself was to take the command .

THIS squadron consisted of fix fllips only, i4v99
of no great burden, and but indifferently pro- age of o.

luirbus.

vided for a hung or dangerous navigation.
The voyage which he now meditated was in a
course different from any he had undertaken.
As he was fully persuaded that the fertile
regions of India lay to the south-west of those
countries which he had discovered, he pro-
posed, as the most certain method of finding
out there, to tand direAtly south from the
Canary or Cape de Verd islands, until he came
under the equinotial line, and then to stretch
to the weft before the favourable wind for such
a course, which blows invariably between the
tropics. With this idea he set fail, and touched May o04

o Life of Columbus, c. 65.
* elrrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9.

0 2 brt

BooK 11. first at the Canary, and then at the Cape de

149.; Verd islands. From the former he dilpatched
july 4.

three of his hips with a supply of provisions
for the colony in Hispaniola: with the ether
three, he continued his voyage towards the
south. No remarkable occurrence happened
until they arrived within five degrees of the
july 19. line. There they were becalmed, and at the

fame time the heat became so excessive, that
many of their wine casks burst, the liquor in
others oured, and their provisions corrupted'
The Spaniards, who had never ventured o fr
to the south, were afraid that the ships would
take fire, and began to apprehend the reality
of what the ancients had taught concerning
the dftrutive qualities of that torrid region
of the globe. They were relieved, in some
measure, from their fears by a seasonable fall
of rain. This, however, though so heavy and
unintermitting that the men could hardly keep
the deck, did not greatly mitigate the inten*.
ness of the heat. The admiral, who with his
usual vigilance had in person direced every
operation, from the beginning of the voyage,
was so much exhausted by fatigue and want
of sleep, that it brought on a violent fit of the
gout, accompanied with a fever. All therf

P P. Martyr, dec. p. 70.

circuinf

circumstances confrained him to yield to the BOOK 0.
importunities of his crew, and to alter his 1498.
course to the north weft, in order to reach
some of the Caribbee ilands, where he might
refit, and be supplied with provisions.

ON the first of August, the man fiationed in Dircovers

the conti-

the round top surprised them with the joyful nent of A.
cry of land. They flood towards it, and dif-
covered a considerable island, which the ad-
miral called Trinidad, a name it Rill retains.
It lies on the coast of Guiana, near the mouth
of the Orinoco. This, though a river only of
the third or fourth magnitude in the New World,
far furpafles any of the streams in our hemi-
sphere. It rolls towards the ocean such a vail
body of water, and rushes into it with such
impetuous force, that when it meets the tide,
which on that coast rites to an uncommon
height, their collision occasions a swell and
agitation of the waves no less surprising than
formidable. In this conflit, the irresistible
torrent of the river so far prevails, that it
frefliens the ocean many leagues with its flood q.
Columbus, before he could perceive the
danger, was entangled among those adverse
currents and tencqcftuous waves, and it was
with the utmost difficulty that he eicaped

, Gumilla HifL. de I'Orenolue, tom. i. p. 14.

0 3 through

BOOK1. through a narrow flrait, which appeared o

4s. . 'mendous, that he called it La Boca del

Drago. As oon as the consternation which
this occasioned permitted him to reflect uon
the nature of an appearance so extraordinary,
he dilcerned in it a source of comfort and
hope. He jutly concluded, that such a vaR
body of water as this river contained, could
not be supplied by any island, but muf flow
through a country of immense extent, and of
consequence that he was now arrived at that
continent, which it had long been the objec
of his wishes to discover. Full of this idca,
he tsood to the weft along the coat of those
provinces which are now known by the names
of Paria and Cumana. He landed in several
places, and had some intercourse with the
people, who refcmbled thole of Hispaniola in
their appearance and manner of life. They
wore, as orpaments, finall plates of gold, and
pearls of consid-erable value, which they wil.
lingly exchanged for European toys. They
leemed to posiess a better understanding, and
greater courage, than the inhabitants of th:
islands. The country produced four-footec
animals of several kinds, as well as a greit
variety of fowls and fruits'. The admiral was

T Ikerra, dec. . lib. iii. c. , o, i. LieT of (,-
lumibus, c. 6--73.

SO

so much delighted with its beauty and fertility, BOOK 1n
that with the warm enthuiafin of a discoverer, 149 .
he imagined it to be the paradise described in
Scripture, which the Almighty chore for the
residence of man, while he retained innocence
that rendered him worthy of such a habitation'.
Thus Columbus had the glory not only of dif-
covering to mankind the existence of a New
Worlk, but made considerable progress towards
a perse& knowledge of it; and was the first
man who conducted the Spaniards to that vast
continent which has been the chief feat of their
empire, and the source of their treasures in
this quarter of the globe. The shattered con-
dition of his ships, scarcity of provisions, his
own infirmities, together with the impatience
of his crew, prevented him from pursuing his
discoveries any farther, and made it neceflary
to bear away for Hispaniola. In his way
thither he discovered the islands of Cubagua
and Margarita, which afterwards became re-
markable for their pearl-fifhery. When he Aug. 3.
arrived at Hispaniola, he was wafted to an
extreme degree with fatigue and sickness; but
found the affairs of the colony in such a situation
as afforded him no profpec of enjoying that
repose of which he flood so much in need.

' IIerrcrn, dec. . lib. iii. c. 12. Gomara, c. 84.
Sec NOT'E XXf.

04 IMANY

.O OKR1 MANY revolutions had happened in thi

,Stat4f9Hi. country during his absence. His brother the
anrivav^ adelantado, in consequence of an advice which
ernI.· the admiral gave before his departure, had

removed the colony from Isabella to a more
commodious fation, on the opposite fide of
the iland, and laid the foundation of Sr. Do.
mningo", which was long the most considerable
European town in the New World, and the
feat of the supreme courts in the Spanish domi.
nions there. As soon as the Spaniards were
eltablifled in this new settlement, the adelan-
tado, that they might neither languish in in-
aCtivity, nor have leisure to form new cabals,
marched into those parts of the island which his
brother had not yet visited or reduced to obedi-
ence. As the people were unable to resist, they
submitted every where to the tribute which he
imposed. But they oonfound the burden to
be so intolerable, that, overawed as they were by
the superior power of their oppressors, they took
arms against them. Those infurrecions, how-
ever, were not formidable. A confli& with timid
and naked Indians was neither dangerous nor of
doubtful issue.
rutdiy of BUT while the adelantado was employed

againit them in the field, a mutiny, c an

Pu . Martyr, dec. p. 56.

aspet far more alarming, broke out among 0o0 K .
the Spaniards, The ringleader of it was Francis 4.
Roldan, whom Columbus had placed in a
station which required him to be the guardian
of order and tranquillity in the colony. A
turbulent and inconsiderate ambition precipi-
tated him into this desperate measure, so un-
becoming his rank. The arguments which ho
employed to reduce his countrymen were frivo-
lous and ill-founded. He accused Columbus
and his two brothers of arrogance and feve-
rity he pretended that they aimed at eftablifth
ing an independent dominion in the country;
be taxed them with an intention of cutting off
part of the Spaniards by hunger and fatigue,
that they might more easily reduce the re-
mainder to fubjeEtion; he represented it as un-
worthy of Castilians, to remain the tame and
paflive slaves of three Genoese adventurers
As men have always a propensity to impute
the hardships of which they feel the pressure,
to the mifcondua of their rulers; as every
nation views.with a jealous eye the power and
exaltation of foreigners, Roldan's insinuations
made a deep imprefflon on his countrymen.
His character and rank added weight to them.
A considerable number of the Spaniards made
choice of him as their leader, and taking arms
against the adelantado and his brother, seized

5 the

ooKz n the king's magazine of provilsons, and endea
249s. voured to surprise the fort at St. Domingo

This was prCeerved by the vigilance and courage
of Don Diego Columbus. The mutineers
were obliged to retire to the province of Xara.
gua, where they continued not only to difclain
the adelantado's authority themselves, bu. ex.
cited the Indians to throw off the yoke w.

SucH was the diflra&ed slate of the colony

when Columbus landed at St. Domingo. -He
was astonished to find that the three ships which
he had dispatched from the Canaries were not
yet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots,
and the violence of currents, they had been
carried a hundred and sixty miles to the weft
of St. Domingo, and forced to take helter in
a harbour of the province of Xaragua, where
Roldan and his seditious followers were can.
toned. Roldan carefully concealed from the
commanders of the hips his insurrection against
the adelantado, and employing his utmost ad-
dress to gain their confidence, persuaded them
to set on shore a considerable part of the new
settlers whom they brought over, that they
might proceed by land to St. Domingo. It
required but few arguments to prevail with

v Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 5-8. Life of Columbui,
c. 7-77. Gomara, c. z3. 1'. Martyr, p. 7.

tlo!e

tholefmen to epoufe his cause. They were BOOK .
the refuse of the jails of Spain, to whom idle-
ness, licentiousness, and deeds of violence were
familiar; and they returned eagerly to a course
of life nearly resembling that to which they
had been accustomed. The commanders of
the (hips perceiving, when it was too late, their
imprudence in disembarking so many of their
men, flood away for St. Domingo, and got
fate into the port a few days after the admiral;
but their itock of provisions was so wafted
during a voyage of such long continuance, that
they brought little relice to the colony x.
BY this junion with a band of such bold composed

-'J~~~~~~~~~~ by the pru-
and desperate associates, Roldan became ex- dnu oC.

du& of Co.

tremely formidable, and no less extravagant in lumbus
his demands. Columbus, though filled with
resentment at his ingratitude, and highly exaf-
rerated by the inlolence of his followers, made
no haste to take tie field. Ile trembled at
the thoughts of kindling the fames of a civil
war, in which, whatever party prevailed, the
power and strength of both must be so much
walted, as might encourage the common enemy
to unite and complete ticir cftlrution. At
the fame time, he ob!ci-vecd, that the preju-

1 t'rrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. J2. Life of Columbus,
c.7 , 7 .

dices

OK 11. dices and paflions which incited the rebels to
"s take arms, had so far infected those who fill

adhered to him, that many of them were ad.
verse, and all cold to the efrvice. From such
sentiments, with respect to the public interest,
as well as from this view of his own situation,
he choe to negociate rather than to fight. By
a seasonable proclamation, offering free pardon
to such as hould merit it by returning to
their duty, he made impreflion upon ome of
the malcontents. By engaging to grant such
as lhould desire it the liberty of returning to
Spain, he allured all those unfortunate adven.
turers, who, from sickness and disappointment,
were disgusted with the country. By pro.
miling to re-eftablilh Roldan in his former
office, he oothed his pride; and by complying
with most of his demands in behalf of his
followers, he satisfied their avarice. Thus,
gradually and without bloodshed, but after
many tedious negociations, he dissolved this
dangerous combination which threatened the
colony with ruin; and restored the appear
once of order, regular government, and tran-
quillity y.

7 Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 13, 14. Life of Columbus,
C. 80, &c.

IN consequence of this agreement with the BDOoK "
mutineers, lands were allotted them in different A n.4.ode
parts of the ifand, and the Indians fettled in of fete.
each diftri& were appointed to cultivate a cer- buhd.
rain portion of ground for the use of those new
matters. The performance of this work was 1499'
fubfticuted in place of the tribute formerly
imposed and how necetary soever such a
regulation might be in a sickly and feeble
colony, it introduced among the Spaniards the
Repartimientos, or distributions of Indians efta-
blifhed by them in all their settlements, which
brought numberless calamities upon that un-
happy people, and fubjeced them to the most
grievous oppreflion . This was not the only
bad effet of the infurretion in Hispaniola; it
prevented Columbus from prosecuting his dif-
coveries on the continent, as felf-prefervation
obliged him to keep near his person his brother
the adelantado, and the sailors whom he in.
tended to have employed in that service. As
soon as his affairs would permit, he sent some
of his liips to Spain with a journal of the
voyage which he had made, a description of
the new countries which he had discovered, a
chart of the coast along which he had failed,
and specimens of the gold, the pearls; and

Herrcra, dec, I. lib, iii. c. 14, &c.

other

OOK 11. other curious or valuable produtions which e
1499. had acquired by trafficking with the native.

At the fame time he tranfmnitted an account of
the infurreaion in Hispaniola; he accufe.l the
mutineers not only of having thrown the colony
into such violent convulsions as threartned its
dissolution, but of having obltrudt every
attempt towards discovery and improvement,
by their unprovoked rebellion against their
Superiors, and proposed several regulations for
the better government of the island, as well as
the extincion of that mutinous spirit, which,
though suppressed at present, might oon burlt
out with additional rage. Roldan and his also.
ciates did not neglet to convey to Spain, by
the fame Ihips, an apology for their own con.
dut, together with their recriminations upon
the admiral and his brothers. Unfortunately
for the honour of Spain, and the happiness
of Columbus, the latter gained most credit in
the court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and pro-
duced unexpected effects .

The voyage BUT, previous to these, events had happened
of Vasco de
Oama tothe which merit attention, both on account of their
East Indies,
bytheCacpc own importance, and their connecion with
yope. the history of the New World. While Co-

· Herrera, dec. . lib. iii, c, 14. Bcnzon. Hilt. Nov.
Orb. lib. i. c. a.

lumbui

Iunibus was engaged in his fuccefive voyages BOOKI u.
to the wclf, the pirit of diicovery did not 499
languish in Portugal, the kingdom where it
firit acquired vigour, and became enterprising.
Self-condemnation and regret were not the
only sentiments to which the success of Co-
lumbus, and reflection upon their own impru-
dence in rejecting his propolals, gave rile
among the Portuguele. They excited a gene-
rous emulation to furpals his performances, and
an ardent desire to make some reparation to
their country for their own error. With this
view, Emmanuel, who inherited the enter-
prifng genius of his predecessors, persised in
their grand scheme of opening a passage to the
Eall Indips by the Cape of Good Hope; and
soon after his accession to the throne, equipped.
a squadron for that important voyage. He
gave the command of it to Vasco de Gama, a
man of noble birth, possessed of virtue, pru-
dence, and courage, equal to the flation. The
fquadrcn, like all those fitted out for discovery
in the infancy of navigation, was extremely
feeble, confiting only of three vefels, of
neither burden nor force adequate to the ser-
vice. As the Europeans were at that- time.
little acquainted with the course of the trade-
winds and periodical monsoons which render
navigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in

the

IooK n. the sea that separates Africa from India, at

fibme eafons easy, and at others not only clan.
gerous, but almost impradicable, the ti.e
chosen for Gama's departure was the most in-
proper during the whole year. He set f.il
47, from Lisbon on the ninth of July, and tland.

ing towards the south, had to Rruggle for four
months with contrary winds, before he could
Norv. . reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their

violence began to abate; and during ah in.
terval of calm weather, Gama doubled that
formidable promontory, which had bo long
been the boundary of navigation, and direted
his course towards the north-east, along tihe
African coast. He touched at several ports;
and after various adventures, which the Por-
tuguefe historians relate with high but jult
encomiums upon his conduft and intrepidity,
he came to anchor before the city of Melinda,
Throughout all the vast countries which extend
along the coast of Africa, from the river Sene-
gal to the confines of Zanguebar, the Portu.
guefe had found a race of men rude and un-
cultivated, fitrangers to letters, to arts and
commerce, and differing from the inhabitants
of Europe no less in their features and com-
plexion, than in their manners and institutions.
As they advanced from this, they observcd, to
their incxprffible joy, that the human form

graduall

gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic OOK
features began to predominate, marks of civi- 1499.
lization appeared, letters were known, the
Mahometan religion was eftablilhed, and a
commerce, far from being inconsiderable, was
carried on. At that time several vefels from
India were in the port of Melinda. Gama
now pursued his voyage with almost ablolute
certainty of success, and, under the condufc
of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecur, upon
the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-fecond
of May, one thousand four hundred and ninety-
eight. What he beheld of the wealth, the
populousness, the cultivation, the indutry and
arts of this highly civilized country, far fur-
pased any idea that he had formed, from the
imperfet accounts which the Europeans had hi-
therto received of it. But as he possessed nei-
ther sufficient force to attempt a settlement, nor
proper commodities with which he could carry
on commerce of any consequence, he hastened
back to Portugal, with an account of his fuc-
cess in performing a voyage the longest, as well
as mofl difficult, that had ever been made since
the first invention of navigation. He landed at
Lilbon on the fourteenth of September, one
thousand four hundred and ninety-nine, two
years two months and five days from the time he
left that port .

Ramufio, vol. i. 9, D.
VOL. I. THUS;

BOOK . TiHLS, during the course of the fifteenth

3499. century, mankind made greater progress in

exploring the state of the habitable globe, than
in all the ages which had elapsed previous to
that period. The spirit of discovery, feebl:
at first and cautious, moved within a very
narrow sphere, and made its efforts with heG.
tation and tiiidity. Encouraged by fuccels,
it became adventurous, and boldly extended
its operations. In the coure of its progreflon,
it continued to acquire vigour, and advanced
at length with a rapidity and force which buil
through all the limits within which ignorance
and fear had hitherto circumscribed the aivty
of the human race. Almost fifty years were
employed by the Portuguese in creeping along
the coast of Africa from Cape Non to Cape de
Verd, the latter of which lies only twelve
degrees to the south of the former. In leii
than thirty years they ventured beyond the
equinoctial line into another hemisphere, and
penetrated to the southern extremity of Africa,
at the distance of forty-nine degrees from Cape
de Verd. During the last seven years of the
century, a New World was discovered in the
weft, not inferior in extent to all the partsof
the earth with which mankind were at that
time acquainted. In the caRs, unknown lIMs
and countries were found our, and a cornu.

naication,

rication, long desired, but hitherto concealed, BOOK It.
was opened between Europe and the opulent re- 1499.
gions of India. In comparison with events so
wonderfll and unexpeted, all that had hitherto
been deemed great or fptendic, faded away and
disappeared. Vast objects now presented them-
lives. The human mind, rouzed and interested
by the prospect, engaged with ardour in pursuit
of them, and exerted its ative powers in a new
direction.

THIS spirit of enterprise, though but newly Dn^rvtrie
awakened in Spain, began oon to operate cx- si,'" hy
tcnfively. All the attempts towards di'covery p'.tu'c,.d.
made in that kingdom, had hitherto been car-
ried on by Columbus alone, and at the ex-
pence of the overeign. But now private ad-
venturers, allured by the magnificent defcrip-
tions he gave of the regions which he had
visited, as well as by the specimens of their
wealth which he produced, offered to fit otlt
Iquadrons at their own risk, and to go in quell
of new countries. The Spanish court, whose
Icanty revenues were exhausted by the charge
of its expeditions to the New World, which,
though they opened vail prorpcts of future
benefit, yielded a very sparing return of present
profit, was extremely willing to devolve the
burden of difcovcry upon its fubjeas. It seized

P 2 with

'BOOK ' with joy an opportunity of rendering the ava.

3499. rice, the ingenuity, and efforts of projectors,

instrumental in promoting designs of certain
advantage to the public, though of doubtful

eiedo the success with refpet to themselves. One of the
tirft of there.

firlt propositions of this kind was made by
Alonfo de Ojeda, a gallant and aive officer,
who had accompanied Columbus in his fcond
voyage. His rank and character procured him
such credit with the merchants of Seville, that
they undertook to equip four ships, provided
he could obtain the royal licence, authorising
the voyage. The powerful patronage of the
bishop of Badajos easily secured success in a
suit so agreeable to the court. Without con-
fulting Columbus, or regarding the rights and
jurisdiction which he had acquired by the capi.
tulation in one thousand four hundred and
ninety-two, Ojeda was permitted to set out for
the New World. In order to direct his course,
the bishop communicated to him the admiral's
journal of his last voyage, and his charts of
May. the countries which he had discovered. Ojeda

struck out into no new path of navigation, but
adhering servilely to the route which Columbus
had taken, arrived on the coast of Paria. He
traded with the natives, and standing to the well,
proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and ranged
along a-confiderable .extent of coaf beyond that

~~~- ~on

on which Columbus had touched. Having thus BoOKi .
ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that this '499.
country was a part of the continent, Ojeda re-
turned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some Oaober.
reputation as a discoverer, but with little bene-
fit to those who had raised the funds for the ex-
pedition .

AMERIGO VFSPUCCI, a Florentine gentle- I' acbompa.
man, accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In Amerig

Vespucci,

what station he served, is uncertain; but as he
was an experienced sailor, and eminently skilful
in all the sciences subservient to navigation, he
seems to have acquired such authority among
his companions, that they willingly allowed
him to have a chief share in diresting their
operations during the voyage. Soon after his
return, he transmitted an account of his ad-
ventures and discoveries to one of his country-
men; and labouring with the vanity of a
traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had
the address and confidence to frame his narra-
tive, so as to make it appear that he had the
glory of having first discovered the continent
in the New World. Amerigo's account was
drawn up not only with art, but with some
elegance. It contained an amusing history of
his voyage, and judicious observations upon

b Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. , z, 3.

P 3 the

BOOK n. the natural produtions, the inhabitants, and

499- the customs of the countries which he had

visited. As it was the first description of any
part of the New World that was published, a
performance so well calculated to gratify the
pafifo of mankind for what is new and mar.
vellous, circulated rapidly, and was read with

From whom admiration. The country of which Amerigo
the name of
^mndtca i was fuppoled to be the discoverer, came gra-
!ivn to the
Nw World. dually to be called by his name. The capri;e

of mankind, often as unaccountable as unjult,
has perpetuated this error. By the univeifla
content of nations, AMERICA is the name bc-
stowed on this new quarter of the globe. The
bold pretensions of a fortunate impostor have
robbed the discoverer of the New World of a
diftin5ion which belonged to him. The name
of Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbus;
and mankind may regret an a& of injustice,
which, having received the fan&ion of time,
it is now too late to redress'.

Vyageof DURING the fame year, another voyage of
'Nino. discovery was undertaken. Columbus not only

introduced the spirit of naval enterprise into
Spain, but all the first adventurers who diftin
guifhed themselves in this new career, wenr

£ See NOTE XXII.

formc.

formed by his inftrutions, and acquired in oo _.
his voyages the skill and information hich 499.
qualified them to imitate his example. Alonfo
Nigno, who had served under the admiral in
his last expedition, fitted out a single hip, in
conjun&ion with Christopher Guerra, a mer-
chant of Seville, and failed to the coalt of Paria.
This voyage seems to have been conducted
with greater attention to private emolument,
than to any general or national object. Nigno
and Guerra made no discoveries of any import-
ance; but they brought home such a return of
gold and pearls, as inflamed their countrymen
with the desire of engaging in similar adven-
tures .

SooN after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of Jsn.y ,1

Of Vincent

the admiral's companions in his first voyage, Yanz Pin-
failed from Palos with four ships. He stood zos.
boldly towards the south, and was the first
Spaniard who ventured to crors the equinoslial
line; but he seems to have landed on no part
of the coast beyond the mouth of the Marag-
non, or river of the Amazons. All there navi-
gators adopted the erroneous theory of Colum-
bus, and believed that the countries which they
had discovered were part of the vfl continent
of India.

P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. lerrcra, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 5.
l Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.

P 4 DURING

BOOK . DURING the last year of ithe fifteenth cen.

hsoo. tury, that fertile district of America, on the

The Porru-
gucfe disco- confines of which Pinzon had ftopt hort, was
vcr liralil.

more fully discovered. The fucccfsful voyae
of Gama to the Eaf' Indies having encourage
the king of Portugal to fit out a fleet so power.
ful, as not only to carry on trade, but
attempt conquest, he gave the command of ,
to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In order to avcid
the coast of Africa, where he was certain of
meeting with variable breezes, or frequent
calms, which might retard his voyage, Cabral
flood out to ea, and kept so far to the \:t,
that, to his surprise, he found himself upcn
the ihore of an unknown country, in t c tenth
degree beyond the line. He imagined, at fii,
that it was ome ifand in the Atlantic ocean
hitherto unobserved; but, proceeding along
its coast for fcveral days, he was led graduaily
to believe, that a country so extensive formed
a part of some great continent. This latter
opinion was well founded. The country with
which he fell in belongs to that province in
South America, now known by the name o!
Brasil. He landed; and having formed a very
high idea of the fertility of the foil, and arc:.
ablenciS of the climate, he took pofcftion (:t t
for the crown of ortugal, and clili;atchli ;
ship to Lifbun with an account of this ecvc,

_vl.kL-,

which appeared to be no less important than Boogn.
it was unexpeced f. Columbus's discovery of 5so.
the New World was the effort of an ative
genius, enlightened by science, guided by ex-
perience, and aing upon a regular plan, exe-
cuted with no less courage than perseverance.
But from this adventure of the Portuguese, it
appears that chance might have accomplished
that great design, which it is now the pride of
human reason to have formed and perfected.
If the sagacity of Columbus had not conducted
mankind to America, Cabral, by a fortunate
accident, might have led them, a few years
later, to the knowledge of that extensive con-
tinent .

WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by Machina-

tionsagaini

those fucccffive voyages, were daily acquiring Colunimbu.
more enlarged ideas of the extent and opulence
of that quarter of the globe which Columbus
had made known to them, he himself, far from
enjoying the tranquillity and honours with
which his services shou'd have been recom-
pcnlld, was struggling with every distress in
which the envy and malevolence of the people
unler his command, or the ingratitude of the
cmurc which he frved, could involve him.

s Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 7.
* Alccra, dec. . lib. vii. c. 5.

Though

OOK I. rThough the pacification with Roldan brok

. the union and weakened the force of the mut:

ieers, it did not extirpate the feeds of difcor
out of the island. Several of the malcontent
continued in arms, refuting to submit to th
admiral. He and his brothers were oblige
to take the field alternately, in order to checl
their incursions, or to punish their crimes
The perpetual occupation and disquiet whic]
this created, prevented him from giving du
attention to the dangerous machinations of hi
enemies in the court of Spain. A good numbe
of such as were most dissatisfied with his admi
niftration, had embraced the opportunity o
returning to Europe with the hips which hi
dispatched from St. Domingo. The final dif
appointment of all their hopes inflamed the
rage of there unfortunate adventurers againf
Columbus to the utmost pitch. Their povert)
and distress, by exciting companion, renderec
their accusations credible, and their complaints
interesting. They teazed Ferdinand and Ila.
bella inceflantly with memorials, containing
the detail of their own grievances, and the
articles of their charge against Columbus.
Whenever either the king or queen appeared
in public, they surrounded them in a tu:rul-
tuary manner, infifing with importunate cla-
mours for payment of the arrears due to them,

and

and demanding vengeance upon the author of Boo0 K.
their sufferings. They insulted the admiral's '5s0
sons wherever they met them, reproaching
them as the offspring of the projecor, whose
fatal curiosity had discovered those pernicious
regions which drained Spain of its wealth, and
would prove the grave of its people. These
avowed endeavours of the malcontents from
America to ruin Columbus, were seconded by
the secret, but more dangerous insinuations of
that party among the courtiers, which had
always thwarted his schemes, and envied his
iUccefs and credit h.

FERDINAND was disposed to liften, not only Their in-

fluence a
with a willing, but with a partial ear, to these Ferdicnd

and Ifsbca&

accusations. Notwithstanding the flattering
accounts which Columbus had given of the
riches of America, the remittances from it
had hitherto been so scanty, that they fell far
thort of defraying the expence of the arma-
ments fitted out. The glory of the discovery,
together with the prolpet of remote commer.
cial advantages, was all that Spain had yet re-
ceived in return for the efforts w.ch fle had
made. But time had already d. iflicd the
firit lenfations of joy which the dii, vcry of a

b Life of Columbus, c. 85.

New

BO K 11 New World occasioned, and fame alone was

ZSO°P not an object to satisfy the cold interested mind

of Ferdinand. The nature of commerce was
then so little understood, that, where in-me.
diate gain was not acquired, the hope of distant
benefit, or of flow and moderate returns,
was totally disregarded. Ferdinand confidered
Spain, on this account, as having loft by the
enterprise of Columbus, and imputed it to his
mifconduc and incapacity for government, that
a country abounding in gold had yielded no.
thing of value to its conquerors. Even Ifa-
bella, who, from the favourable opinion which
{he entertained of Columbus, had uniformly
protected him, was shaken at length by the
number and boldness of his accusers, and began
to fufpec that a difaffecion so general mft
have been occasioned by real grievances, which
called for redress. The bishop of Badajos,
with his usual animosity against Columbus,
encouraged these suspicions, and confirmed
them.

Fatal efircs As oon as the queen began to give way to
of this.

the torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to
Columbus was taken. Francis de Bovadilla,
a knight of Calatrava, was appointed t repair
to H-ilpaniola, with full powers to inquire into
the conduct of Columbus, and, if he nliil

inJ

find the charge of mal-administration proved, BoOK
to supersede him, and assume the government 350o.
of the ifand. It was impossible to escape con-
demnation, when this preposterous commission
made it the interest of the judge to pronounce
the peroln whom he was sent to try, guilty.
Though Columbus had now composed all the
dissentions in the island; though he had brought
both Spaniards and Indians to submit peace-
ably to his government; though he had made
such effectual provision for working the mines,
and cultivating the country, as would have
secured a considerable revenue to the king, as
well as large profits to individuals, Bovadilla,
without deigning to attend to the nature or
merit of those services, discovered, from the
moment that he landed in Hispaniola, a deter-
mined purpose of treating him as a criminal.
He took poffefion of the admiral's house in
St. Domingo, from which its master happened
at that time to be absent, and seized his effets,
as if his guilt had been already fully proved;
he rendered himself master of the fort and of
the king's fiores by violence; he required all
persons to acknowledge him as supreme gover-
nor; he set at liberty the prisoners confined by
the admiral, and summoned him to appear
before his tribunal, in order to answer for his
conduct; transmitting to him, together with

5 the

BOOK 1. the summons, a copy of the royal mandate, ,

·oo. which Columbus was enjoined to yield inplici

obedience to his commands.

Cdumbus COLUMBUS, though deeply affeced with t!.
tent in
~ain, co ingratitude and injultice of Ferdinand and lid-

bella, did not hesitate a moment about his own
conduct. He ubmitted to the will of his lb-
vercigns with a refpctful silence, and repaired
direaly to the court of that violent and partial
judge whom they had authorised to try him.
Bovadilla, without admitting him into his pre-
fence, ordered him instantly to be arrefrtd,
to be loaded with chains, and hurried on
Odaobcr. board a hip. Even under this humiliating re-

verse of fortune, the firmness of mind whica
difinguifhes the charafter of Columbus, did
not forsake him. Conscious of his own inte-
grity, and solacing himself with refleting upon
the great things which he had achieved, he en-
dured this insult offered to his charaEter, rot
only with composure, but with dignity. Nor
had he the consolation of sympathy to mitigate
his fuffcrings. Bovadilla had already renc'c;cd
himself so extremely popular, by granting va-
rious immunities to the colony, by liberal Jo-
nations of Indians to all who applied for thnm,
and by relaxing the reins of dilcipline and go-
vernncnt, that the Spaniards, who were nmofil

advcnru:'c ,

adventurers, whom their indigence or crimes BOOK .
had impelled to abandon their native country, ,50
cxprefsed the most indecent satisfaction with the
disgrace and imprisonment of Columbus. They
flattered themselves, that now they should en-
joy an uncontroulcd liberty, more suitable to
their disposition and former habits of life.
Among persons thus prepared to censure the
proceedings, and to asperse the chara&er of
Columbus, Bovadilla colleced materials for a
charge against him. All accusations, the most
improbable, as well as inconsistent, were re-
ceived. No informer, however infamous, was
rejected. The result of this inquest, no less in-
decent than partial, he transmitted to Spain.
At the fame time, he ordered Columbus, with
his two brothers, to be carried thither in fetters
and, adding cruelty to insult, he confined them
in different ships, and excluded them from the
comfort of that friendly intercourse which might
have oothed their common distress. But while
the Spaniards in Hispaniola viewed the arbitrary
and insolent proceedings of Bovadilla with a ge-
neral approbation, which reflects dishonour upon
their name and country, one man fill retained a
proper sense of the great ations which Colum-
bus had performed, and was touched with the
fcntiments of veneration and pity due to his
rink, his age, and his merit. Alonfo de Val-

lejo,

BOOK It. jo, the captain of the veflEl on board which

1sos. the admiral was confined, as oon as he was clear

of the island, approached his prisoner with great
respect, and offered to release him from the
fetters with which he was unjustly loaded.
'- No," replied Columbus, with a generous in.
dignation, " I wear these irons in confcquence
of an order from my sovereigns. They hall
find me as obedient to this as to their other in.
juntions. By their command I have been con-
fined, and their command alone hall fct me at
liberty '."

Nov. 23. FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was ex-
Set at liber-
ty, hut de- tremely hort. As oon as Ferdinand and Ifa-
pnrivcd of all
authority. bella were informed that Columbus was brought

home a prisoner, and in chains, they perceived
at once what universal astonishment this event
must occasion, and what an imprefflon to their
ditsdvantage it must make. All Europe, they
foresaw, would be filled with indignation at this
ungenerous requital of a man who had per-
formed ations worthy of the highest recom-
pence, and would exclaim against the injustice
of the nation, to which he had been such an
eminent benefa6tor, as well as against the in-

Life of Columbus, c. 86. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c.
3.-I1. Gomara Hitt. c. 23. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.

gratitude

gratitude of the princes whose reign he had ren- BOOKI
dcred illustrious. Afhaimed of their own con- sco.
ducl, and eager not only to make omer repara-
tion for this injury, but to efface the stain which
it might fix upon their charaócr, they instantly
ifTued orders to set Columbus at liberty, invited Dc. 17.
him to court, and remitted money to enable
him to appear there in a manner suitable to his
rank. When he entered the royal presence, Co-
lumbus threw himself at the feet of his fove-
reigns. He remained for ome time silent; the
various passions which agitated his mind sup-
prefing his power of utterance. At length he
recovered himself, and vindicated his conduct
in a long dilcourte, producing the most satisfy-
ing proofs of his own integrity as well as good
intention, and evidence, no less clear, of the ma-
levolence of his enemies, who, not satisfied
with having ruined his fortune, laboured to de-
prive him of what alone was now left, his ho-
nour and his fame. Ferdinand received hm with
decent civility, and Isabella with tenderness and
rerpet. They both exprefred their sorrow for
what had happened, disavowed their knowledge
of it, and joined in promising him prote&cior
and future favour. But though they inltantly
degraded Bovadilla, in order to remove sion
themselves any fulicion of having authorised his
violent proceedings, they did not reilore to Co-

VoL. I. Q
. libus

BOOK I.m lumbus his jurifdifion and privileges as viceroy

aIoo. of those countries which he had discovered.

Though willing to appear the avengers of Co.
lumbus's wrongs, that illiberal jealousy whliic
prompted them to invet Bovadilla with such
authority as put it in his power to treat the
admiral with indignity fill fubfilted. They were
afraid to trust a man to whom they had beenlb
highly indebted, and retaining him at court un.
der various pretexts, they appointed Nicholas
de Ovando, a knight of the military order or
Alcantara, governor of Hispaniola k.

COLUMBUS was deeply affeEted with this new

injury, which came from hands that seemed to
be employed in making reparation for his pall
sufferings. The sensibility with which great
minds feel every thing that implies any fulpicin
of their integrity, or that wears the afpeEt of an
affront, is exquisite. Columbus had experienced
both from the Spaniards; and their ungenerous
conduct exasperated him to such a degree, that
he could no longer conceal the sentiments which
it excited. Wherever he went, he carried about
with him, as a memorial of their ingratitude,
those fetters with which he had been loaded.

k I-erroa, dec. I. lib. iv. c. o1.-2z. Life of Co!:sl
bus, c. 87.

'1 i,.'

They were constantly hung up in his chamber, BOOK .
and he gave orders that when he died they hould
b: buried in his grave '.

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, not- ,o.

witlSftanding die fcvere check which it received difogve y.
by the ungenerous treatment of the man, who
firt excited it in Spain, continued active and
vigorous. Roderigo de Baffidas, a perlbn of
dillincion, fitted out two hips in co-partnery January.
with John de la Cosa, who having served under
til admiral in two of his voyages, was deemed
the most skilful pilot in Spain. They fleered
directly towards the continent, arrived on the
coast of Paria, and proceeding to the welf, dif-
covered all the coast of the province now known
by the name of Tierra Firme, from Cape de
Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not long after
Ojeda, with his former associate Amerigo Ve-
fpucci, set out upon a econd voyage, arid
being unacquainted with the destination of
Baffidas, held the fame course, and touched at
the fame places. The voyage of Baftidas was
prosperous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unfor-
tunate. But both tended to increase the ardour
of discovery; for in proportion as the Spaniards
acquired a more extensive knowledge of the

Life of Columbus, c. 86. p. 577.

Q 2 American

BOOK f1. American continent, their idea of its opulence

I5Cl' and fertility increased m

Ovando ap- BEFORE these adventurers returned from their
pointed go-
vernori o voyages, a leet was equipped, at the public e.
I-Iipaniola.

pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new ?.
vernor, to HiJpaniola. His presence there w.vs
extremely requisite, in order to stop the incon.
fiderare career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent
administration threatened the settlement with
ruin. Conscious of the violence and iniquity
of his proceedings against Columbus, he on-
tinued to make it his sole object to gain the fa.
vour and support of his countrymen, by ac.
commodating himself to their passions and pre-
judices. With this view, he established regu.
lations, in every point the reverse of thuol
which Columbus deemed essential to the pro-
fperity of the colony. Instead of the evere iif
cipline, necessary in order to habituate the
dissolute and corrupted members of which the
ociety was composed to the restraints of law
and subordination, he suffered them to enjoy
such uncontrouled licence, as encouraged the
wildest excesses. Instead of protecing the In-
dians, he gave a legal sanction to the opprefirn
of that unhappy people. He took the exalt

liefrrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 1.

i n!: 1 : 1

number of such as survived their past calami- BOOK .
ties, divided them into diftin6t classes, diftri- 'f'
bited them in property among his adherents,
and reduced all the people of the island to a
state of complete servitude. As the avarice of
the Spaniards was too rapacious and impatient
to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this ervitude became as
grievous as it was unjust. The Indians were
driven in crowds to the mountains, and com-
pelled to work in the mines by matters, who
imposed their tasks without mercy or discretion.
Labour, so disproportioned to their strength
and former habits of life, wafted that feeble race
of men, with such rapid consumption, as muff
have oon terminated in the utter extinction of
the ancient inhabitants of the country n.

THE neceflity of applying a speedy remedy New regula.

to those disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. bliihed.
He had the command of the most refpedable
armament hitherto fitted out for the New
World. It confited of thirty-two hips, on
board of which two thousand five hundred per-
sons embarked, with an intention of feetling in
the country. Upon the arrival of the new go- 5so2.

" Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. , &c. Oviedo Iift. lib.
ii. c. 6 . 97. c. Brnon. Hil. lib, i. c. 12. p. 51.

Q 3 vernor

BOOK I1. vernor with this powerful reinforcement to the

zio. colony, Bovadilla resigned his charge, and was

commanded to return inflantly to Spain, in
order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, and
the other ringleaders o the mutineers, who had
been most ative in oppoting Columbus, were
required to leave the island at the fane time.
A proclamation was issued, declaling the na-
tives to be free fubjecs of Spain, of whom no
service was to be exaaed contrary to their own
inclination, and without paying them an ade-
quate price for their labour. With refpe to
the Spaniards themfclves, various regulations
were made, tending to suppress the licentious
spirit which had been so fatal to the colony, and
to eftablifll that reverence for law and order on
which society is founded, and to which it is in-
debted for its increase and stability. In order
to limit the exorbitant gain which private per.
sons were fuppoled to make by working the
mines, an ordinance was published, directing
all the gold to be brought to a public smelting.
house, and declaring one half of it to be the
property of the crown °.

The dif- WHILE these fleps were taking for securing
*greexh':e fituationoF the tranquillity and welfare of the colony which
Columbus.

o Solorzano Politica Indiana, lib. i. c. z. IIerrera
dec. . lib. iv. c. z.

Columbus

Columbus had planted, he himself was engaged BOOK ;
in the unpleasant employment of soliciting the 50o1.
favour of an ungrateful court, and, notwith-
standing all his merit and services, he solicited
in vain. He demanded, in terms of the ori-
ginal capitulation in one thousand four hundred
and ninety-two, to be reinltated in his office of
viceroy over the countries which he had disco.
vered. By a strange fatality, the circumstance
which he urged in support of his claim, de-
termined a jealous monarch to rejct it. The
greatness of his discoveries, and the profpe&t of
their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider
the conceflions in the capitulation as extrava-
gant and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting
a subjet with the exercise of a jurisdiction that
now appeared to be so extremely extensive, and
might grow to be no less formidable. He in-
spired Isabella with the fame suspicions; and
under various pretexts, equally frivolous and
unjust, they eluded all Columbus's requisitions
to perform that which a solemn treaty bound
them to accomplish. After attending the court
of Spain for near two years, as an humble
suitor, he found it impotfible to remove Ser,
dinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and
perceived, at length, that he laboured in vain,
when he urged a claim of justice or merit with
an interested and unfeeling prince.

Q 4 BUT

sOOK 1. BUT even this ungenerous return did not dif-
He ors courage him from purifuing the great object
nwdrSchermc which first called forth his inventive genius, and

excited him to attempt cdicovery. To op-.n a
new paTage to the Eaf Indies was his origilnal
and favourite scheme. This still engronCll hIs
thoughts; and either from his own olervations
in his voyage to Paria, or from some oblcure
hint of the natives, or from the accounts given
by Baftidas and de la Cosa, of their expedition,
he conceived an opinion that, beyond the coln-
tinent of America, there was a ea which ex-
tended to the Ealt Indies, and hoped to find
tome firait or narrow neck of land, by which a
communication might be opened with it and
the part of the ocean already known. By a
very fortunate conjeture, he supposed this strait
or ithlmus to be situated near the gulf of
Darien. Full of this idea, though he was now
of an advanced age, worn out with fatigue, and
broken with infirmities, he offered, with the
alacrity of a youthful adventurer, to undertake
a voyage which would ascertain this important
point, and perfect the grand scheme which from
the beginning he proposed to accomplish. Se-
veral circurnftances concurred in disposing Ser-
dinand and Ifibella to lend a favourable ar to
this proposal. They were glad to have the
pretext of any honourable employment for re-

5 movir.

moving from court a man with whose demands BOOK .
they deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose 50s.
services it was indecent to negle&. Though
unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not
inlenfible of his merit, and from their experience
of his skill and conduct, had reason to give
credit to his conjectures, and to confide in his
success. To these considerations, a third mufl
be added of still more powerful influence. About
this time the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral,
arrived from the Indies; and, by the richness
of its cargo, gave the people of Europe a more
perfet idea. than they had hitherto been able
to form, of the opulence and fertility of the east.
The Portuguese had been more fortunate in
their discoveries than the Spaniards. They had
opened a communication with countries where
industry,' arts, and elegance flourihed; and
where commerce had been longer established,
and carried to greater extent, than in any region
of the earth. Their first voyages thither yielded
immediate, as well as vast returns of profit, in
commodities extremely precious and in great
request. Lisbon became immediately the feat
of commerce and of wealth; while Spain had
only the expectation of remote benefit, and of
future gain, from the western world. Nothing,
then, could be more acceptable to the Spa-
niards than Columbus's offer to conduct them

to

o OK II to the east, by a route which he expeted to bx
1so. ihorter, as well as less dangerous, than that

which the Portuguese had taken. Even Ser.
dinand was routed by such a profpeat, and
warmly approved of the undertaking.

1T4, fourth BUT, interesting as the objet of this voyage
woyaqe.

was to the nation, Columbus could procure
only four small barks, the largest of which did
not exceed seventy tons in burden, for per-
forming it. Accultomed to brave danger, and
to engage in arduous undertakings with inade-
quate force, he did not hesitate to accept the
command of this pitiful squadron. His brother
Bartholomew, and his second ion Ferdinand,
the historian of his aions, accompanied him.
He failed from Cadiz on the ninth of May, and
touched, as usual, at the Canary Illands; from
thence he purposed to have flood directly for
the continent; but his largest veel was o
clumsy and unfit for service, as conitrained him
to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of ex-
changing her for ome hip of the fleet that had
carried out Ovando. When lie arrived off St.
June 19.

Domingo, he found eighteen of these flfips
ready loaded, and on the point of departing tor
Spain. Columbus immediately acquainted the
governor with the deltination of his voyage,
and the accident which hd obliged him to alter

Ills

his route. He requested permission to enter BOO K IT.
the harbour, not only that he might negociate 5'
the exchange of his ship, but that he might
take shelter during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from various
prognostics, which his experience and sagacity
had taught him to oblirve. On that account,
he advised him likcwile to put off for omer
days the departure of the fleet bound for Spain.
But Ovando refused his request, and despised
his counlel. Under circumstances in which
humanity would have afforded refuge to a ftran-
grr, Columbus was denied admittance into a
country of which he had discovered the existence,
and acquired the poflelion. His salutary warn-
ing, which merited the greatefl attention, was
regarded as the dream of a visionary prophet,
who arrogantly pretended to predict an event
beyond the reach of human foresight. The
fleet set fail for Spain. Next night the hurri-
cane came on with dreadful impetuosity. Co-
lumbus, aware of the danger, took precautions
against it, and saved his little squadron. The
fleet delfined for Spain met with the fate which
the rafinefs and obstinacy of its commanders
delerved. Of eighteen (hips two or three only
escaped. In this general wreck perilhed Bova-
dilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those
who had been the most aive in persecuting

Columbus,

BOOK l. Columbus, and oppressing the Indians. To;

gether with themselves, all the wealth which
they had acquired by their injustice and cruelty
was swallowed up. It exceeded in value two
hundred thousand pesos; an immense fum at
that period, and sufficient not only to have
screened them from any severe scrutiny into
their conduct, but to have secured them a gra.
cious reception in the Spanish court. Among
the lhips that escaped, one had on board all the
effects of Columbus which had been recovered
from the ruins of his fortune. Historians,
itruck with the exa& discrimination of cha.
rafters, as well as the just distribution of re-
wards and punishments, conspicuous in thole
events, universally attribute them to an imme-
diate interposition of divine Providence, in
order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man,
and to punilh the oppressors of an innocent
people. Upon the ignorant and superstitious
race of men, who were witnesses of this occur-
rence, it made a different impression. Frorn
an opinion, which vulgar admiration is apt to
entertain with refpe& to persons who have di-
ttinguifhed themselves by their sagacity and in-
ventions, they believed Columbus to be 1ps-
fefled of supernatural powers, and imaginld
that he had conjured up this dreadful florm bs

magicl

magical art, and incantations, in order to be nBOOK
avenged of his enemies P. .50o.

COLUMBUS soon left Hispaniola, where he met Tuy 4.
with ftch an inhospitable reception, and stood vain for a

p'IaK to

towards the continent. After a tedious and the Indin
dangerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an
illand not far distant from the coast of Hon-
duras. There he had an interview with some
inhabitants of the continent, who arrived in a
large canoe. They appeared to be a people
more civilized, and who had made greater pro-
grefs in the knowledge of useful arts, than any
whom he had hitherto discovered. In return
to the inquiries which the Spaniards made, with
their usual eagerness, concerning the places
where the Indians got the gold which they wore
by way of ornament, they directed them to
countries situated to the weft, in which gold
was found in such profusion, that it was applied
to the most common uses. Inflead of fleering
in quest of a country so inviting, which would
have conducted him along the coast of Yucatan
to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was so
bent upon his favourite scheme of finding out
the firair which he supposed to communicate
with the Indiah ocean, that he bore away to the

P Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. Herrera, dec. I. lib. v.
C. i, z, Life of Columbus, c. 8.

calt

BOOK 1 east towards the gulf of Darien. In this navi

·50. gation he discovered all the coast of the con:;

nent, from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbc.:;
which, on account of its beauty and fecuri.,
he called Porto Bello. He searched, in vain,
for the imaginary strait, through which he ex-
pecled to make his way into an unknown ira;
and though he went on shore several times, and
advanced into the country, he did not penetrate
so far as to cross the narrow isthmus which fe.
parates the gulf of Mexico from the great
southern ocean. He was so much delightcu,
however, with the fertility of the country, and
conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that
he resolved to leave a small colony upon the

w ~ river Belem, in the province of Veragua, under
s53. the command of his brother, and to return him-

self to Spain, in order to procure what was re-
quifite for rendering the eftablifmrent perma-
nent. But the ungovernable spirit of the peo-
ple under his command, deprived Columbus of
the glory of planting the first colony on the con-
tinent of America. Their inlblence and rapaci-
oufnefs provoked the natives to take arms, and
as thelf were a more hardy and warlike race of
men than the inhabitants of the islands, they
cut off part of the Saniardcs, and obliged the

reft

reft to abandon a llation which was found to be BOK o I .
untenable q 15o;.
THis repulf, the first that the Spaniards s.,irwrrck-

cd on tle

met with fom any of the American nations, c. o ja-
was not tlh oncly misfortune that besel Colum-
bus; it was followed by a fucccflion of all the
difters to which navigation is exposed. Fu-
rious hurricanes, with violent florms of thun-
der and lightning, threatened his leaky vessels
,;li deftruciion; while his discontented crew,
cxhaufted with fatiub, and deftiture of provi-
sions, was unwilling or unable to execute his
(cummanss. One of his hips perished; he was
cbiiged to abandon another, as unfit for ser-
vice; and with the two which remained hee
quitted that part of the continent which in his
anguih hle named the Coast of Vexation ', and
bore away for Hilpaniola. New cliftrelecs
awaited him in this voyage. Ile was driven
back by a violent tempest from the coast of-
Cuba, his ships fell foul of one anotler, and
wcre so much flattered by the shock, that with
the utmost difficulty they reached Jamaica, Jun 24.
where he was obliged to run them aground,
to prevent them from finking. The measure

l Iktrrera, dec. i. lib. . c. , &c. Life of Colum-
bus,c. 89, &c. Oviedo, lib. iii, c. 9.
' La Colt de los Contralles.

Of

BOOK i. of his calamities seemed now to be full. H

sos. was cast ahore upon an island at a confiderabl

distance from the only settlement of the Sp,
niards in America. His hips were ruic;
beyond the possibility of being repaired. T,
convey an account of his situation to Ilii,
niola, appeared impracticable; and without thi
it was vain to expect relief. His genius, fr
tile in resources, and most vigorous in thorf
perilous extremities when feeble minds abando:
themselves to despair, discovered the only cx
pedient which afforded any profpet of deli
verance. He had recourse to the holpit ibi
kindness of the natives, who confidering tlit
Spaniards as beings of a superior nature, we
eager, on every occasion, to minister to the!
wants. From them he obtained two of thi:
canoes, each formed out of the trunk of a ingle
tree, hollowed with fire, and so mif-flapen and
aukward as hardly to merit the name of boats,
In there, which were fit only for creeping along
the coast, or crossing from one fide of a bay to
another, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Filclii, a
Genoese, two gentlemen particularly attached
to Columbus, gallantly offered to set out for
Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above thirty
leagues'. This they accomplifled in ten days,

° Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9.

aftcr

after furmnounting incredible dangers, and en- BooK n
duringfuch fatigue, that everal of the Indians so3.
who accompanied them funk under it, and died.
''he attention paid to them by the governor of
Hilpaniola was neither such as their courage
merited, nor the distress of the persons from
whom they came, required. Ovando, from a
mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of al-
lowing him to set foot in the island under
his government. This ungenerous passion
hardened his heart against every tender enti-
ment, which refletion upon the services and
misfortunes of that great man, or companion
for his own fellow-citizens involved in the fame
calamities, must have excited. Mendez and
Fiefchi spent eight months in soliciting relief
for their commander and afrociates, without any
proipet of-obtaining it.
DURING this period, various paflions agi- His difref

s1 * j - /-. i

*, , *nlnd ufife-

tated .the mind of Columbus, and his compa- in"g tLherc
nions in adversity. At first the expecation of
Ieedy deliverance, from the fuccels of Men-
dcz and Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of
the most desponding. After Ibme time the
more timorous began to fuflpec that they had
miscarried in their daring attempt. At length, s154,
even the moit sanguine concluded that they had
pcrilhed. The ray of hope which had broke in
VOL. . R upon

BOOK . upon them, made their condition appear now more

1504- dismal. Despair, heightened by dilappointment,

fettled in every breast. Their last resource had
failed, and nothing remained but the profpc of
ending their miserable days among naked favags,
far from their country and their friends. Tie
farrren, in a transport of rage, rose in open nn.
tiny, threatened the life of Columbus, whom they
reproached as the author of all their calamities,
seized ten canoes, which he had purchascd from
the Indians, and despising his remonftrancs
and entreaties, made off with themn to a diftanc
part of the island. At the fame time, the na-
tives murmured at the long relidence of the
Spaniards in their country. As their industry
was not greater than that of their neighbours in
Hispaniola, like them, they found the burden
of supporting so many strangers to be altogether
intolerable. ''hey began to bring in provisions
with reluctance, they furnished thenm with a
ifparing hand, and threatened to withdraw thole
fuipplies altogether. Such a resolution mull
have been quickly fatal to the Spaniards. Their
safety depended upon the good will of the In-
dians; and unless they could revive the ad-
miration and reverence ith which that imple
people had at first beheld them, destruction was
unavoidable. Though the licentious proccd-
ings of the mutineers had, in a great ncalurc,

ctrTacl

effaced those impreflions which had been so fa- BOOK II.
vourable to the Spaniards, the ingenuity of 15o4.
Columbus fuggefled a happy artifice, chat not
only reltored but heightened the hilh opinion

lhich the Indians had originally entertained of
thitn. By is kill in afronomy, he knew that
there was shortly to be a total ecli.,fe of the
moon. He afllniblcd all the principal pcrsons
of the diltria around him on the day before it
happened, and, alter reproaching them for their
fickleness in withdrawing their affection and
aflillance from men whom they had lately re-
vered, he told them, that the Spaniards were
srvants of the Great Spirit who dwells in
heaven, who made and governs the world ; that
he, offended at their refuting to support men
who were the objects of his peculiar favour, was
preparing to punish this crime with exemplary
severity, and that very night the moon flould
withhold her light, and appear of a bloody hue,
as a sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem
of the vengeance ready to fall upon them. To
this marvellous prediction ome of them listened
with the carles indifference peculiar to the
people of America; others, with the credulous
allonilhment natural to barbarians. But when
the moon began gradually to be darkened, and
at length appeared of a red colour, nll were
firuck with terror. They ran with conltcrna-

R z tion

1L0o KLi tion to their houties, and returning instantly to

1504. Coluiibus loaded with provisions, threw then:

at his feet, conjuring him to intercede with the
Great Spirit to avert the deftrution with whih
they were threatened. Columbus, feemin to
be moved by their entreaties, promiled to comn
ply with their desire. The eclipse went o;
the moon recovered its splendour, and from
that day the Spaniards were not only furnifhcti
profusely with provisions, but the natives, with
superstitious attention, avoided every thing that
could give them offence'.

A cruel ad- DURING those tranfacions, the mutineers
rlition to
them. had made repeated attempts to pass over to

Hispaniola in the canoes which they had ICized.
But, from their own misconduct, or the vio.
lence of the winds and currents, their efiort
were all unsuccessful. Enraged at this dilap-
pointment, they marched towards that part of the
island where Columbus remained, threatening
him with new insults and danger. While they
were advancing, an event happened, more
cruel and affliting than any calamity which he
dreaded from them. The governor of Flifp.
niola, whose mind was fill filled with foim

Life of Columbus, c. o;. Herrera, dec. . lib. i
c. 5, 6. Benzon, li. lib. i. c. 14.

1,li

jark 'ufpicions of Columbus, sent a frall bark oo_ n.
to Jamaica, not to deliver his distressed coun- z'504.
trymen, but to ipy out their condition. Left
th! lnympathy of those whom he employed
Ihauld afford them relief, contrary to his in-
tention, he gave the command of this veffcl
to Eicobar, an inveterate enemy of Colum-
bLu, who adhering to his inftrutions with
malignant accuracy, cast anchor at ofme dil-
tance from. the illand, approached the hore
in a rmiall boat, obfcrved the wretched plight
of the Spaniards, delivered a letter ot empty
compliment to the admiral, received his an-
fwer, and departed. VWhen the Spaniards firit
dcfcried the vefcl ifanding towards the iand,
every heart exulted, as if the long expeced
hour of their deliverance had at length arrived;
but when it disappeared so suddenly, they' funk
into the deepest dejection, and all their hopes
died away. Columbus alone, though he felt
molt sensibly this wanton insult which Ovando
added to his past neglet, retained such com-
pofure of mind, as to be able to cheer his fol-
lowers. IHe assured them, that Mendez and
liefchi had reached Hispaniola in safety; that
they would speedily procure hips to carry them
off; but as E'fcobar's vessel could not take them
all on board, that he had refuled to go with
her, because he was determined never to aban-

3 don

oocK ' don the faithful companions of his ilfilels
i50. Soothed with the expecation of speedy deliver.

ance, and delighted with his apparent generosity
in attending more to their preservation than to
his own fafcty, their spirits revived, and he re.
gained their confidence .

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

resifted the mutineers, who were now at hand.
All his endeavours to reclaim thoe dlcfl)-rate
men had no effeEt but to increalc their frenzy.
Their demands became every day more extra.
vagant, and their intentions more violent an,!
bloody. The common safety rendered it no.
ceffary to oppose them with open force. Co-
lumbus, who had been long affliAed with the
May 0. gout, could not take the field. His brother,

the Adelantado, marched against them. They
quickly met. The mutineers rejected irth
scorn terms of accommodation, which were
once more offered them, and rufled on bolly
to the attack. They fell not upon an enemy
unprepared to receive them. In the firt shock,
several of their mofl daring leaders were lain.
The Adelantado, whole flrength was equal to
his courage, coled with their captain, wounded,

Life of Columbus, c. 104. Herrera, dec. . lib. vi.
C. '7ism

difirrmel

disarmed, and took him prisoner x. At fight BOOK n.
of this, the'reft fled with a dastardly fear, suit- a504.
able to their former insolence. Soon after, they
submitted in a body to Columbus, and bound
themselves by the mol solemn oaths to obey
all his commands. Hardly was tranquillity
rc-eftablifhcd, when the fihips appeared, whose
arrival Columbus had promised with great ad-
trefs, though he could foresee it with little cer-
tainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards
quitted an island in which the unfeeling jealousy
of Ovando had fuffcred them to languish above
a year, exposed to mifcry in all its various
torms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the go- Aug. i,.
vernor, with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, ance, nd
that labours to atone for insolence by servility, H1paniola.
fawned on the man whom he envied, and had
attempted to ruin. He received Columbus
with the most studied rfpeCt, lodged him in his
own house, and diflinguifhed him with every
mark of honour. But, amidst those over-
aced demonfirations of regard, he could not
conceal the hatred and malignity latent in his
heart. Ile set at liberty the captain of the mu-

Life of Columbus, c. 107. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi.
., 11.

R 4 tineers,

BooK Ir. tineers, whom Columbus had brought over in

1504. chains; to be tried for his crimes, ancd threatened

such as had adhered to the admiral with pro-
ceeding to a judicial inquiry into their conduct
Columbus submitted in silence to what he could
not redress; but discovered an extreme impI;.
tience to quit a country which was under the
jurifdic&ion of a man who had treated him, on
every occasion, with inhumanity and injustice.
Septem. n. His preparations were soon finifled, and he {e:

fail for Spain with two ships. Dilaflers fimii::
to those which had accompanied him t!hrouh
life continued to 'pursue him to the end of iis
career. One of his vessels being diflabled, was
soon forced back to St. Domingo; the other,
shattered by violent storms, failed flven hun.
December. dred leagues with jury-mafts, and reached with

difficulty the port of St. Lucar r.

Peath of TrERE he received the account of an event
ITJfelia.
Nov. 9 the most fatal that could have befallen him,

and which completed his misfortunes. Thii
was the death of his patroness queen Isabella,
in whore juffice, humanity, and favour, he
confided as his last resource. None now re-
mained to redress his wrongs, or to reward

Y Life of Columbus, c. 108. IHcrrera, dec. . lib. i.
C. 12.

liiin

him for his services and sufferings, but erdi- BOOK i
nand, who had so long opposed and ib often I5s4.
injured him. To solicit a prince thus preju-
diced against him, was an occupation no lds
irksome than hopeless. In this, however, was
Columbus doomed to employ the dole of his
Lays. As soon as his health was in some de-
gree re-eltablifhed, he repaired to court; and
though he was received there with civility
barely decent, he plied Ferdinand with peti-
tion after petition, demanding the punishment
of his oppressors, and the restitution of all the
privileges bestowed upon him by the capitula-
rion of one thouland four hundred and ninety-
two. Ferdinand amused him with fair words
and unmeaning promises. Instead of granting
his claims, he proposed expedients in order to
elude them, and spun out the affair with such
apparent art, as plainly discovered his intention
that it should never be terminated. The de-
clining health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand
v.ith the hopes of being oon delivered from
an importunate suitor, and encouraged him to
perrevere in this illiberal plan. Nor was he
deceived in his expectations. Disgusted with
the ingratitude of a monarch whom he had
fcrved with such fidelity and luccels, cxhaufted
with the fatigues and hardships which he had
rpnlured, and broken with the infirmities which

these

aooK 11. there brought upon him, Columbus ended hl

,so~. life at Valladolid on the twentieth of M;iy ,n
Dolumbus. thousand five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninthl

year of his age. He died with a compollre or
mind suitable to the magnanimity which diftin-
guilhed his character, and with fentimcnts o:
piety becoming that supreme refpe& tor rli-
gion, which he manifested in every occurrence
of his life '.

Life of Columbus, c. IoS. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ai.
c. 13, 14, 15

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK III.

T I E

H S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

F
A M E R I C A.

B O OK III.

W HFILE Columbus was employed in his B l, K
W lat voyage, fcveral events worthy of ';-
notice happened in Hispaniola. The colony stito, ,1he

coleny in

tilere, the parent and nurse of all the lubi-- Hirpaniola
quent eftab!ifhmerts of Spain in the New
World, gradually acquired the form of a re-
gular and prosperous society. The humane
fulicitude of Isabella to proteca the Indians from
opprefion, and particularly the proclamation,
by which the Spaniards were prohibited to
compel them to work, retarded, it is true, for
fonme time, the progress of improvement. The
natives, who confidered exemption from toil as
supreme felicity, scorned every allurement and
reward by which they were invited to labour.
The Spaniards had not a sufficient number of
hands either to work the mines or to cultivate

the

B ,0 K the foil. Several of the first colbnifts, who

L ' had been accustomed to the service of the In.

dians, quitted the ifand, when deprived of
those instruments, without which they knew
not how to carry on any operation. Many of
the new ettlers who came over with Ovando,
were seized with the difempers peculiar to the
climate, and in a short space above a thousand
of them died. At the anme time, the exatire
one half of the procdu& of the mines as tie
royal hare, was found to be a demand b
exorbitant, that no adventurers would engage
to work them upon lilch terms. In order to
save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured
zsos5 to relax the rigour of the royal edicts. -He

made a new distribution of the Indians among
the Spaniards, and compelled them to labour,
for a stated time, in digging the mines, or in
cultivating the ground; but, in order to screen
himself from the imputation of having l;b-
jeled them again to servitude, he enjoined
their masters to pay them a certain fum, as the
price of their work. He reduced the. royal
share of the gold found in the mines from the
half to the third part, and oon after lowered
it to a fifth, at which it long remained. Not-
withltanding Isabella's tender concern for the
good treatment of the Indians, and Ferdinand's
eagerness to improve the royal revenue, Ovando

8 pleriu;it 1

persuaded the court to approve of both these re- B 0 0 K
gulations '. ;o;.

BUTr the Indians, after enjoying respite from War with

oppreflion, though during a hort interval, now th "di"s
felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that
they made several attempts to vindicate their
own liberty. This the Spaniards confidered as
rebellion, :and took arms in order to reduce
them to subjection. When war is carried on
between nations whose ifate of improvement is
in any degree similar, the means of defence
bear forrne proportion to those employed in
the attack; and in this equal contest such
efforts must be made, such talents are displayed,
and such passions routed, as exhibit mankind
to view in a situation no less firiking than
interesting. It is one of the noblest functions
of hiflory, to observe and to delineate men at
a junture when their minds are most violently
agitated, and all their powers and pagfions are
called forth. Hence the operations of war,
and the struggles between contending states,
have been deemed by historians, ancient as
well as modern, a capital and important article
in the annals of human aions. But in a con-
test between naked savages, and one of the

Herrcra, dec. . lib. v. c. 3.

most

B Oo K most warlike of the European nations, where
.--.- science, courage, and discipline on one fide,

were oppolfd by ignorance, timidity, and dif.
order on the other, a particular detail of evcnts
would be as unpleasant as uninftrutive. Ii
the simplicity and innocence of the Indians had
infiircd the Spaniards with humanity, had sot.-
ened the pride of fuiperiority into compaflio,
and had. induced them to improve the ink..
bitants of the New World, instead of opprcm
ting them, sone itdden as of violence, like
the too rigorous chaftilments of impatient in-
ftructors, might have been related without
horror. But, unfortunately, this confcioutlnte
of superiority operated in a different manner.
The Spaniards were advanced so far beyond
the natives of America in improvement of every
kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be animaii
of an inferior nature, who were not intitlcd to
the rights and privileges of men. In peace,
they fubjeded them to servitude. In war, tey
paid no regard to thole laws, which, by a tac
convention between contending nations, regu.
late hostility, and set ornme bounds to its rage.
They confidered them not as men fighting in
defence of their liberty, but as slaves, who liha
revolted againlf their malters. Their caz;quic,
when taken, were condemned, like the leaders

of
I

of banditti, to the most cruel and ignominious B Ol K
punishments; and all their subje&s, without re- z o5-
garding the diltin&ion of ranks established among
them, were reduced to the fame state of abject
slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments were
hostilities carried on against the cazique of Hi-
guey, a province at the eastern extremity of the
island. This war was occasioned by the perfi-
dy of the Spaniards, in violating a treaty which
they had made with the natives, and it was ter-
minated by hanging up the cazique, who de-
fended his people with bravery so far superior to
that of his countrymen, as intitled him to a bet-
ter fate b.

THE conduEt of Ovando, in another part of The cruel

and trcache-
the island, was still more treacherous and cruel. rouscondua

of Ovando.

The province anciently named Xaragua, which
extends from the fertile plain where Leogane
is now situated, to the western extremity of the
island, was subject to a female cazique, named
Anacoana, highly refpeded by the natives.
She, from that partial fondness with which the
women of America were attached to the Euro-
peans (the caule of which shall be afterwards
explained), had always courted the friendship
of the Spaniards, and loaded them with be-

b lerrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 9, lo.

nefits.

:OOI°C ,nefits. But some of the adherents of Roldan

--~.-- ..1aiviag setted in her country, were so nluc
50' -exalperated at her endeavouring to rcftrain

Itheir xceffes, that they accued her of having
.formed a.pan .to throw off the yoke, an to
erxterminate the Spaniards. Ovando, tough
he krnew well how little credit was due to luch
-profiigate men, marched, without further in.
.tqiiry, towards Xaragua, with three hundred
-foot-and seventy horsemen. To prevent the
J.ndians from taking alarm at this hotli!e ap.
paarance, he gave out that his sole intention
was. to visit Anacoana, to whom his country.
men had been so much indebted, in tlie nmlt
refpetful manner, and to regulate with her
*the:mode of levying the tribute payable to the
:king of Spain. Anacoana,i in order to receive
. this illustrious guest with due honour, after.i
bled the principal men in her dominions, t3
the number of three hundred, and advancing
:at the head of these, accompanied by a val:
croud of persons of inferior rank, she welcomed
Ovando with songs and dances, according to
the mode of the country, and condutced hinl
to the place of her rfidence. There he was
feasted for some days, with all the kindness of
.simple hospitality, and amused with the gan.es
and fpetacles usual among the Americans
upon occasions of mirth and festivity. But,

;.ntidil

mnidit the security which this inspired, Ovando B

. K

was meditating the deftrution of his unfufpi- L5o.
cious entertainer and her fubjets; and the
mean perfidy with Which he executed this
scheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it.
Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians the
parade of an European tournament, he ad-
vanced with his troops, in battle array, towards
the houfl in which Anacoana and the chiefs
who attended her were aembled. The in.
fantry took poffliflon of all the avenues which
led to the village. The horsemen encompasscd
the house. These movements were the object
of admiration without any mixture of fear,
until, upon a signal which had been concerted,
the Spaniards suddenly drew their swords, and
rushed upon the Indians, defenceless, and afto-
nifhed at an a& of treachery which exceeded
the conception of undesigning men. In a
moment Anacoana was secu-red. All her at-
tendants were seized and bound. Fire was
set to the house; and, without examination or
conviction, all thele unhappy persons, the most
illustrious in their own country, were confumned
in the flames. Anacoana was reserved for a
more ignominious fate. She was carried ini
chains to Saint Domingo, and, after the for-
mality of a trial before Spanii judcges, flhe
Was condemned, upon the evidence of thole
Vo01 . S very

B OI K very men who had betrayed her, to be publicly
'--J ,5 hanged'.

Rhdueioof OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious
the Indians,
tandits es treatment of their princes and nobles, ho

were objects of their highest reverence, the
people in all the provinces of Hifpaniolafub.
mitted, without farther refitcance, to the Spaniih
yoke. Upon the death of lfabella, all the
regulations tending to mitigate the rigour of
their servitude were forgotten. The small gra.
tuity paid to them as the price of their labour
was withdrawn; and at the fame time the talks
,;6. imposed upon them were increased. Ovando,

without any restraint, distributed Indians among
his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to whom
the queen had left by will one half of the
revenue arising from the settlements in the
New World, conferred grants of a firniil.r
nature upon his courtiers, as the least expen.
five mode of rewarding their services. They
farmed out the Indians, of whom they were
rendered proprietors, to their countrymen set-
tied in Hispaniola; and that wretched people,
being compelled to labour in order to atisiv
the rapacity of both, the exactions of their

c Ovirdo, lib. iii. c. ?.. Ilcrrcra, dec. . lib) vi. c.4.

(0>icdo, lih. iii. c. . Relation d dcilruyc. dela I11 .
dias, por Bart. d laI Cuia., p. H.

or ·'' i '

oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But, B o K
barbarous as their policy was, and fatal to the '
inhabitants of Hispaniola, it produced, for
fonme time, very considerable effcts. By call-
ing forth the force of a whole nation, and
exerting it in one direcion, the working of the
mines was carried on with amazing rapidity
and success. During fver..l years, the gold
brought into the royal fmelting-houfcs in His-
paniola amounted annually to four hundred
and sixty thousand pclos, above a hundred
thousand pounds ltcrling; which, if we attend
to the great change in the value of money since
the beginning of the ixteenth century to the
present times, must appear a considerable fun-'
Vast fortunes were created, of a sudden, by
some. Others diflipated in ostentatious pro-
fuGion, what they acquired with facility.
Dazzled by both, new adventurers crouded to
America, with the most eager impatience, to
share in those treasures which had enriched
their countrymen; and, notwithftantiing the
mortality occasioned by the unhealthiness of
the climate, the colony continued to increafc .

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wil- rproer of
dom and justice, not inferior to the rigour wihli

I Ierrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. S
, &c.

S whic:

°0° K which he treated the Indians. He establishcd
' ]-t J equal laws, and, by executing them with im-

partiality, accustomed the people of the colony
to reverence them. He founded several new
towns in different parts of the island, and
allured inhabitants to them, by the concession
of various immunities. He endeavoured to
turn the attention of the Spaniards to some
branch of industry more ufcful than that of
1earching for gold in the mines. Some flips
of the sugar-cane having been brought from
the Canary islands by way of experiment, they
were found to thrive with such increase in the
rich foil and warm climate to which they were
transplanted, that the cultivation of them soon
became an obje& of commerce. Extensive
plantations were begun; fugar-works, which
the Spaniards called ingeio'ss from the various
machinery employed in them, were erected, ard
in a few years the manutaEture of this comnn-
dity was the great occupation of the inhabitants
of Hispaniola, and the mofl considerable fourcc
of their wealth '.

Political re- THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to pro-
erdnand. mote the welfare of the colony, were power-

fully seconded by Ferdinand. The large re-

Oviedo. lib. iv. c. 8.

mittances

nittapces which he received from the New B o K
World, opened his eyes, at length, with refp e6
to the importance of those discoveries, which
he had hitherto affefted to undervalue. For-
tune, and his own address, having now extri-
cated him out of those difficulties in which he
had been involved by the death of his queen, ,s-.
and by his disputes with his fon-in-law about
the government of her dominionss, he had
full leisure to turn his attention to the affairs
of America. To his provident sagacity, Spain
is indebted for many of those regulations which
gradually formed that system of profound, but
jealous policy, by which he governs her domi-
nions in the New World. -ie erected a court,
diltinguifhed by the title of the Casa de Con-
tratacion, or Board of Trade, composed of per-
sons eminent for rank and abilities, to whom
he committed the adminiltration of American
affairs. This board aflembled regularly in
Seville, and was invested with a diftinc- and
extensive jurifdiion. He gave a regular form
to ecclesiastical government in America, by
nominating archbishops, bishops, deans, toge-
ther with clergymen of subordinate ranks, to
take charge of the Spaniards eftablihecd there,
as well as of the natives who hould embrace

lifl. of the Reign of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 6, &c.

S 3 the

B 00 R the Christian faith. But, notwithstanding the
'"-^- obsequious devotion of the Spanith court to

· 507.

the Papal See,. such was Ferdinand's solicitude
to prevent any foreign power from claiming
jurifdiaion, or acquiring influence, in his new
dominions, that he refeived to the crown of
Spain the sole right of patronage to the bene-
sices in America, and Stipulated that no papal
bull or mandate hould be promulgated there,
until it was previously examined and approved
of by his council. With the fame spirit of
jealousy, he prolibited any goods to be ex-
ported to America, or any perlbn to fettle
there, without a special licence from that
council .

The number BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the
of the In.
dals dimi_ police and welfare of the colony, a calamity

impended which threatened its dissolution. The
original inhabitants, on whose labour the Spa-
niards in Hispaniola depended for their protpc-
rity, and even their existence, waited bo flt,
that the extinction of the whole race Jeemed to
be inevitable. When Columbus dilcovcrl
-lifpaniola, the number of its inhabitants v.as
computed to be at least a millionh. They
were now reduced to sixty thoulanld in the

e Icrrcra, dec. . lib. vi. c. 19, 20.
h Ibid. cc. i. lib. x. c. i:.

I )at C

space of fifteen years. This consumption of Bo. K
the human species, no less amazing than rapid, 5o7'
was the effet of several concurring cauties.
The natives of the American islands were of a
more feeble conflitution than the inhabitants
of the other hemisphere. They could neither
perform the fame work, nor endure the fame
fatigue, with men whose organs were of a more
vigorous conformation. The listless indolence
in which they delighted to pals their days, as
it was the effct of their debility, contributed
likewise to increase it, and rendered them, from
habit as well as constitution, incapable of hard
labour. The food on which they fubfifed,
afforded little nourishment, and they were ac-
culorned to take it in small quantities, not
sufficient to invigorate a languid frame, and
render it equal to the efforts of active indufiry.
The Spaniards, without attending to thole
peculiarities in the constitution of the Ameri-
cans, imposed talks upon them to difpropor-
tioned to their strength, that many funk under
the fatigue, and ended their wretched days.
Others, prompted by impatience and despair,
cut hort their own lives with a violent hand.
Famine, brought on by compelling lcli num-
bers to abandon the culture of their lands, in
order to labour in the mines, proved f tal to
many. Diseases of various kinds, lbme occ;a-

S 4 sioned

B o

i K sioned by the hardships to which they were ex.
i z7.-~ posed, and others by their intercourse with the

Europeans, who communicated to them ome
of their peculiar maladies, completed the defo-
lation of the ifand. The Spaniards being thus
deprived of the instruments which they were ac.
customed to employ, found it impoflible to extend
their improvements, or even to carry on the works
which they had already begun. In order to
provide an immediate remedy for an evil so
alarming, Ovando proposed to transport the in.
habitants of the Lucayo islands to Hispaniola,
under pretence that they might be civilized with
more facility, and inftruted to greater ad-
vantage in the Christian religion, if they were
united to the Spanish colony, and placed
under the immediate infpecion of the miffiona-
ries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by this
artifice, or willing to connive at an aft of
violence which policy represented as necefllry,
gave his assent to the proposal. Several vefels
were fitted out for the Lucayos, the com-
manders of which informed the natives, with
whose language they were now well acquainted,
that they came from a delicious country, in
which the departed ancestors of the Indians
resided, by whom they were efnt to invite their
delcendents to resort thither, to partake of the
bliss enjoyed there by happy spirits. T'hat
simple people liltened with wonder and credu-

lity;

lity; rod, fond of visiting their relation4 and ' q
frinds i that happy region, followed the Spa. .?,"
niprdf with agerocfs. By this artifice, above
forty tbofand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to
bare in the ffferings which mwre the lot of the
inhabitants of that illand, and to mingle their
groans and tears with thoe of that wretched race
of men '.

THE Spaniards had, for some time, carried New diro-,

on their operations in the mines of Hispaniola t"ttl'emen
with such ardor as well as success, that these
seemed to have engrossed their whole attention.
The spirit of discovery languished; and, since
the last voyage of Columbus, no enterprize of
any moment had been undertaken. But as the
decrease of the Indians rendered it ipofllble
to acquire wealth in that island with the fame
rapidity as formerly, this urged them to search
for new countries, where their avarice might
be gratified with more facility. Juan Ponce
de Leon, who commanded under Ovando in
the eastern diftri& of Hispaniola, passid over
to the island of St. Juan de Puerto Rico, which
Columbus had discovered in his second voyage,
and penetrated into the interior part of the
country. As he found the foil to be fertile,

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.
Gomara Hft c. 41.

and

'
B K and expe&ed, from some symptoms, as -well as
X^- 'V" from the information of the inhabitants, to dif.

cover mines of gold. in the mountains, Ovando
permitted him 'to attempt making a settlement
in the -idand. This was easily efeted by an
officer eminent for conduct no less than for
courage. -In a few years Puerto Rico was sub.
je&ed to the Spanilh government, the natives
were reduced to servitude; and, being treated
with the fame inconsiderate rigour as their neigh-
bours in Hispaniola, the race of original inha-
bitants, worn out with fatigue and sufferings,
was soon exterminated .

AnoUT the fame time, Juan Diaz tie Solis,

in conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon,
one of Columbus's original companions, made
a voyage to the continent. They held the
fame course which Columbus had taken, as
far as to the island of Guanaios; but, flanding
from thence to the weft, they discovercd a
new and extensive province, afterwards known
by the name of Yucatan, and proceeded a con.
fiderable way along the coast of that country'
Though nothing memorable occurred in this
voyage, it deserves notice, becaulc it led to

k Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. --4. Gomara Ilin.
c. 4. Relacion de 1. de las Casas, p. io.

'Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 17.

di:ca.

discoveries of greater importance.. For the fame B K
reason, the voyage of Sebaflian de O ampo must --c o
be mentioned. By the command of Ovando, he
failed round Cuba, and first discovered, with cer-
tainty, that this country, which Columbus once
supposed to be a part of the continent, was a
large island '.
THIs voyage round Cuba was one of the Diego Co.

Jhimhus ap
last occurrences under the administration of poind', go

vcrn'or of

Ovando. Ever since the death of Columbus, l"ilaniola.
his son Don Diego had been employed in fuli-
citing Ferdinand to grant him the offices of
viceroy and admiral in the New World, toge-
ther with all the other immunities and profits
which descended to him by inheritance, in con-
sequence of the original capitulation with his
father. But if thele dignities and revenues
appeared so considerable to Ferdinand, thar,
at the expence of being deemed unjust, as well
as ungrateful, he had wrefled them from Co-
lumbus, it is not surprising that he fhiuld be
unwilling to confer them on his son. Accord-
ingly, Don Diego wafted two years in inceflant
but fruitless importunity. Weary of this, he
endeavoured at length to obtain, by a legal len-

m Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. .

tCICC,

so0o K tence, what he could not procure frem the
L--'*vJ favour of an interested monarch. He corn.

menced a suit against Ferdinand before the
council which managed Indian affairs, and that
court, with integrity which reflefts honour
upon its proceedings, decided against the king,
and sustained Don Diego's claim of the vice.
royalty, together with all the other privileges
stipulated in the capitulation. Even after this
decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a sub.
jest in poflelfion of such extensive rights, might
have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego
had not taken a ftep which interested very
powerful persons in the success of his claims.
The sentence of the council of the Indies gave
him a tide to a rank so elevated, and a fortune
so opulent, that he found no difficulty in con-
cluding a marriage with Donna Maria, dalgh-
ter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo, great com-
mendator of Leon, and brother of the duke
of Alva, a nobleman of the first rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his
family espoused so warmly the cause of their
new ally, that Ferdinand could not refill their
so5g. solicitations. He recalled Ovando, and ap-

pointed Don Diego his successor, though, even
in conferring this favour, he could not conceal
his jealousy; for he allowed him to aflniil

onlIy

only the tide of governor, not that of viceroy, B °o K
which had been adjudged to belong to him , i.--

Dos Diego quickly repaired to Hispaniola, He repai.t
attended by his brother, his uncles, his wife,
whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honoured
with the title of vice-queen, and a numerous
retinue of persons of both sexes, born of good
families. He lived with a splendour and mag-
nificence hitherto unknown in the New World;
and the family of Columbus seemed now to en-
joy the honours ad rewards due to his invent-
ive genius, of which he himself had been cruelly
defrauded. The colony itself acquired new
lustre by the accession of so many inhabitants,
of a different rank and characer from most of
those who had hitherto migrated to America,
and many of the molt illustrious families in the
Spanish fcttlements are descended from the per-
sons who at that time accompanied I)cn Diego
Columbus o.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives
from this change of governors. Don Diego
was not only authorised by a royal edic to con-
tinue the repartimien!os, or diftriburion of In-

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 4, &c.
e Oviedg, lib. iii. c. .

cinn1

so0ol tence, what he could not procure frem the
X-v* -) favour of an interested monarch. He cornm.

menced a suit against Ferdinand before the
council which managed Indian affairs, and that
court, with integrity which refle&ts honour
upon its proceedings, decided against the king,
and sustained Don Diego's claim of the vice-
royalty, together with all the other privileges
stipulated in the capitulation. Even after this
decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a sub-
je& in possession of such extensive rights, might
have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego
had not taken a ftep which interested very
powerful persons in the success of his claims.
The sentence of the council of the Indies gave
him a title to a rank so elevated, and a fortune
so opulent, that he found no difficulty in con-
cluding a marriage with Donna Maria, daugh-
ter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo, great com-
mendator of Leon, and brother of the duke
of Alva, a nobleman of the first rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his
family espoused so warmly the cause of their
new ally, that Ferdinand could not refilt their
rso9. solicitations. He recalled Ovando, and ap-

pointed Don Diego his successor, though, even
in conferring this favour, he could not conceal
his jealousy; for he allowed him to aftfurn

onl

only the tide of governor, not that of viceroy, o 0o
which had been adjudged to belong to him . si--.i

>509.

Dow Diego quickly repaired to Hispaniola, Her pito

attended by his brother, his uncles, his wife,
whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honoured
with the title of vice-queen, and a numerous
retinue of persons of both exes, born of good
families. He lived with a splendour and mag-
nificence hitherto unknown in the New World;
and the family of Columbus seemed now to en-
joy the honours and rewards due to his invent-
ive genius, of which he himself had been cruelly
defrauded. The colony itself acquired new
lutre by the accefflon of so many inhabitants,
of a different rank and charater from most of
those who had hitherto migrated to America,
and many of the most illustrious families in the
Spanish lettlements are descended from the per-
sons who at that time accompanied lDn Diego
Columbus .

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives
from this change of governors. Don Diego
was not only authorired by a royal edict to con-
tinue the repartimientos, or diftribtuion of In-

' Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 4, &c.
' Oviedq, lib. iii. c. .

sian.

B o K; dians, but the particular number which he might

5-9. grant to every person, according to his rank in

the colony, was specified. He availed himself
of that permission; and soon after he landed at
St. Domingo, he divided such Indians as were
Rill unappropriated, among his relations and
attendants P.

Pearl fihry THE next care of the new governor was to
of Cubagua.

comply with an instruction which he received
from the king, about fettling a colony in Cu-
bagua, a small iland which Columbus had dif-
covered in his third voyage. Though this
barren spot hardly yielded subsistence to its
wretched inhabitants, such quantities of those
oysters which produce pearls were found on its
coast, that it did not long escape the inquisitive
avarice of the Spaniards, and became a place
of considerable resort. Large fortunes were
acquired by the fishery of pearls, which was
carried on with extraordinary ardour. The
Indians, especially those from the Lucayo
islands, were compelled to dive for them; and
this dangerous and unhealthy employment was
an additional calamity, which contributed not
a little to the extinction of that devoted race'.

P Recopilacion de Leyes, lib. vi. tit. S. 1. 1, 2. lIer-
rera, dec. i. lib. vli. c. io.

q Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara Hil. c. 7s.

ABOUl 7

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Soils and B 0° K
Pinzon set out, in conjuncion, upon a second *.---^
voyage. They stood dire&ly south, towards New or-

agCs.

the equinoctial line, which Pinzon had for-
merly crossed, and advanced as far as the for-
tieth degree of southern latitude. They were
aflonifhed to find that the continent of America
stretched, on their right hand, through all this
vast extent of ocean. They landed in different
places, to take possession in name of their so-
vereign; but though the country appeared to
be extremely fertile and inviting, their force
was so small, having been fitted out rather for
discovery than making ettlements, that they
left no colony behind them. Their voyage
served, however, to give the Spaniards more
exalted and adequate ideas with relpet to the
dimensions of this new quarter of the globe r.

THOUGH it was above ten years since Colum- A fetlement

on the con-
bus had dilcovered the main land of America, 'm"',t "-

tempted.

the Spaniards had hitherto made no ftttlement
in any part of it. What had been so long ne-
gleted was now seriously attempted, and with
considerable vigour, though the plan for this
purpose was neither formed by the crown, nor
executed at the expence of the nation, but

r Icerrcra, dec . lib. vii c. 9.

carried

so OK carried 6n by the enterprifhg Ipirit of private
*- .-J adventurers. This fheme took its rife from

Alono de Ojeda, who had already made to
voyages as a ditcovter, by which he acquired
considerable reputation, but no wealth. But
his charater for intrepidity and'condu& easily
procured himri aflociates, *ho advanced the
money requilite to defray the charges of the ex.
pedition. About the fame timle, Diego de Ni-
cUefla, who had acquired a large fortune in
Hispaniola, formed a imilar design. Ferdinand
encouraged both; and though he refuscd to
advance the smallest form, was extremely liberal
es titles and patents. He erec&ed two govern-
nments on the continent, one extending from
Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the
other from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The
former was given to Ojeda, the latter to Ni-
cueiTa. Ojeda fitted out a ship and two brigan-
tines, with three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix
velels, with seven hundred and eighty men.
They failed about the fame time from Sr. Do-
mingo for their refpe5live governments. In
order to give their title'to those countries omne
appearance of validity, everal of the most
eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were em-
ployed to prescribe the mode in which they
fould take pofeflion of them a. There is not

* cerrcra, d'c. . lib. vii. c. jS.

4 in

in the hiftQry of mankind any thing more fin- () lt
gular or e~ravagant than the form which they 'r; '
deviled for this purpose. They infttuced thofi
invaders, as faon as they landed on the conti.
nent, to deciare to the natives the principal ar-
ticks of the Chriflian faith; t acquaint them,
in particular, with the supreme jurifdition of
the Pope over all the kingdoms of the earth $
to inform .them of the grant which this holy
pontiff had made of their country to the king
of Spain; to require them to embrace the doc-
trines of that religion which the Spaniards made
known to them; and to fubmik to the sovereign
whose authority they proclaimed. If the na-
tives refused to comply with this requisition,
the terms of which must have been utterly in-
comprehensible to unirnftrvued Indians, then
Ojeda and Nicueffa were authorised to attack
them with fire and sword; to reduce them,
their wives and children, to a ate of servitude;
and to compel them by force to recognize the
jurifdi&ion of the church, and the authority of
the monarch, to which they would not volun-
tarily subjea themselves .
As the inhabitants of the continent could not The tdira;tn

attending Hr
at once yield afrcnt to doctrines too refined for

t See NO rE XXII.
VOL. I. T their

- 0 K their uncultivated understandings, and ex.
L ,emJ plained to them by interpreters imperfe&ly ac.

quainted with their language; as they did not
conceive how a foreign priest, of whom they
had never heard, could have any right to dispose
of their country, or how an unknown prince
should claim jurifdiQion over them as his sub.
je&s; they fiercely opposed the new invader
of their territories. Ojeda and Nicuef'a en-
deavoured to effet by force what they could
not accomplish by persuasion. The contem-
poraty writers enter into a very minute detail
in relating their tranfa&ions; but as they made
no discovery of importance, nor eftablilhed any
permanent settlement, their adventures are not
intitled to any considerable place in the general
history of a period, where romantic valour,
struggling with incredible hardships, distinguish
every effort of the Spanish arms. They found
the natives in those countries of which they went
to assume the government, to be of a charaAer
very different from that of their countrymen in
the islands. They were fierce and warlike.
Their arrows were dipped in a poison o noxious,
that every wound was followed with certain
death. In one encounter they flew above
ifventy of Ojeda's followers, and the Spaniards,
for the first time, were taught to dread the in-
habitants of the New World. Nicueffa was

opposcd

bppofed: by people equally resolute in defence BoK
of their pofcfillons. Nothing could soften their u.
ferocity. Though the Spaniards employed
every art to ibothe them, and to gain their con-
fidence, they refu'ed to hld any ihtercourfe, or
to exchange any friendly office, With rtme whose
reildence atong them they confidered as fatal
to their liberty ahd irldependence. This im- l
placable enmity of the natives, though it ren-
dered an attempt to eltablifh a settlement in their
country, extremely difficult a well as dangerous,
might have been surmoUnted at length by the per-
feverance'of the Spaniards, by the superiority of
their arms, and their skill in the art of war.
But every disaster which can be accumulated
upon the unfortunate, combined to complete
their ruin. The loss of their ships by various
accidents upon an unknown coast, the diseases
peculiar to a climate the most noxious in all
America, the want of provisions, unavoidable
in a country imperfectly cultivated, distention
among themselves, and the incessant hoflilities
of the natives, involved them in a fuccefflon of
calamities, the bare recital of which strikes one
with horror. Though they received two con-
fiderable reinforcements from Hispaniola, the
greater part of thole who had engaged in this
unhappy expedition, perilhed, in left than a

T '2 yer,

BO-IK ye4r~ in the most extreme nmiery.. A few who
-v*-u survived,, fettled as a feeble'colony at Santa

Marial Cl Antigua, on the gulf of Darien, under
the comnmand of Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,
who, in the molf defpcrate exigencies, dif.
played such courage and condut, as. first gained
the confidence of his countrymen,, and marked
him ou. as their le4der in more klendid and
successful undertakiRgs. Nor was he the only
adventurer in this expedition who will appear
with lustre ir more important-fcenes. Fran.
cisco Pizarro was on.e of Ojeda's, companions,
and- in thisfchool of adversity acquired or im.
proved the talents which fitted him for the ex.
traordinary aions which he afterwards per.
forpmed. Heroar Cortes, whose name became
fti!l more famous, had likewise engaged early
in. this eterprile, which rouzed all the aive
youth of Hifpaijola. to arrus ;, but the good for.
tune that accompanied. him in his subsequent
adventures, inter.posed to save him from tile
disasters to which his companions were expoled.
He was taken ill at St. Domingo before the de-
parture of the fleet, and detained there by a te-
dious indisposition u.

Hqrrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. il, &c. Gomara Hi .

c. 57, S8, S9. Benzon Hilt. lib. i. cap. 19- 3. P'. Mar-
tyr, decad. 1 z.

NOTWI TH

NoTWirTHsJTDINo the unfortunate iffe of Bs30

it).

this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred -
from engging in new schemes of a similar na- coqnoe *f
ture. When wealth is acquired gradually by
the persevering hand of industry, or accumu-
lated by the flow operations of regular com-
merce, the means employed are so proportioned
to the end attained, that there is notding to
strike the imagination, and little to urge on the
ative powers of the mind to uncommon efforts.
But when large fortunes were created almost in-
ftantaneoufly; when gold and pearls were pro-
cured in. exchange for baubles; when the coun-
tries which produced there rich commodities,
defended only by naked savages, might be
seized by the first bold invader; objecs so firn
gular and alluring, roused a wonderfial spirit of
enterprise among the Spaniards, who ruihed
with ardour into this new path that was opened
to wealth and diftincion While this spirit
continued warm and vigorous, every attempt
either towards difoovery or conquest as ap-
plauded, and adventurers engaged in it with
emulation. The pallion for new undertakings,
which chara&erifcs te age of discovery in the
latter part of the fifteenth and beginning of the
sixteenth century, would alone have been fufli-
cient to prevent the Spaniards from tfopping
flort in their career. But circumstances pecu-

T 3 liar

B o K liar to Hispaniola at this junture, concurred
^.dh^ I with it in extending their navigation and con.

quests. The rigorous treatment of the inha.
bitants of that island having almost extirpated
the race, many of the Spanilh planters, as I
have already observed, finding it impoflible to
carry on their works with the fame vigour and
profit, were obliged to look out for settlements
in ome country whose people were not yet
wafted by oppreflion. Others, with the inconfi-
derate levity natural to men upon whom wealth
pours in with a sudden, flow, had squandered,
in thoughtless prodigality, what they acquired
with ease, and were driven by neceflity to em-
bark in the most desperate schemes, in order to
retrieve their affairs. From all thee causes,
5UA1. when Don Diego Columbus proposed to con-

quer the iland of Cuba, and to establish a co-
lony there, many persons of chief diftin&ion in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the mea-
sure. He gave the command of the troops
destined for that service o Diego Velasquez,
one of his father's companions in his second
voyage, and who, having been long lettled in
Hilpaniola, had acquired an ample fortune,
with such reputation for probity and prudence,
that he seemed to be well qualified for con.
duating an expedition of importance. Three
hundred men were deemed filficient for th.

conquest

conquest of an island above seven hundred miles °,°

o

in length, and filled with inhabitants. But ^--v-
they were of the fame unwarlike character with
the people of Hispaniola. They were not only
intimidated by the appearance of their new ene-
mies, but unprepared to reft& them. For
though, from the time that the Spaniards took
pofeffion of the adjacent iland, there was
reason to expec a descent on their territories,
none of the small communities into which Cuba
was divided, had either made any provision for
its own defence, or had formed any concert for
their common safety. The only obftrution
the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey, a
carique, who had fled from Hispaniola, and
had taken pofftflion of the eastern extremity of
Cuba. He flood upon the defensive at their first
landing, and endeavoured to drive them back
to their (hips. His feeble troops, however,
were soon broken and dispersed; and he him-
self being taken prisoner, Velasquez, according
to the barbarous maxim of the Spaniards, con-
fidered him as a slave who had taken arms against
his master, and condemned him to the flames.
When Hatuey was fastened to the stake, a Fran-
cifcan friar labouring to convert him, promised
him immediate admittance into the joys of
heaven, if he would embrace the Christian faith.
" Are there any Spaniards," fays he, after

T 4 some

^ul0oK Coome pause, " in that region of bliss whici

^you escribe?" " Yes," replied the monk

." but only fuGh as are worthy and good.'
' The best of them,", reurned the indignar
cazique, " have neither worth nor goodnes
1 will not go to a place where I may meet wit&
one of that accursed race x." This dreadful ex.
,mple of vengeance struck the people of Cuba
with such terror, that they scarcely gave any
,opposition to the progress of their invaders; and
Velalquez, without the loss of a man, annexed
this extensive and fertile illand to the Spanilh
,monarchy .

DPrcovery of THE facility with which this important con.
Floprda.

quefft was completed, served as an incitement to
other undertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon,
having acquired both fame and vealth by the
reduEtion of Puerto Rico, was impatient to en.
in, .gage in fomne new enterprise. He fitted out

three ffips at his own expence, for a voyage of
dilcovery, and his reputation soon drew to-
gether a refi>eCable body of followers. He
directed his pourfe towards the Lucayo ifands;
pnd after touching at several of them, as well
ps of the Bahama iles, hi food t the south.

x B. de las Caas, p. 40.
Y Herrero, dec. . ib. x. c. z, 3, C. Ovicdo, lib.
;vii. c. 3. p. 79.

p.Cr,

wet, and discovered a country hitherto uin- B 0
known t he Spaniards, which he called Flo.- ,

10.

rkda, either because he fell in with it on Palm
SundAy, or er account of its gay and beautiful
appearance. .He attempted to land in different
places, but met with such vigorous opposition
from the natives, who were fierce and warlike
as convinced him that an increase of force was
requisite to ffc& a settlement. Satisfied with
having opened a communication with a new
country, of whose value and importance he
conceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to
Puerto Rico, through the channel now known
by the name of the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the paflion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to
undertake this voyage; he was influenced by
one of those visionary ideas, which at that time
often mingled with the spirit of discovery, and
rendered it more aive. A tradition prevailed
among the natives of Puerto Rico, that in the
isle of Bimini, one of the Lucayos, there was a
fountain of such wonderful virtue as to renew
the youth, and recal the vigour of every per-
son who bathed in its salutary waters. In hopes
of finding this grand restorative, Ponce de
Leon and his followers ranged through the
ilands, ifarching, with fruitless solicitude and

labour,

B i I labour, for the fountain, which was the chiel
!'- -A object of their expedition. ,That a tale so fa.

bulous hould gain credit among simple unin.
struted Indians is not surprising. That ii
should make any imprefllon upon an enlightened
people appears, in the precent age, altogether
incredible. The fa&, however, is certain; and
the most authentic Spanish historians mention
this extravagant ally of their credulous country.
men. The Spaniards, at that period, were en-
gaged in a career of activity which gave a ro.
mantic turn to their imagination, and daily pre-
sented to them frange and marvellous obje&s.
A New World was opened to their view. They
visited islands and continents of whose existence
mankind i former ages had no conception.
In those delightful countries nature seemed to
assume another form; every tree and plant and
animal was different from those of the ancient
hemisphere. They fiemed to be transported
into -enchanted ground; and, after the wonders
which they had seen, nothing, in the warmth
and novelty of their admiration, appeared to
them so extraordinary as to be beyond belief.
If the rapid fucceflion of new and flriking
scenes made such impreflion even upon the
found underltanding of Columbus, that he
boasted of having found the feat of Paradise, it
will not appear strange that Ponce de Leon

lhould

lhould dream of discovering the fountain of B0 K
youth '*. 2-

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a dif- Pros rsof

covery of much greater importance was made Darin
in another part of America. Balboa having
been raied to the government of the small co-
lony at Santa Maria in Darien, by the volun-
tary fuifrage of his aflbciates, was so extremely
deirous to obtain from the crown a confirma-
tion of their election, that he dispatched one of
his officers to Spain, in order to solicit a royal
commission, which might invest him with a
legal title to the supreme command. Conscious,
however, that he could not expet success from
the patronage of Ferdinand's ministers, with
whom he was unconneted, or from negociating
in a court to the arts of which he was a ftran-
ger, he endeavoured to merit the dignity to
which he aspired, and aimed at performing
some signal service that would secure him the
preference to every competitor. Full of this
idea, he made frequent inroads into the adjacent
country, subdued several of the caziques, and

2 P. Martyr, decad. p. 2oz. Enfayo Chronol. para la
lilt. de la Florida, porD. Gab. Cardenas, p. . Oviedo.
lib. xvi. c. zi. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Hilt. de la
Conc. de la Florida, par Garc de la Vega, lib. i. c. 3.

collected

B o10 a colledted a considerable uatiy of;gold, which

abounded more in that part. of the continent
than in the islands. In one of those excursions,
the Spaniards ontendd with such eagerness
about the divifon of some gold, that they were
at .;-le poirt of prooeedisg to as of violence
against one another. A young cazique, who
was prefem, aitonifhed at the high value which
they et-upon a thing of which: he did not dilf
cern the use, tumbled the.goldout of theba-
lance with indignitions and, turning to the
Spaniards, ' Why do you quarel (fays he)
aboit such a trife ? If youare so paflionately
fond of gold, .as to abandon your own country,
aad to diflurb.the tranquillity of distant nations
for.. its fake, I ill condu& you to a region
where the metal which seems to be the chief
ojefk: of your admiration and desire, is so
common thar.the. meanest utensils are formed
of it." Transported with what they heard, Bal-
boa and his companions inquired eagerly where
this happy country lay, and how they might
arrive at it. He informed them 'that at the
distance of fix funs, that is of fix days journey
towards the south, they should di5cover another
ocean, near to which this wealthy kingdom
was situated; but if they intended to attack
that powerful flare, they must alemble forces

far

si fupero io. nm ber and strength t. thof with o, ir
which. thqy. nrf appeared'.. ,
* .

'RHs was tli first information which the The schemes

which hu

Spaniards reccived cQncerning the great foutlhrn io, m.
ocean, or the opulent and. extensive couan,ry
known, afieFwards. by the namne of Peru. Bal-
boa had npw before b.im objets suited, to his
boundless abition, and the enterprising ar-
dour of his genius. He immediately concluded
the ocean which the cazique mentioned, to be
that for wlhcbch Qum bus had searched without
success in. this part of ArericA, in hopes of
opening a more .direst commwuication with the
East Indies,; an4 he conjectured that the rich
territory wiah had been described to him, mufL
be part of that vast and opulent region of the
earth. Elared with the idea of performing what
so great a man had attempted in vain; and
eager to accowplilh a difcovey which he knew
would be no Ifs acceptable, to the king than
benefcic to his country, he was impatient
uotil he. cukl fre out upon this enterprise, ir
comparison of which all his former exploits ap-
peared inconsiderable, But previous arrange-
ment and preparation were requisite to ensure
success. He began with courting and fcuring

' terrcra, dec. . lib. ix. c. Gomara, c. 6o. P.
dartyr, decad. p. 149.

the

B 0 0 K the friendship of the neighbouring caziques.

fIt.
L^-'-- lent some of his officers to Hispaniola with i

large quantity of gold, as a proof of his pat
success, and an earnest of his future hopes. By a
proper distribution of this, they secured the fa.
your of the governor, and allured volunteers into
the service. A considerable reinforcement from
that island joined him, and he thought himself in
a condition to attemrpt the discovery.
Difficulty of THE ithmus of Darien i riot above sixty

miles in breadth; but this neck of land, which
binds together the continents of North and
South America, is trengthened by a chain of
lofty mountains ftretchirfg throtgh its whole
extent, which render it a barrier of solidity sus-
ficient to resist the ipulfe of two opposite
oceans. The mountains are covered with forests
almost inaccefible. The valleys in that moist
climate, where it rains during two thirds of the
year, are marshy, and so frequently overflowed,
that the inhabitants find it necessary, in many
places, to build their houses upon trees, in
order to be elevated at some distance from the
damp foil, and the odious reptiles engendered in
the putrid waters b. Large rivers rush down
with an impetuous current from the high

k P. Martyr, decad. p. 158,

grounds,

grounds. In a region thinly inhabited by wan- BoioK
dering savages, the hand of industry had done '
nothing to mitigate or correct those natural dif-
advantages. To march across this unexplored
country, with no other guides but Indians, whole
fidelity could be little trusted, was, on all those
accounts, the boldest enterprise on which the Spa-
niards had hitherto ventured in the New World.
But the intrepidity of Balboa was such as di-
finguifhed him among his countrymen, at a
period when every adventurer was conspicuous ;.
for daring courage. Nor was bravery his only
merit; he was prudent in condut, generous,
affable, and poffceed of those popular tail.;ts
which, in the most desperate undertakings, i:-
spire confidence and secure attachment. Even
after the jun&ion of the volunteers from -lilpa-
niola, he was able to muster only an hundred and
ninety men for his expedition. But they were
hardy veterans, inured to the climate of Ame-
rica, and ready to follow him through every dan-
ger. A thousand Indians attended them to c-'ry
their provisions; and to complete their warlike
array, they took with them Icveral of those fierce
dogs, which were no lels formidable than d-
flrutive to their naked enemies.
BALBOA set out upon this important expedi- iircoer,,he

*South boa.
ton on the firil of September, about the time

il .it

B oo that the periodical rais began to abate. HI
^""S__- proceeded by sea, and without- any difficulty,

to the territories of a cazique whose friendship
he had gained; but no sooner did he begin te
advance into the interior-part of the country,
than he was retarded by every obRfacle, which
he had reason to apprehend, from the nature of
the territory, or the disposition of its inhabk-
ants. Some of the caziques, at his approach,
fled to the mountains with all their people, and
carried off or destroyed whatever could afford
subsistence to his troops. Others colleced their
fubjeets, in order to oppose his progress, and
he quickly perceived what an arduous under-
taking it was, to condu& such a body of men
through hofile nations, across swamps and ri-
vers, and woods, which had never been passed
but by straggling Indians. But by haring in
every hardship with' the meanest soldier, by ap-
pearing the foremost to meet every danger, by
promising confidently to his troops the enjoy-
mnht of honour and riches superior to what had
been attained by the mofi successful of their
countrymen, he inspired them with such en-
thufiaftic resolution, that they followed him
without murmuring. When they had pene-
trated a good way into the mountains, a power-
ful cazique appeared in a narrow pals, with a
numerous body of his fubjecs, to obftruac their

8 progrcfs.

progdfs. Bet entn who had surmounted b BO OK p
tiny bftacles, despised the opposition of such -'
feble enemies. They attacked them with im-
petuofity, and having dispersed them with
fiuch cafe and great slaughter, continued their
march. Though their guides had represented
the breadth of the isthmus to be only a journey
of fix days, they had already spent twenty-five
in forcing their way through the woods and
mountains. Many of them were ready to fink
under such uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry
climate, several were seized with the diseases
peculiar to the country, and all became impa-
tient to reach the period of their labours and
sufferings. -At length the Indians assured them,
that from the top of the next mountain they
should discover the ocean which was the objeit
of their wishes. When, with infinite toil, they
had climbed up the greater part of that steep
ascent, Balboa commanded his men to halt, and
advanced alone to the summit, that he might
be the first who should enjoy a fpe&tacle which
he had so long desired. As oon as lie beheld
the South Sea stretching in endless profpet be-
low him, he fell on his knees, and lifting up
his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to God,
who had conlduded him to a discovery so bene-
ficial to his country, and so honourable to him-
ftlf. His followers, obfcrving his tranfsorts

VoL. 1. r f

B o, K of joy, rushed forward to join in his wonder
m- '-s exultation and gratitude. They held on thei

course to the shore with great alacrity, whet
Balboa advancing up to the middle in the wave
with his buckler and sword, took poffeflion
that ocean in the name of the king his master,
and vowed to defend it, with these arms, againf
all his enemies c.

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern

ocean, which Balboa first discovered, fill re.
tains the name of the Gulf of St. Michael,
which he gave to it, and is situated to the east
of Panama. From several of the petty princes,
who governed in the diftrits adjacent to that
gulf, he extorted provisions and gold by force
of arms. Others ent them to him voluntarily.
To these acceptable presents, ome of the caziques
added a considerable quantity of pearls; and he
learned from them, with much fatisfation, that
pearl oysterS abounded in the sea which he had
newly discovered.

He receives TooETHER with the acquisition of this wealth,
information
concerning which served to soothe and encourage his fol-
a more opu-
lent coun- lowers, he received accounts which confirmed
iry.

c Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. i, &c. Gomara, c. 6,
&c. P. Martyr, decad. p. 205, &c.

hii

his sanguine hopes of future and more extensive B Ko o
benefits from the expedition. All the people I,.
on the coast of the South Sea concurred in in-
forming him that there was a mighty and opu-
lent kingdom situated at a considerable distance
towards the south-east, the inhabitants of which
had tame animals to carry their burdens. In or-
der to give the Spaniards an idea of these, they
drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas or
lheep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Pe-
ruvians had taught to perform luch ervices as
they described. As the Llama, in its form,
nearly resembles a camel, a beast of burden
deemed peculiar toAfia, this circumfiance, in
conjunction with the discovery of the pearls,
another noted production of that country, tend-
ed to confirm the Spaniards in their mistaken
theory with refpet to the vicinity of the New
World to the East Indies d.

BUT though the information which Balboa Obliged to

received from the people on the coast, as well
as his own conjectures and hopes, rendered him
extremely impatient to visit this unknown
country, his prudence restrained him from at-
tenmpting to invade it with an handful of men,

d Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 2.

U 2 cxhaulecd

) 0 IC exhausted by fatigue, and weakened by diseases .
c-v *-. He determined to lead back his followers, at

present, to their ettlement at Santa Maria in
Darien, and to return next season with a force
more adequate to such an arduous enterprize.
In order to acquire a more extensive knowledge
of the isthmus, he marched back by a different
route, which he found to be no less dangerous
and difficult than that which he had formerly
taken. But to men elated with success, and
animated with hope, nothing is infurmount-
t,,4. able. Balboa returned to Santa Maria, from

which he had been absent four months, with
greater glory and more treasure than the Spa-
niards had acquired in any expedition in the
New World. None of Balboa's officers diftin-
guifhed himself more in this service than Fran-
cilco Pizarro, or assisted with greater courage
and ardour in opening a communication with
thole countries, in which he was destined to at
loon a most illustrious part f.

prelrarias BALBOA'S first care was to fend information
appointed v,-rnor of to Spain of the important discovery which he
Lai n.

had made; and to demand a reinforcement of

Sec NOTE E XXI\V.
-lelcr ra, . . i.cc.

. i . 3-6. Gomara, c. 6.
[. Martyr, dec. p. zz2, &C.

a thou-

a thousand men, in order to attempt the con- B olo K
quest of that opulent country, concerning which 1' i<.
he had received such inviting intelligence.
The first account of the discovery of the New
World hardly occasioned greater joy, than the
unexpeted tidings, that a palTage was at las
found to the great southern ocean. The com-
munication with the East Indies, by a course
to the westward of the line of demarcation,
drawn by the Pope, seemed now to be certain.
The vast wealth which flowed into Portugal
from its settlements and conquests in that
country, excited the envy and called forth the
emulation of other states. Ferdinand hoped
now to come in for a share in this lucrative
commerce, and in his eagcrnefs to obtain it,
was willing to make an effort beyond what
Balboa required. But even in this exertion,
his jealous policy, as well as the fatal antipathy
of Fonseca, now bishop of Burgos, to every
man of merit who diltinguifhed himself in
the New World, were conspicuous. Notwith-
standing Balboa's recent services, which marked
him out as the most proper person to finish
that great undertaking which he had begun,
Ferdinand was so ungenerous as to overlook
these, and to appoint Pedrarias Davila governor
of Darien. He gave him the command of
fifteen Rout vessels, and twelve hundred fol-

U 3 dicrs.

B (1° K diers. These were fitted out at the public ex.

pence, with a liberality which Ferdinand had
never diiplayed in any former armament def.
tined for the New World; and such was the
ardour of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a
leader who was about to condu& them to a
country, where, as fame reported, they had
only to throw their nets into the sea and draw
out gold , that fifteen hundred embarked on
board the fleet, and if they had not been re.
strained, a much greater number would have
engaged in the service h

PEDRARIAS reached the gulf of Darien with-

out any remarkable accident, and immediately
sent ome of his principal officers ahore ta
inform Balboa of his arrival, with the king's
commifon, to be governor of the colony. lo
their aftonifhmenr, they found Balboa, of whole
great exploits they had heard so much, and
of whole opulence they had formed such hihi
ideas, clad in a canvas jacket, and wearing
coarse hempen sandals ued only by the meancll
peafnts, employed, together with ome In-
dians, in thatching his own hut with reeds.
Even in this simple garb, which correipcndcd

Hlerrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 14.

1 Ibid. dec. . lib. x. c. 6, 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. 1,7.
óg6.

So

so ill with the expectations and wishes of his new B 0, K
cuets, Balboa received them with dignity. The '-4
fame of his discoveries had drawn so many ad-
venturers from the islands, that he could now
muster four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than
a match for the forces which Pedrarias brought
with him. But though his troops murmured
loudly at the injultice of the king in superseding
their commander, and complained that ftrang-
ers would now reap the fruits of their toil
and success, Balboa submitted with implicit
obedience to the will of his sovereign, and
received Pedrarias with all the deference due to
his character'.

NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation, to which Dissention

between him

Pedrarias owed the peaceable pofflflion of his and Balboa.
government, he appointed a judicial inquiry
to be made into Balboa's conduct, while under
the command of Nicueffa, and imposed a con-
fiderable fine upon him, on account of the
irregularities of which he had then been guilty.
Balboa felt sensibly the mortification of being
fibjeted to trial and to punihmnent in a place
where he had so lately occupied the first station.
Pedrarias could not conceal his jealousy of his

i Ilerrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 13, 14.

U 4 fupcrior

BO o K superior merit; so that the resentment of the

5'. -one, and the envy of the other, gave rife to

diffcntions extremely detrimental to the colony.
It was threatened with a calamity ill more
July. fatal. Pedrarias had landed in Darien at a

most unlucky time of the year, about the
middle of the rainy season, in that part of the
torrid zone where the clouds pour down such
torrents as are unknown in more temperate
climates . The village of Santa Maria was
feated in a rich plain, environed with marlhes
and woods. The constitution of Europeans
was unable to withstand the pestilential in-
fluence of such a situation, in a climate natu-
rally so noxious, and at a season so peculiarly
unhealthy. A violent and deftru&tive malady
carried off many of the soldiers who accompa-
nied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity of pro-
viions augmented this distress, as it rendered
it impoflible to find proper refreshment for the
sick, or the necessary iulfienance for the healthy .
In the space of a month, above fix hundred
persons perished in the utmost misery. Dc-
jedion and depair spread through the colony.
Many principal persons lolicited their difmif-
lion, and were glad to rclinquilh all their hopes

k Richard Hilt. Naturelle de 'Air, tom. i. p. zo4.

iHerrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 1.. P. Martyr, dec. p). 272.

of

of wealth, in order to cfcape from that perni- B °o K
cious region. Pedrarias endeavoured to divert -v-.
those who remained from brooding over their
misfortunes, by finding them employment.
With this view, he lent several detachments
into the interior parts of the country, to levy
gold among the natives, and to search for the
mines in which it was produced. Those rapa-
cious adventurers, more attentive to prefcnt
gain than to the means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without diftindcion
wherever they marched. Regardless of the
alliances which Balboa had made with several
of the caziques, they stripped them of every
thing valuable, and treated them, as well as
their subje&s, with the utmost insolence and
cruelty. By their tyranny and exations, which
Pedrarias, either from want of authority or of
inclination, did not restrain, all the country
from the gulf of Darien to the lake of Nica-
ragua was desolated, and the Spaniards were
inconsiderately deprived of the advantages
which they might have derived from the friend-
ship of the natives, in extending their conquests
to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with con-
cern that flch ill-judged proceedings retarded
the execution of his favourite scheme, sent
violent remonflrances to Spain against the im-
prudent government of Pedrarias, which had

ruined

B o K ruined a happy and flourilhing colony. Pedra.
1_i rias, on the other hand, accused him of having

54 deceived the king, by magnifying his own ex.

ploits, as well as by a false representation of the
opulence and value of the country m.

Violent pro- FERDINAND became sensible at length of his
gcadils- imprudence in superseding the molt ative and

experienced officer he had in the New World,
and, by way of compensation to Balboa, ap-
pointed him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-gover-
nor of the countries upon the South Sea, with
very extensive privileges and authority. At
the fame time he enjoined Pedrarias to support
Balboa in all his operations, and to consult
with him concerning every measure which he
sTs.- himself pursued. But to effe such a sudden

transition from inveterate enmity to perfet
confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power. Pc-
drarias continued to treat his rival with neg-
let&; and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by
the payment of his fine, and other exactions
of Pedrarias, he could not make suitable pre-
parations for taking poffellion of his new go-
vernment. At length, by the interposition
and exhortations of the bilhop of Darien, they

m Herrera, dec. g. lib. x. c. 15. dec. z. c. , &c. Go.

mara, c. 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. 10. Relacion dc B.
de las Casas, p. 12.

werc

were brought to a reconciliation; and, in order B O K
to cement this union more firmly, Pedrarias ' -
agreed to give his daughter in marriage to
Balboa. The first effect of their concord was, s5C.
that Balboa was permitted to make several
small incursions into the country. These he
conduted with such prudence, as added to the
reputation which he had already acquired.
Many adventurers resorted to him, and, with
the countenance and aid of Pedrarias, he began
to prepare for his expedition to the South Sea.
In order to accomplifli this, it was necessary to
build vessels capable of conveying his troops to
those provinces which he purposed to invade.
After surmounting many obstacles, and endur- 1517,
ing a variety of those hardships which were
the portion of the conquerors of America, he
at length finished four small brigantines. In
there, with three hundred chosen men, a force
superior to that with which Pizarro afterwards
undertook the fame expedition, he was ready
to fail towards Peru, when he received an un-
expected message from Pedrarias . As his re-
conciliation with Balboa had never been cordial,
the progress which his fon-in-law was making
revived his ancient enmity, and added to its ran-
cour. He dreaded the prosperity and elevation

Ierrera, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. 11. 13. s2.

of

B 0I K of a man whom he had injured o deeply. HI

5J17, fufpeóted that fuccels would encourage him t(

aim at independence upon his jurifdidlion; anc
so violently did the passions of hatred, fear, anc
jealousy, operate upon his mind, that, in order
to gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to
cefeat an enterprise of the greatest moment to
his country. Under pretexts which were falfc,
but plausible, he delired Balboa to postpone
his voyage for a short time, and to repair to
Acla, in urder that he might have an inter.
view with him. Balboa, with the unlufpicious
confidence of a man conscious of no crime, in-
flantly obeyed the summons; but as oon as he
entered the place, he was arrested by order of
Pedrarias, whole impatience to satiate his re-
venge did not susser him to languish long in
confinement. Judges were immediately ap-
pointed to proceed to his trial. An accusation
of disloyalty to the king, and of an intention
to revolt against the governor, was preferred
against him. Sentence of death was pro-
nounced; and though the judges who pafied
it, seconded by the whole colony, intercdci
warmly for his paidon, Pedrarias continred
inexorable; and the Spaniards beheld, with
astonishment and sorrow, the public execution
of a man whom they univcrllly deemed u(lc
capable than any who had borne comm:ind i;1

4 Alllcr:.,

America, f forming and accomplishing great B, Ko
decigns . Upon his death, the expedition -
which he had.planned was relinquilhed. Pe-
drarias, notwithstanding the violence and in-
justice of his proceedings, was notonly screened
from punihrment by .the powerful patronage
of the bishop of Burgas and other courtiers,
but continued in power. Soon after, he ob-
tained permifion to remove the colony from
its unwholfiome fation at Santa Maria to
Panama, on the opposite fide of the isthmus;
and though it did not gainr much in point of
healthifulnef by the change, the commodious
situation of this new settlement contributed
greatly to facilitate the subsequent conquests of
the Spaniards in the extensive countries. situated
upon the Southern Ocean P.
DURING these tranfaEtions in Darien, the Is;is

New al"-

history of which it was proper to carry on in vas.
an uninterrupted tenour, several important
events occurred with refple4 to the discovery,
the conquest, and government of other pro-
vinces in the New World. Ferdinand was
intent upon opening a communication with
the Molucca or Spice Islands by the welt, that,
in the year one tlhouland five hundred and
* lterera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. ,. z. P ibid. lib. iv. c. .

sift ccln,

1oo oK fifteen, he fitted out two hips at his own ex

l.
___k pence, in order to attempt such a voyage, ant

7' gave the command of them to Juan Diaz d

Solis, who was deemed one of the most fkilfu
navigators in Spain. He tsood along the coaf
of South America, and on the first of Januar1
one thousand five hundred and sixteen, enterec
a river which he called Janeiro, where an ex
tensive commerce is now carried on. From
thence he proceeded to a spacious bay, which
he supposed to be the entrance into a strait that
communicated with the Indian ocean ; but up-
on advancing farther, he found it to be the
mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vast rivers
by which the southern continent of America is
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent
in this country, De Solis and several of his
crew were slain by the natives, who, in fight
of the hips, cut their bodies in pieces, roasted
and devoured them. Discouraged with the
loss of their commander, and terrified at this
Shocking fpedtacle, the surviving Spaniards ser
fail for Europe, without aiming at any farther
dilcovery 9. Though this attempt proved abor-
tive, it was not without benefit. It turned
the attention of ingenious men to this course
of navigation, and prepared the way for a nlore
q Herrera, dec. 2, lib. i. c, 7. P. Martyr, decad. p. 317

fortunate

fortunate voyage, by which, a few years pofte- B K
rior to this period, the great design that Ferdi- ' ,-
nand had in view was accomplilhed.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus atively tate of the

colony n

employed in extending their discoveries and Hifrpmoa.
settlements in America, they ill confidered
Hispaniola as their principal colony, and the
feat of government. Don Diego Columbus
wanted neither inclination nor abilities to have
rendered the members of this colony, who were
most immediately under his jurifdiaion, profpe-
rous and happy. But he was circumscribed in
all his operations by the suspicious policy of
Ferdinand, who on every occasion, and under
pretexts the most frivolous, retrenched his pri-
vileges, and encouraged the treasurer, the
judges, and other subordinate officers, to coun-
terad his measures, and to dispute his autho-
rity. The most valuable prerogative which
the governor possessed, was that of distributing
Indians among the Spaniards fettled in the
island. The rigorous servitude of those un-
happy men having been but little mitigated by
all the regulations in their favour, the power
of parcelling out such necessary instruments of
labour at plealure, secured to the governor
great influence in the colony. In order to
Itrip him of this, Ferdinand created a new

office,

oo. C office, with the power of distributing the In
NI.
v%.%~ dians, and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albu

35'7. querque, a relation of Zapata, his confidentia

minister. Mortified with the injustice, as wel
as indignity, of this invasion upon his rights
in a point so eflfcial, Don Diego could no
longer remain in a place where his power and
consequence were almost annihilated. He re.
paired to Spain with the vain hopes of obtain-
ing redress'. Albuquerque entered upon his
office with all the rapacity of an indigent ad-
venturer, impatient to amass wealth. He
began with taking the exact number of Indians
in the island, and found, that from sixty thou-
sand, who, in the year one thoofand five hun-
dred and eight, survived after all their fffer-
ings, they were now reduced to fourteen thou-
sand. These he threw into separate divisions
or lots, and bestowed them upon such as were
willing to purchase them at the highest price.
By this arbitrary distribution, several of the
natives were removed from their original habi-
tations, many were taken from their ancient
matRers, and all of them fubje6ted to heavier
burdens, and to more intolerable labour, in
order to rcimburfe their new proprietors.
Those additional calamities completed tht

Herrera, dec. . lib. ix, c. . lib. x. c. 12.

l iil'ry,

nifery, and hastened on the extintion of this BiOOK
wretched and innocent race of men'. Ls7

THE violence of these proceedings, together Co.ntroery

0

& ' o with rfpeeq
with the fatal conlrfquences which attended to''""C';

-nlcnt us the

them, not only excited complaints among such l"nd,'s.
as thought themselves aggrieved, but touched
the hearts of all who retained any sentiments
of humanity. From the time that Ecclesiastics
were ent as inftrudCors into America, they
perceived that the rigour with which their
countrymen treated the natives, rendered their
minitry altogether fruitless. The miflionaries,
in conformity to the mild spirit of that religion
which they were employed to publish, early
remonitrated against the maxims of the planters
with reipeft to the Americans, and condemned
the reparimienios, or dijlributions, by which
they were given up as slaves to their con-
querors, as no less contrary to natural justice
and the precepts of Chrittianity, than to found
policy. The ominicans, to whom the in-
ftrudion of the Americans was originally com-
mitted, were most vehement in testifying against
the repartiieptos. In the year one thouand
five hundred and eleven, Montcfino, one of
their molt eminent preachers, inveighed aail!lt

Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. xz.
VOL. I. X this

BOOK this pra&ice in the great church at St. Do

ill.
^- --mingo, with all the impetuosity of popula

eloquence. Don Diego Columbus, the prin.
cipal officers of the colony, and all the laymen
who had been his hearers, complained of the
monk to his superiors; but they, inilead ol
condemning, applauded his doctrine, as equally
pious and leafonable. The Franciscans, in-
fluenced by the spirit of opposition and rival.
hip which subsists between the two orders,
discovered orme inclination to take part with
the laity, and to espouse the defence of the
repartimieiztos. But as they could not with de.
cency give their avowed approbation to a system
of oppression, so repugnant to the spirit f
religion, they endeavoured to palliate what they
could not justify, and alleged, in excu:e for
the conducE of their countrymen, that it was
impossible to carry on any improvement in the
colony, unless the Spaniards possessed such do-
minion over the natives, that they could com-
pel them to labour '.

Contraryde- THE Dominicans, regardless of fch political
Cllonb coiI- Z
ec.n)ing ltis and interefied considerations, would not relax

in any degree the rigour of their Icntiments,
and even refuscd to ablblvc, or admit to th!

2 lIerrera, dec. I. lib. viii. c. I1. Oviedo, lil. iii
c. 6. p. 97

i:\cra-

sacraments, such of their countrymen as conti- BOOK
nued to hold the natives in servitude . Both 5 7
parties applied to the king for his decision in a
matter of such importance. Ferdinand empower-
ed a committee of his privy-council, alilted by
some of the mofl eminent civilians and divines in
Spain, to hear the deputies ent from Hispaniola,
in support of their relpective opinions. After
a long difcufiion, the speculative point in con-
troverfy was determined in favour of the I)o-
minicans, the Indians were declared to be a
free people, intitled to all the natural rights of
men; but, notwithstanding this decision, the
repartimienlos were continued upon their ancient
footing w. As this determination admitted the
principle upon which the Dominicans founded
their opinion, they renewed their efforts to ob-
tain relief for the Indians with additional bold-
ness and zeal. At length, in order to quiet
the colony, which was alarmed by their
remonstrances and censures, Ferdinand issued
a decree of his privy-council, declaring, that
after mature consideration of the Apoltolic
Bull, and other titles by which the crown of
Caltile claimed a right to its pCffeTins in the s1534
New World, the ervitude of the Indians was
warranted both by the laws of God waid of

O()viedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97.
W llncra, Lec. . lib. viii. c. . 12 . ix. c. 5.

X 2 man

BOOK man that unless they were fubjeaed to tlh
5'","~ dominion of the Spaniards, and compelled t(

reside under their infpetion, it would be im.
poflible to reclaim them from idolatry, or tc
inftru6 them in the principles of the Chriltiar
faith that no farther scruple ought to be en.
tertained concerning the lawfulness of the rpar.
timientos, as the king and council were willing
to take the charge of that upon their own con-
sciences; and that therefore the Dominicans,
and monks of other religious orders, hould
abstain, for the future, from those invecives,
which, from an excess of charitable, but ill-
informed zeal, they had uttered against that
practice y.

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree

might be fully undertood, Ferdinand con-
ferred new grants of Indians upon several of
his courtiers . But, in order that he might
not eem altogether inattentive to the rights
of humanity, he published an edict, in which
he endeavoured to provide for the mild treat-
ment of the Indians under the yoke to which
he fubje&ed them; he regulated the nature of
the work which they hould be required to
perform, he prescribed the mode in which they

Y Hcrrcra, dec. . lib. ix. c. 4. z See NOTE XXV.

fliould

should be clothed and fed, and gave directions B o, K
with refpe& to their inftruaion in the principles 7'-'
of Christianity .

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their ex- Eot

there.

perience of what was past, judged concerning
the future, oon perceived the inefficacy of
those provisions, and foretold, that as long as
it was the interest of individuals to treat the
Indians with rigour, no public regulations
could render their servitude mild or tolerable.
They confidered it as vain to waste their own
time and trength in attempting to commu-
nicate the sublime truths of religion to men,
whose spirits were broken, and their faculties
impaired by opprefflon. Some of them, in
despair, requested the permission of their fupe-
riors to remove to the continent, and to pursue
the object of their mission, among such of the
natives as were not hitherto corrupted by the
example of the Spaniards, or alienated by their
cruelty from the Christian faith. Such as re-
mained in Hispaniola continued to remonstrate,
with decent firmness, against the servitude of the
Indians .

a Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14.
b lerrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hiif. Gener.
de l'.mcriue, tom. i. p. 25z.

X 3 T'HIE

B 0 0K THE violent operations of Albuquerque, the
' ,,-- new distributor of Indians, revived the zeal of

.etllo- the Dominicans against the repartimientos, and

pear inp called forth an advocate for that oppressed
fnc people, who all the courage, t
Indians. people, who Foflslsed all the courage, the

talents, and aivity rquifite in supporting
such a desperate caule. This was Bartholo-
mew de las Casas, a native of Seville, and oe
of the clergymen sent out with Columbus in
his second voyage to Hilfpaniola, in order ta
fettle in that island. He early adopted tile
opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics, with
refpe& to the unlavfulnefs of reducing the
natives to servitude; and that he might demon.
firate the sincerity of his conviccion, he relin-
quifhed all the Indians who had fallen to his
own fliare in the division of the inhabitants
among their conquerors, declaring that he flould
ever bwail his own misfortune and guilt, in
having exercised for a moment this inpious do-
minion over his fellow-creatures . From that
tirme, he became the avowed patron of the In-
dians ; and by his bold interpositions in their be-
half, a well as by the respect due to his abilities
and character, he had often the merit of fclting
some bounds to the cxceffes of his country-

c Fr. Ang. Davila Padiila IIilt. dc la Fundacion e la

Plorincia tic St. IaLo dc MelxicQ, p. oj, 304. Ilcrrcr.,
dpc. i. lib. x. c. iz.

In'II.

men. He did not fail to remonstrate warmly lB 1 K
againRf the proceedings of Albuquerque, and, '*7'
though he oon found that attention to his own
interest rendered that rapacious officer deaf to
admonition, he did not abandon the wretched
people whose cause he had espoused. He in-
ftantly set out for Spain, with the most sanguine
hopes of opening the eyes and softening the heart
of Ferdinand, by that friking picture of the op-
pression of his new fubjeas, which he would ex-
hibit to his viewd.

HE easily obtained admittance to the king, Ice6.

~~~~~~~~~' . . ° Solicit& theit
whom he found in a declining state of health. ciufcin th

court of

With much freedom, and no less eloquence, he Spain.
represented to him all the fatal effects of the re-
partimienos in the New World, boldly charging
him with the guilt of having authorised this
impious measure, which had brought misery and
deflrution upon a numerous and innocent race
of men, whom Providence had placed under
his protetion. Ferdinand, whose mind as well
as body was much enfeebled by his distemper,
was greatly alarmed at this charge of impiety,
which at another junaure he would have de-
spifcd. He listened with deep compunction to
the dilcourle of Las Casas, and promifid to

d lHerrera, dec. . lib. x. c. z. Dee. . lib.i. c. ii.
Davila Padilla Hilt. p. 304.

X 4 take

00K take into serious confidecation the means of reh
IlL.
-v~-'y dressing the evil of which he complained. But

death prevented him frort executing his refolu.
tion. Charles of Austria, to whom all his
crowns devolved, resided at that time in his pa.
ternal dominions in the Low Countries. Las
Casas, with his usual ardour, prepared imme.
diately to set out for Slanders, in order to occupy
the ear of the young monarch, when cardinal
Ximenes, who, as regent, aumed the reins of
government in Castile, commanded him to defifl
from the journey, and engaged to hear his com.
plaints in person.

The rcfJca- HE accordingly weighed the matter with
tions of car-
cAr^A. attention equal to its importance; and as hi;

impetuous mind delighted in schemes bold and
uncommon, he oon fixed upon a plan which
altonifhcd the ministers; trained up under the
formal and cautious administration of Ferdi-
nand. Without regarding either the rights of
Don Diego Columbus, or the regulations efta-
blifhed by the late king, he resolved to fend
three perfobs to America as fiiperinccndcnts of
all the colonies there, with authority, afrer
examining all circumftanccs on tlhe spot, to dc-
cide finally with reflrpe to the point in quefiion.
It was a matter of deliberation and delicacy
to chute men qualified for such an inportant

flation.

Ration. As all the laymen fettled in America, B ,0 o
or who had been consulted in the administration m7.-
of that department, had given their opinion that
the Spaniards could not keep pofleffion of their
new settlements, unless they were allowed to retain
their dominion over the Indians, he saw that he
could not rely on their impartiality, and deter-
mined to commit the trust to ecclesiastics. As
the Dominicans and Franciscans had already
cfpoufed opposite fides in the controversy, he,
from the fame principle of impartiality, excluded
bath these fraternities from the commifflon. He
confined his choice to the monks of St. Je-
rome, a small, but refpec'able order in Spain.
With the assistance of their general, and in con-
cert with Las Casas, he soon pitched upon three
persons whom he deemed equal to the charge,
To them he joined Zuazo, a private law-
yer of distinguished probity, with unbound-
ed power to regulate all judicial proceedings
in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to
accompany them, with the title of Protetor of
the Indians '.

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might Them-anan
at once overturn the system of government tely uwcd
eRablitled in the New World, in four persons,

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

who,

8 0 o who, from their humble condition in life, wer

-7s7. little intitled to possess this high authority, ap

peared to Zapata, and other ministers of t.
late king, a measure so wild and dangerous
that they refused to issue the dilpatches ncccf
fary for carrying it into execution. But Xi
menes was not of a temper patiently to brook
opposition to any of his fchernes. He sent foi
the refractory ministers, and adldreffed theml i.
such a tone, that in the tmoft confternaticn
they obeyed his orders '. The -l;perin:endea:s,
with their associate Zujzo, and Las Calas,
failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival,
the first at of their authority was to set at
liberty all the Indians who had been granted
to the Spanish courtiers, or to any person not
refilling in America. This, together with the
information which had been received from
Spain concerning the objec: of the commilfion,
spread a general alarm. The colonists con.
cluded that they were to be deprived at once
of the hands with which they carried on their
labour, and that, of consequence, ruin was un-
avoidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome pro.
ceeded with such caution and prudence, as blon
diflipated all their fears. 'They dilfcvcrcJ, in
every ftcp of their conduct, a knowledge of the

f Icrrcra, dec. . lib. ii. c. 6.

world!,

world, and of affairs, which is lcldom acquired B oo K
in a cloilter; and displayed a moderation as well -
as gentleness still more rare among persons train- 5
ed up in the solitude and austerity of a monastic
life. Their ears were open to information
from every quarter, they compared the dif-
ferent accounts which they received, and, after
a mature conlideration of the whole, they were
filly satisfied that the state of the colony ren-
dered it impossible to adopt the plan proposed
by Las Casas, and recommended by the Car-
dinal. They plainly perceived that the Spa-
niards fettled in America were so few in num-
ber, that they could neither work the mines
which had been opened, nor cultivate the coun-
try; that they depended for effcting both upon
the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they must initantly relinquish their conquelts, or
give up all the advantages which they derived
from them; that no allurement was so power-
ful as to surmount the natuial aversion of the
Indians to any laborious effort, and that no-
thing but the authority of a mafler could com-
prl them to work; and if they were not kept
constantly under the eye and dilfipline of a
fup)rior, so great was their natural lillcf'nefs
and indifference, that they would neither attend
to religiou, intlrudlion, nor oblirve those rites
of Chriltianity which they had been already

tailght.

B o K taught. Upon all those accounts, the super.

- intendents found it necessary to tolerate the

repartimientos, and to susser the Indians to re.
main under fubje&tion to their Spanilh masters,
They used their utmost endeavours, however, to
prevent the fatal effects of this eltabliflment,
and to secure to the Indians the consolation of
the best treatment compatible with a tlate of ser.
vitude. For this purpose, they revived former
regulations, they prescribed new ones, they
negleEted no circumstance that tended to miti.
gate the rigour of the yoke; and by their
authority, their example, and their exhorta.
tions, they laboured to inspire their country.
men with sentiments of equity and gentlenes
towards the unhappy people upon whose in-
duftry they depended. Zuazo, in his depart-
ment, seconded the endeavours of the fuperin-
tendents. He reformed the courts of jufric,
in such a manner as to render their decisions
equitable as well as expeditious, and intro-
duced various regulations which greatly im-
proved the interior police of the colony. The
fatisfaaion which his condu&, and that of the
superintendents gave, was now universal among
the Spaniards fettled in the New World, and
all admired the boldness of Ximenes, in hav-
ing departed from the ordinary path of bufinlls
in forming his plan, as well as his sagacity, in

5 Iitcl.ing

pitching upon persons, whose wisdom, mode- BOo ,K
ration, and difntereftednefs rendered them wor-

s7.
thy of this high trust 5.

LAS CASAS alone was difratisfied. The pru- La Cafua

difatisfied

dential considerations which influenced the With thm.
ftuperintendents, made no imprefflon upon him.
He regarded their idea of accommodating their
conduct to the slate of the colony, as the maxim
of an unhallowed timid policy, which tole-
rated what was unjufs, because it was benefi-
cial. He contended, that the Indians were
by nature free, and, as theirprote&tor, he re-
quired the superintendents not to bereave
them of the common privilege of humanity.
They received his most virulent remonitrances
without emotion, but adhered firmly to their
own system. The Spanish planters did not
bear with him so patiently, and were ready to
tear him in pieces for insisting in a requisition
so odious to them. Las Casas, in order to
screen himself from their rage, found it necef-
fary to take heiter in a convent; and perceiv-
ing that all his efforts in America were fruitless,
he oon set out for Europe, with a fixed refo-
lution not to abandon the protection of a people
whonm he deemed to be cruelly opprelfod .

c Ilerrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 15. Remcnal Hit. Gener.
lib. ii. c. 14, 15, i6.

licrrera, dc. z. lib. ii, c. 16.

HAD

BOa O K HAD Ximenes retained that vigour of mind
v--*- with which he ulually applied to bufiners, Las

Hitsncoci- Casas mull have met with no very gracious re-
ations with
he minar' ception uponup his return to Spain. But he found

the Caidinal languishing under a mortal diftcm.
per, and preparing to resign his authority to the
young king, who was daily expeced from the
Low Countries. Charles arrived, took posses.
sion of the government, and, by the death of
Ximenes, loft a minilter, whose abilities and
integrity intitled him to direct his affairs.
Many of the Flemish nobility had accompanied
their sovereign to Spain. From that warm
predilection to his countrymen, which was na-
tural at his age, he consulted them with rclfpec
to all the transactions in his new kingdom, and
they, with an indifcreec eagerness, intruded
themlelves into every business, and seized al.
most every department of adminifIration h. The
direction of American affairs was an objct too
alluring to escape their attention. Las Calis
observed their growing influence, and though
projecors are ulually too Languine to condult
their Ichemes with much dexterity, he pofcnlcd
a bustling indefatigable activity, which lonm-
times accomplishes its purposes with greater
fucccfs, than the most exquisite dilccrnmcnt

X Hiil. of Charles V. ol. ii. p. 43.

and

and address. He courted the Flemish ministers B o oK0
with assiduity. He represented to them the ab- '---
furdity of all the maxims hitherto adopted with
refpec to the government of America, and par-
ticularly the defects of that arrangement which
Ximenes had introduced. The memory of
Ferdinand was odious to the Flemings. The
superior virtue and abilities of Ximenes had
long been the object of their envy. Tlhey
fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for
condemning the measures, both of the mo-
narch and of the minister, and of reflecting
some discredit on their political wisdom. The
friends of Don Diego Culumbus, as well as the
Spanish courtiers, who had been difatisfied
with the Cardinal's adminiflration, joined Las
Casas in censuring the cheme of ending lfi-
perintendents to America. This union of so
many interests and passions was irresistible; and,
in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Jerore,
together with their affuciate Zuazo, weic recall-
ed. Roderigo de Si ueroa, a lawyer of lime
eminence, was appointedl chiefjudge of the island,
and received initruciions, in compiiance wiili
the rqueft of Las Calis, to exacline once lnore,
with the utmott atcnrticn, the puint in colltro-
vcrly between him and th poplc of ihe colony,
wx:h refri t- to lC:inIn of the .:tivcs ;
and in the meazn tinic to do every thiing in his

S jJJ Wcr

B o1°K power to alleviate their sufferings, and prevent

L-c,, the extinction of the race '.

Scheme of THIS was all that the zeal of Las Casas could
thIPoio O procure, at that juncture, in favour of he In.
with nc-
grocs.n dians. The impossibility of carrying c any

improvement in America, unlels the Spanifl
planters could command the labour of the na.
tives, was an insuperable objeEtion to his plan
of treating them as free subjects. In order to
provide ome remedy for this, without vhich
he found it was in vain to mention his fclhere,
Las Casas proposed to purchae a lufficient
number of negroes from the Portuguese fttle-
ments on the coast of Africa, and to transport
them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and
cultivating the ground. One of the firit ad-
vantages which the Portuguese had derived
from their discoveries in Africa, arose from the
trade in slaves, Various circumstances concurred
in reviving this odious commerce, which had
been long abolished in Europe, and wlich is
no less repugnant to the feelings of humanity,
than to the principles of religion. As early as
the year one thousand five hundred and three,
a few negro slaves had been sent into the New

Hcrrcra, dec. a. lib. ii. c. 16. 9. 21. lib. iii. c. 7,8.

World

World . In the year one thousand five hundred B °, K
and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the importa- lv-.-

1527.

tion of them in greater numbers '. They were
ftund to be a more robust and hardy race than
the natives of America. They were more ca-
p. ble of enduring fatigue, more patient under
jervitude, and the labour of one negro was
computed to be equal to that of four Indians m.
Cardinal Xinmnes, however, when solicited to
encourage this commerce, peremptorily re-
icrted the proposition, because he perceived the
;llquity of reducing one race of men to slavery,
while he was confuting about the means of re-
laoring liberty to another . But Las Casas,
from the inconsistency natural to men who
hurry with headlong impetuosity towards a fa-
vourite point, was incapable of making this
lillinction. While he contended earneflly for
the liberty of the people born in one quarter of
the globe, he laboured to enslave the inhabit-
ants of another region and in the warmth of
his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke,
pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to
impose one still heavier upon the Africans.
Unfortunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan
was adopted. Charles granted a patent to one

kIlerrera, dec. . lib. v. c. 2. 1 Ibid. lib. viii.
tc. Ibid. lib. ix. c. . Ibid. 4ec . lib.
:;i c. 8.
V)L. Y of

BO K of his Flemish favourites, containing an cxclu.

v- ' five right of importing four thouland negros

into America. The favourite fold his patent to
ome Genoese merchants for twenty-five thousand
ducats, and they were the first who brought inu
a regular form that commerce for slaves betwcen
Africa and America, which has since been car-
ried on to luch an amazing extent a.

L.a.Cs BUT the Genoese merchants, conducting
Ip'ndipC their operations, at first, with the rapacity of

,panola. monopolists, demanded such an high price fur

negroes, that the number imported into l-liipa-
niola made no great change upon the state of
the colony. Las Casas, whose zeal was no less
inventive than indefatigable, had recourse to
another expedient for the relief of the Indians.
He observed, that most of the persons who had
fettled hitherto in America, were ailors and fol-
diers employed in the discovery or conquest
of the country; the younger sons of noble fa-
milies, allured by the profpet of acquiring
sudden wealth; or defperare adventurers, whom
their indigence or crimes forced to abandon
their native land. Inltead of such menh who
were difiblute, rapacious, and incapable of that
fober perfevcring indultry which is requisite in

H*irrera, dec, i. lib. ii. c. 20.

forming

forming new colonies, he proposed to supply BooK
the settlements in Hispaniola and other parts of

I 0sl

the New World with a sufficient number of la-
bourers and hulbandmen, who hould be allured
by fitable premiums to remove thither. Thele,
as they were a customed to fatigue, would be
able to perform the work, to which the Indians,
Iro:n the feeblencls of their conltitution, were
unequal, and might oon become useful and
opulent citizens. But though Hispaniola flood
much in need of a recruit of inhabitants, having
been visited at this time with the fall-pox,
which wept off almost all the natives who had
survived their long continued oppression, and
though Las Casas liad the countenance of the
Flemiih miniiters, this cheme was defeated by
the bishop of Burgos, who thwarted all his
projecs P.

LAS CASAS now despaired of procuring any Forms the

relief for the Indians in those places where the "tv co"lons
Spaniards were already fettled. The evil was
become so inveterate there, as not to admit of
a cure. But such discoveries were daily making
in the continent, as gave an high idea both of
its extent and populoulnefs. In all those val
regions there was but one feeble colony planted;
and except a small spot on the ifllmus of Da-

P errera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 21.

Y 2 ricn.

Bo K rien, the natives still occupied the whole coun.
1- t.J rry. This opened a new and mQre ample fitld

for the humanity and zeal of Las Casas, who
flattered himself that he might prevent a perni.
cious system from being introduced there,
though he had failed of success in his attempnts
to overturn it, where it was already eftablilhed.
Full of this idea, he applied for a grant of the
unoccupied country, firetching along the sea.
coast from the gulf of Paria to the western fron-
tier of that province now known by the name
of Santa Martha. He proposed to fettle there
with a colony composed of husbandmen, la-
bourers, and ecclesiastics. He engaged, in
the space of two years, to civilize ten thousand
of the natives, and to inftru& them so thoroughly
in the arts of social life, that, from the fruits
of their indutry, an annual revenue of fifteel
thousand ducats hould arise to the king. In
ten years he expected that his improvements
would be so far advanced, as to yield annually
sixty thousand ducats. He itipulated, that no
sailor or soldier Ihould ever be permitted to
Fettle in this diflri ; and that no Spaniard what-
ever hould enter it without his permifflion. e
even projected to clothe the people whom he
took along with him in ome peculiar garment,
which did not resemble the Spanilh dress, that
they might appear to the natives to be a dif-

ferent

ferent race of men from those who had brought B ° ° K
so many calamities upon their country . From - -5m
this scheme, of which I have traced only the
great lines, it is manifeff that Las Casas had
formed ideas concerning the method of treating
the Indians, similar to those by which the Je-
suits afterwards carried on their great opera-
tions in another part of the fame continent. He
supposed that the Europeans, by availing them-
lelves of that ascendant which they possessed in
consequence of their superior progress in science
and improvement, might gradually form the
minds of the Americans to relish those comforts
of which they were deititute, might train them
to the arts of civil life, and render them capable
of its functions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council Favourably
of the Indies this projec appeared not only
chimerical, but dangerous in a high degree.
They deemed the faculties of the Americans to
be naturally so limited, and their indolence so
excessive, that every attempt to inftrut or to
improve them would be fruitless. They con-
tended, that it would be extremely imprudent to
give the command of a country extending above
a thousand mile, along the coast, to a fanciful,

i Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. z.

Y 3 prefump-

B 0 oK presumptuous enthufiafl, a stranger to the as
-4_-' fairs of the world, and unacquainted with th,
1517.

arts of government. Las Casas, far from bein
discouraged with a repulse, which he had realo
to expect, had recourse once more to the 'le
mifli favourites, who zealously patronized lii
scheme, merely because it had been rejected b!
the Spanish minilters. They prevailed wi
their matter, who had lately been railed to ti;e
Imperial dignity, to refer the consideration ci
this measure to a flecEt number of his privy.
counsellors; and Las Casas having cx cp[ci
against the members of the council of the In.:,
as partial and interested, they were all exclutd.
The decision of men cholen by recommcndetion
of the Flemings, was perfcctly conformable o
their sentiments. They warmly approved of Las
Cafas's plan; and gave orders for carrying i:
into execution, but rcftrited the territory allot-
ted him to three hundred miles along the coal
of Cumana, allowing him, however, to extend it
as far as he pleased towards the interior part if
the country .

A solemn THiI determination did not pass uncerfurcd,
deliber.tiion "ncerdi'ng Almost every person who had been in the \\'clt
the idc of
trcating the
Indians. r Gomara Itil. Gener. c. 77. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. i

c. 3. Oviedo, lib, xix. c. 5.

IrlJi

Indies exclaimed against it, and supported their B 0 K
opinion so confidently, and with such plausible -~1-
reasons, as made it advileable to pause and to
review the fbjeft more deliberately. Charles
,imnfelf, though accustomed, at this early period
of his life, to adopt the sentiments of his mini-
lters, with such submissive deference as did not
promise that decisive vigour of mind which di-
ftinguilhed his riper years, could not help sus-
pecing that the eagerness with which the Fle-
mings took part in every affair relating to Ame-
rica, flowed from ome improper motive, and
began to discover an inclination to examine in
person into the state of the queflion concerning
the character of the Americans, and the proper
manner of treating them. An opportunity of Juneo.
making this inquiry, with great advantage, oon
occurred. Quevedo, the bithop of Darien,
who had accompanied Pedrarias to the conti-
nent in the year one thousand five hundred and
thirteen, happened to land at Barcelona, where
the court then resided. It was quickly known,
that his sentiments concerning the talents and
ilpofition of the Indians differed from those of
Las Calas; and Charles naturally concluded,
that by confronting two respectable perlbns,
who, during their relidence in America, had
full lcifure to obfi;-ve the manners of the people

Y 4 whom

B ° K whom they pretended to describe, he might be
I.. able to discover which of them had formed his

opinion with the greatelt discernment and ac-
curacy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was ap-

pointed. The emperor appeared with extraor-
dinary pomp, and took his eat on a throne in
the great hall of the palace. His principal
courtiers attended. Don Diego Columbus,
admiral of the Indies, was summoned to be
present. The bishop of Darien was called po,n
first to deliver his opinion. He, in a short dii-
course, lamented the fatal desolation of America,
by the extinction of so many of its inhabitints;
he acknowledged that this must be imputed, in
some degree, to the excessive rigour and inconfi-
derate proceedings of the Spaniards; but de-
clared, that all the people of the New World,
whom he had seen either in the continent or in
the islands, appeared to him to be a race of
men marked out, by the inferiority of their ta-
lents, for servitude, and whom it would be im-
possible to inftruft or improve, unless they were
kept under the continual infpeaion of a matter.
Las Casas, at greater length, and with more
fervour, defended his own system. He rejeEted
with indignation the idea that any race of men

5 was

was born to servitude, as irreligious and inhu- B °, K
mane. He asserted, that the faculties of the '- ,7.
Americans were not naturally despicable, but
unimproved; that they were capable of re-
ceiving inftru&ion in the principles of religion,
as well as of acquiring the industry and arts
which would qualify them for the various offices
of lbcial life ; that the mildness and timidity of
their nature rendered them so fubmilive and
docile, that they might be led and formed with
a gentle hand. -le profefled, that his inten-
tions in proposing the scheme now under con-
fidcration were pure and difinterefled; and
th(.ugh, from the accomplilminent of his de-
signs, inestimable benefits would reult to the
crown of Castile, he never had claimed, nor
ever would receive any recompence on that
account.

CHARLES, after hearing both, and consulting Thercheme,

with his minifrtrs, did not think himself fuffi- 3praoved f.
ciently informed to establish any general ar- 50
rangement with rel]pet to the itate of the In-
dians; but as he had perfect confidence in the
integrity of Las Casas, and as even the bishop
ofa larien admitted his cheme to be of fulch
importance, that a trial should be made of its
clicts, he issued a patent, granting him the
diilrilt in Cumana formerly mentioned, with

full

BOOI K full power to establish a colony there according

' to his own plan '.
1517.

His prepara- LAS CASAS pushed on the preparations for
tions for
cxecutng it. his voyage with his usual ardour. But, either

from his own inexperience in the conldut oi
affairs, or from the fccret opposition of the
Spanish nobility, who universally dreaded the
success of an institution that might rob them of
the industrious and useful hands which culti-
vated their estates, his progress in engaging
husbandmen and labourers was extremely flow,
and he could not prevail on more than two
hundred to accompany him to Cumana.

Departs for NOTHING, 'however, could damp his zeal.
:,in mce)ts With this slender train, hardly fufficicnt to talke
with frmi-
dahe b- pofefion of such a large territory, and altoge-
fla pcs.olar. e

ther unequal to any effccual attempt towards
civilizing its inhabitants, he'set fail. The silt
place at which he touched was the island of
Puerto Rico. There he received an account ot a
new obstacle to the execution of his scheme, more
insuperable than any he had hitherto encounter-
ed. When he left America in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and sixteen, the Spanialdl.s hli

' llerrera, dec. z. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfol A-

nanls d'Aragon, 74, 97. Rcniel; Ililt Gnc.r Ib. it.
. 19, 20.

little intercourfc with any part of the continent, BIO i
except the countries adjacent to the gulf of Da- 5,;7
lien. But as every species of internal industry
begain to stagnate in Hispaniola, when, by the
rapid decreale of the natives, the Spaniards
were deprived of those hands with which they
had hitherto carried on their operations, this
prompted them to try various expedients for
supplying that lols. Considerable numbers of
negroes were imported; but, on account of
their exorbitant price, many of the planters
could not affbrd to purchale them. In order
to procure saves at an eaflcr rate, tome of the
Sl)iniar.s in Hitpaniola fitted out vessels to cruize
along tle coall of tl:e continent. In places where
they found tlicmcllvcs inferior in strength, they
traded with the natives, and gave European toys
in exchange for the plates of gold worn by
them as ornaments; but, wherever they could
lurprife or overpower the Indians, they carried
them olF by force, and old them as saves t.
In tholie predatory xcurfions, the most atro-
cious as of violence and cruelty were com-
mitted. The Spanifl name was held in de-
tcltation all over the continent. \Vhenever
any Ihips appeared, the inhabitants either fled

'Ilcrrc:.a, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3.

to

Bo0oK to the woods, or rushed down to the hore ii

57 arms, to repel those hated dilturbers of thei

tranquillity. They forced ome parties of the
Spaniards to retreat with precipitation; the!
cut off others; and in the violence of their re
fentment againit the whole nation, they rur.
dered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal
had prompted them to fettle in the province of
Cumana ". This outrage againit persons re.
vered for their fancdity, excited such indigna-
tion among the people of Hispaniola, who,
notwithstanding all their licentious and cruel
proceedings, were poc'fled with a wonderful
zeal for religion, and a superstitious refpea for
its ministers, that they determined to inflict
exemplary punishment, not only upon the per-
petrators of that crime, but upon the whole
race. With this view, they gave the command
of five ships and three hundred men to Diego
Ocampo, with orders to lay waste the country
of Cumana with fire and sword, and to tranl-
port all the inhabitants as slaves to Hilpaniola.
Thliis armament Las Casas found at Puerto
Rico, in its way to the continent; and as
Ocampo refuled to defer his voyage, he imme-
diately perceived that it would be impofible to
attempt the execution of his pacific plan in a

u OviedofIilt. lib. xix. c. 3.

country

country dftined to be the feat of war and defo- B K
lation . --

IN order to provide gainft the effects of this ath April.

L ahou rs o
unfortunate incident, he iet fail directly for St. surmount

them.

Domingo, leaving his followers cant)ned out
among the planters in Puerto Rico. From
many concurring caulcs, the reception which
Las Casas met with in Hili)aniola was very un-
favourable. In his ncgociations for the relief
of the Indians, he had censured the conduct ot
his countrymen fettled there with fuich honest
flverity, as rendered hini universally odious to
them. They confidered their own ruin as the
inevitable consequence of his success. They
were now elated with hope of receiving a large
recruit of laves from Cumana, which must be
relinquished if Las Casas were assisted in fettling
his projeaed colony there. Figueroa, in con-
sequence of the inftrutions which he had re-
ceived in Spain, had made an experiment con-
cerning the capacity of the Indians, that was
represented as decisive against the system of Las
Casas. He collected in Hispaniola a good num-
ber of the natives, and fettled them in two vil-
lages, leaving them at perfec liberty, and with
the uncottrouled direcion of their own actions.

x lerrera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

But
.

BOOK But that people, accustomed to a mode of !;

il.
q5-.-J - extremely different, incapable of afumning new

habits at once, and dejeced with their own iii.
fortunes as well as those of their country, cx.
erted so little industry in cultivating the grotn,
appeared so devoid of solicitude or forcfilit n
providing for their own wants, ant were ii:
firangers to arrangement in conducing their ..
fairs, that the Spaniards pronounced them inca-
pable of being formed to live like men in
social life, and conlidered them as chilien,
who should be kept under the perpetual tutc.
lage of persons superior to themfclves in wifdu.i
and sagacity Y.

cnalmia f NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumftancc',
hischme. which alienated the persons in Hispaniola to

whom Las Casas applied from himself and from
his measures, he by his activity and perfeverancc,
by some concessions, and many threats, obtair.ci
at length.a small body of troops to protect hi:n
and his colony at their first landing. But upon
his return to Puerto Rico, he found that the dif-
cafes of the climate had been fatal to several of
his people; and that others having got employ.
ment in that island, refused to follow him.
With the handful that remained, he set fail ad

y IIercra, dec. z. lib. x. c. 5.

landcJ

landed in Cumana. Ocampo had executed his B o K
commifion in that province with such bar- -' -
barous rage, having mafTicred many of the in-
habitants, fnt others in chains to Hispaniola,
and forced the reft to fly for shelter to the
woods, that the people of a small colony, which
he had planted at a place which he named To-
,edo, were ready to perish for want in a defo-
lated country. There, however, Las Casas
was obliged to fix his residence, though de-
lerted both by the troops appointed to protect
him, and by thole under the command of
Ocampo, who forehaw and dreaded the calami-
ties to which he must be exposed in that
wretched flation. He made the best provision
in his power for the safety and subsistence of his
followers; but as his utmost efforts availed little
towards securing either the one or the other, he
returned to Hispaniola, in order to solicit more
rffctual aid for the preservation of men, who
from confidence in him had ventured into a polt
of so much danger. Soon after his departure,
the natives, having discovered the feeble and
defcncclefs state of the Spaniards, aflimbled
kcretly, attacked them with the fury natural
to men exasperated by many injuries, cut off a
good number, and compelled the refl to fly ia
the utmost conflernation to the iand of Cuba-
gua. The finall colony fettled there, on ac-

colunt

00 2K count of the pearl filhery, catching the )panic

- with which their countrymen had been seized,

abandoned the island, and not a Spaniard re-
mained in any part of the continent, or aldjacc-t
ilands, from the gulf of Paria to the borlers
of Darien. Astonished at such a fuccelInon
disasters, Las Casas was ahamed to shew his ficc
after this fatal termination of all his plendl
schemes. He shut himself up in the convent ,
the Dominicans at St. Domingo, and ocn aftci
assumed the habit of that order .

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony tfr,

Cumana happened in the year one thouland lis,
hundred and twenty-one, I have chosen to traic
the progress of Las Cafas's negociations fron
their first rife to their final issue without inter-
ruption. His system was the object of long nt:
attentive difcufllion and though his efforts i,1
behalf of the oppresscd Americans, partly son
his own rashness and imprudence, and p;:.i,
from the malevolent opposition of his adcr-
saries, were not attended with that success which
he promiled wuh too sanguine confidence, great
praise is due to his humane ativity, which gave

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, .;.

. Ovido Hist. lib. xix. c. 5. Gomara, c. 77. Davila
Padilla, lib. i. c, 97. Rcmifal Hill. Gen. lib. xi. c. 2:,
23.

rile

r ti' vaiibus regulations that were of rome B 0 K
beneffi t that unhappy people. I return now ,51,
to' he iiftory of the Spanith discoveries, as they
occur in trh order of time'.

JDieoo VELASQ.UEZ, who conquered Cuba in Newdifco.

the year one thousand' five hundred and eleven, vvlrd5 iio
still reiained the government of that island, as
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though
he seldom acknowledged his superior, and
aimed at rendering his own authority altogether
independent b. Under his prudent adminiltra-
rion, Cuba became one of the most flourishing
of the Spaiifli settlements. The fame of this
allurd' thither many persons from the other co-
lonies; in hopes of finding either some perma-
nent' eftablifiiment, or ome employment for
their acivity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all
the islands occupied by the Spaniards, and as
the ocean, which stretches' beyond it toward;
that quarter, had not hitherto been explored,
these circumstances naturally invited the inha-
bitants to attempt new discoveries. An expe-
dition for this purpose, in which acivity and
resolution might condut to sudden wealth, was
more suited to the genius of the age, than the

a Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 5. p. 3z9.
b Ibid. lib. ii. c. 19.
Vor.. I. Z paFtct

B ° oPK patient industry requisite in clearing ground
-v-^ and manufacturing sugar. Instigated by this

spirit, several officers, who had served undez
Pedrarias in Darien, entered into an association
to undertake a voyage of discovery. They per-
fuaded Francisco Hernandez Cordova, an opu-
lent planter in Cuba, and a man of diltinguifhed
courage, to join with them in the adventure,
and chore him to be their commander. Velaf.
quez not only approved of the design, but as-
fitted in carrying it on. As the veterans from
Darien were extremely indigent, he and Cor-
dova advanced money for purchasing three small
vefiels, and furnishing them with every thing
requisite either for traffic or for war. A hundred
and ten men embarked on board of them, and
failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of
February one thousand five hundred and seven-
teen. By the advice of their chief pilot, An-
tonio Alaminos, who had served under the firfI
admiral Columbus, they Itood directly weft, re-
lying on the opinion of that great navigator,
who uniformly maintained that a westerly course
would lead to the most important discoveries.

O the twenty-firfI day after their departui

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved
to be Cape Catoche, the eastern point of that
large peninsula projecting from the continent

¢(t'

of America, which fill retains its original B O 0
name of ucatan. As they approached the 1'T7.
Thore, five canoes came off full of people de- YU"'""'
cently clad in cotton garments; an astonishing
fpetacle to the Spaniards, who had found
every other part of America possesscd by naked
savages. Cordova endeavoured by small pre-
sents to gain the good-will of these people.
They, though amazed at the strange objects
now presented for the first time to their view,
invited the Spaniards to visit their habitations,
with an appearance of cordiality. They landed
accordingly, and as they advanced into the
country, they observed with new wonder onme
large houses built with itone. But they soon
found that, if the people of Yucatan had made
progress in improvement beyond their country-
men, they were likewise more artful and war-
like. For though the Cazique received Cor-
dova with many tokens of friendship, he had
posted a considerable body of his subjects in
ambush behind a thicket, who, upon a signal
given by him, rushed out and attacked the
Spaniards with great boldness, and ome degree
of martial order. At the first flight of their
arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were wounded;
but the Indians were truck with uuch terror
by the sudden explosion of the lire-arms, and
so furpriied at the execution done by them, Iy

Z 2 the

B oI0 K the cross-bows, and by the other weapons o

ill.
Cv-i - their new enemies, that they fled precipitately
»So. Cordova quitted a country where he had me

with such a fierce reception, carrying off two
prisoners, together with the ornaments of
linall temple, which he plundered in his re-
treat.

He continued his course towards. the wef

without losing fight of the coast, and on the
Campeachy. sixteenth day arrived at Campeachy. There

the natives received them more hospitably;
but the Spaniards were much surprised, that on
all the extensive coast along which they had
failed, and which they imagined to be a large
island, they had not observed any river . As
their water began to fail, they advanced, in
hopes of finding a supply; and at length they
discovered the mouth of a river at Potonchan,
onme leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to

protect the sailors while employed in filling the
casks; but notwithstanding this precaution, the
natives rushed down upon them with such fury,
and in such numbers, that forty-feven of the
Spaniards were killed upon the spot, and one

' See NOTE XXVI.

man

man only of the whole body escaped unhurt. B O or
Their commander, though wounded in twelve -
different places, directed the retreat with pre-
fence of mind equal to the courage with which
he had led them on in the engagement, and with
much difficulty they regained their hips. After
this fatal repulse, nothing remained but to haften
back to Cuba with their shattered forces. In
their passage thither they suffered the most ex-
quifite distress for want of water, that men
wounded and sickly, shut up in small vessels,
and exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can
be supposed to endure. Some of them, fink-
ing under these calamities, died by the way; Cor-
dova, their commander, expired oon after they
landed in Cuba d.

NOTWITHSTANDING the difaitrous conclu- voye of

sion of this expedition, it contributed rather to Gn'ralva
animate than to damp a spirit of enterprize
among the Spaniards. They had discovered
an extensive country, situated at no great
distance from Cuba, fertile in appearance, and
poffefied by a people far superior in improve-
ment to any hitherto known in America.

d Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. Hiflor. Verdadera

de la Conquilla de la Nueva Epana pr Bernal Diaz del
Caflillo, cap. I-7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomara,
c. 52. . Martyr de Infulis nuper inventis, p. 3'9.

Z 3 Thoug'r

B3 0 K Though they had carried on little commercial
1L....' intercourse with the natives, they had brought

off some ornaments of gold, not considerable
in value, but of singular fabric. These cir-
cumftances, related with the exaggeration na-
tural to men desirous of heightening the merit
of their own exploits, were more than sufficient
to excite romantic hopes and expecations.
Great numbers offered to engage in a new
expedition. Velalquez, solicitous to diftin-
guifh himself by some service so meritorious,
as might entitle him to claim the government
of Cuba independent of the admiral, not only
encouraged their ardour, but at his own ex-
pence fitted out four hips for the voyage.
Two hundred and forty volunteers, among
whom were leveral persons of rank and fortune,
embarked in this enterprise. The command
of it was given to Juan de Grijalva, a young
man of known merit and courage, with in-
ftrutions to obfcrve with attention the nature
of the countries which he should discover, to
barter for gold, and if circumfances were in-
viting, to fettle a colony in some proper station.
is51. IHe ailed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eilhth

of April, one thousand five hundred and eighteen.

PiC,,oversj The pilot Alaminos held the liame courlt as in
New pain.

the former voyage; but the violence of the
currents carrying the ilips to the bouth, lhe

fir-lt

first land which they made was the island of B oK
Coezmel, to the east of Yucatan. As all the s;,i
inhabitants fled to the woods and mountains at May .
the approach of the Spaniards, they made no
long stay there, and without any remarkable
occurrence they reached Potonchan on the
oppofire fide of the peninsula. The desire of
avenging their countrymen who had been (lain
there, concurred with their ideas of good po-
licy, in prompting them to land, that they
might chastise the Indians of that difiric with
such exemplary rigour, as would itrike terror
into all the people around them. But though
they disembarked all their troops, and carried
alhore some field-pieces, the Indians fought
with such courage, that the Spaniards gained
the victory with difficulty, and were contirmed
in their opinion that the inhabitants of this
country would prove more formidable enemies
than any they had met with in other parts of
America. From Potonchan, they coniinucd
their voyage towards the weft, keeping as near
as possible to the miore, and cafling anchor
every evening, from dread of the dangerous
accidents to which they might be exposed in
an unknown sea. During the day, their yes
were turned continually towards land, with a
mixture of furprilf and wond'r at the beauty
of the country, as well as the novelty of the

Z 4 ubjects

LB it objets which they beheld. Many villages

were scattered along the coast, in which they
could distinguish houses of flone that appeared
white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth
of their admiration, they fancied these to be
cities adorned with towers and pinacles; and
one of the soldiers happening to remark that
this country resembled Spain in its appearance,
Grijalva, with universal applause, called it New
Spain, the name which still distinguishes this
extensive and opulent province of the Spanish

lune . empire in America. They landed in a river
Tabarco.

which the natives called Tabasco, and the fame
of their victory at Potonchan having reached
this place, the cazique not only received them
amicably, but bestowed prelents upon them
of fh value, as confirmed the high ideas
which the Spaniards had formed with relpec
to the wealth and fertiiity of the country. These
ideas were raised still higher' by what occurred
at the place where they next touched. This
was considerably to the weft of Tabasco, in the
Cuaxaca. province since known by the name of Guaxaca.

There they were received with the refpec paid
to superior beings. The people perfumed them
as they landed with incense of gum copal, and
prefinted to them as offerings the choicelt deli-
cacies of tleir country. They were extremely
fond of tradi:ng with their new visitants, and in

fix

fix days the Spaniards obtained ornaments of B OK
gold, of curious workmanlhip, to the value of
fifteen thousand pesos, in exchange for Euro-
pean toys of small price. The two prisoners
whom Cordova had brought from Yucatarn,
had hitherto served as interpreters; but as they
did not underhand the language of this country,
the Spaniards learned from the natives by
signs, that they were fubjets of a great mo-
narch called Montezuma, whose dominion ex-
tended over that and many other provinces.
Leaving this place, with which he had so much
reason to be pleated, Grij.lva continued his
course towards the weft. He landed on a small June 19.
island, which he named the Isle of Sacrifices,
because there the Spaniards beheld, for the first
time, the horrid fpetacle of human viEims,
which the barbarous superstition of the natives
offered to their gods. He touched at another st.Juande
fmnall island, which he called St. Juan de Ulua. Vl
From this place he dispatched Pedro de Alva-
rado, one of his officers, to Velasquez, with a
full account of the important discoveries which
he had made, and with all the treasure that he
had acquired by trafficking with the natives.
After the departure of Alvarado, he himself,
with the remaining veflels, proceeded along
the coast as far as the river Panuco, the country

fiill

B o0 K fill appearing to be well peopled, fertile, ant
'-7^

* opulent.

Reafois for SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended,
not leaving
tarolony that it was not enough to have discovered those

delightful regions, or to have performed, at
their different landing-places, the empty cere-
mony of taking poffeflion of them for the
crown of Castile, and that their glory was in-
complete, unless they planted a colony in some
proper station, which might not only fccure
the Spanilh nation a footing in the country,
but, with the reinforcements which they were
certain of receiving, might gradually subject
the whole to the dominion of their sovereign.
But the squadron had now been above five
months at ea; the greatest part of their pro-
visions was exhauffed, and what remained of
their stores so much corrupted by the heat of
the climate, as to be almost unfit for use; they
had loft ome men by death; others were
sickly; the country was crowded with people
who leemed to be intelligent as well as brave;
and they were under the government of one
powerful monarch, who could bring them to
act against their invaders with united force
To plant a colony under so many circunifltnccs
of disadvantage, appeared a clltme too eril-

oli

ous to be attempted. Grijalva, though poffefled B , K
both of ambition and courage, was destitute of -EL
the superior talents capable of forrning or exe-
cuting such a great plan. He judged it more
prudent to return to Cuba, having fulfilled the
purpose of his voyage, and accomplished all
that the armament which he commanded en-
abled him to perform. He returned to St.Jago
de Cuba, on the twenty-fixth of Oober, from
which he had taken his departure about fix
months before .

THIS was the longest as well as the most 'reparations

successful voyage which the Spaniards had expedition.
hitherto made in the New World. They had
discovered that Yucatan was not an ifand as
they had supposed, but part of the great con-
tinent of America. From Potonchan they had
pursued their course for many hundred miles
along a coast formerly unexplored, stretching
at first towards the weft, and then turning to
the north; all the country which they had dif-
covered appeared to be no less valuable than
extensive. As oon as Alvarado reached Cuba,
Velasquez, transported with success so far be-
yond his molt Sanguine expectations, immedi-
ately dispatched a person of confidence to carry

'lerrera, dec. Il. lib. iii, c. , 2, 9, o. BernaiDiaz,
c, 8. 17. Oviedo Hilt. lib. xvii. c. 9. zo. Goimara, c.49.

this

oOKrx this important intelligence to Spain, to exhib
- »S the rich productions of the countries which ha

been discovered by his means, and to folic
such an increase of authority as might enab]
and encourage him to attempt the conquelt c
them. Without waiting for the return of hi
mefrenger, or for the arrival of Grijalva, o
whom he was become so jealous or diftruflful
that he resolved no longer to employ him, h
began to prepare such a powerful armament
as might prove equal to an enterprise of so mucd
danger and importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Velafquec

was now intent, terminated in conquests oi
greater moment than what the Spaniards had
hitherto achieved, and led them to the know.
ledge of a people, who, if compared with thole
tribes of America, with whom they were i-
therto acquainted, may be confidered as hihily
civilired; it is proper to pause before e pro.
ceed to the history of events extremely different
from those which we have already related, in
order to take a view of the slate of the New
World when first discovered, and to conccmpil)ltc
the policy and manners of the rude uncultivated
tribes, that occupied all the parts of i, iv;itl
which the Spaniards were at this time acqucilteLJ.

NOTES

AND
1LLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S
NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 9.
TYRE was situated at such a diflance from the

Arabian Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impraEti-

cable to convey commodities from thence to that city
by land-carriage. This induced the Phenicians to ren-
der themselves masters of Rhinocrura, or Rhinocolura, the
nearest port in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
They landed the cargoes which they purchased in
Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at Elath, the safes har-
bour in the Red Sea towards the north. Thence they
were carried by land to Rhinocolura, the diflance not
being very considerable; and being refhipped in that
pFrt, were transportcd to Tyre, and diflributed over
t!'e world. S'rabon. Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi.
1. 128. Diodor. S:cul. Biblioth. Hiltor. Edit. \Vef-
feliilgi, lib. i. p. 7o.

NOTE II. p. 4.

IIE Periplus Hannonis is the only authcntic mo-
nunent of the Crtliaginian flkill in inaval asTirs,
:l1 one of the niofl curious fragncits tranfinittcd to

ale

us by antiquity. The learned and industrious Mlr.
Dodwell, i a dertatioriprefixe- to thE' Periplsol
Hanno, in the edition of the Minor Geographers pub.
lilhed at Oxford, endeavours to prove that this is a
spurious work, the cotpffitibn of some Greek, wiho
alrumed Hanno's name. But M. de Montesquieu, in
his I'Eflnit dLb6i,' liv.' xxi c. . asid M. d Bougain-
ville, in a dissertation publilhed tom. xxvi. of the Me-
moires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have ell,.
blifhed its authenticity by arguments which to I.e
appear unanfwerabl. Ratnufiol has- accompanied I:is
translation of this curious voyage with a dissertation
tending to illustrate it. Racolte de Viaggi, vl.
p. r12. M. de Bougainville has, with great learni.g
ahd ability, treated the fame fubjefls. It appears t!la
Hanno,. according to the mode of ancient navigation,
undertook this voyage in frnall velels, so conflriLtci
that he could keep close in with the coafl. He failed
from Gades to the island of Cerne in twelve dlvs.
This is probably what is known to the nodcrni
by the name of the Isle of Arguim. It became t!i
chief Rtation of the Carthaginians on that coall; anl
M. de Bougainville contends, that the cisterns found
there are monuments of the Carthaginian power and
ingenuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and flill folloiw-
ing the winding of the coast, he arrived, in feventeel
days, at a promontory which lie called The I/fl HLrn1,
probably Cape Palmas. From this lie advancel to
another promontory' whicli he'named The South Hrn,:
and which is manifcflly Cape de Tres Puntas, abuilt
five degrees north of the line. All the circulnlirlcic
contained in the short abflra1 of his journal, vwh;::

4

is handed 'down to us, concerning the appearance ad
Rate of the countries on the coast of Africa, are con-.
finned and illultrated by a comparison with the ac-
counts of modern navigators. Even. those circum-
tances, which, from their seeming improbability, have
been produced to invalidate the credibility of his rela-
tion, tend to confirm it. He observes, that in the.
country to the south of Cerne, a profound silence
reigned through the day; but during the night, innume-c
rable fires were kindled along the banks of the rivers,
and the air resounded with the noise of pipes and
drums, and cries of joy. The fame thing, as Ramufio
observes, till takes place. The excessive heat obliges
the negroes to take shelter in the woods, or in their
houses, during the day. As soon as the fun sets, they
filly out, and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure of
inufic and dancing, in which they spend the night,
Ramus. i. 113, F. In another place, he mentions the
lea as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred
to M. Adanfon, on the fame coast, may explain this.
; As soon" fays lie, " as the fun dipped beneath the
horizon, and night overspread the earth with darkness,
the sea lent us its friendly light. While the prow of
our vessel ploughed the foaming surges, it seemed to set
them all on fire. Thus we failed in,a luminous inclofure,
which surrounded us like a large circle of rays, from
whence darted in the wake of the ship a long fiream of
light." Voy. to Scnegal, p. 176. The Periplus of
Hanno has been translated, and every point with refpec
to it has been illufirated with much learning and inge-
nuity in a work published by Don Pedr. Rodrig. Cam-
pomanes, entitled, Auligiie dad Maritima de Cartago,

VOL. I. A a con

con e Periplo de fu General Hannon traducido ilur.
trado. Maid. 1756. 4"-.

NOTE. II. p. 5.
L N G after thc navigation of the Phenicians and of

Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the mos intel-

ligent and bei informed historian of antiquity, alld
particularly diftingninlcd by his attention to geographi-
cal researches, affirms, tlrat it was not known, in his
time, whether Africa was a continued continent,
firetching to tle south, orwxhetlrer it was encompasledl
by the efa. Polybii Hli . lib. iii. Pliny the naturalif
aferts, that there c;n e no romrriunication bt\sen
the southem and northern temperate zones. Plinii Hdl.
Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to. lib. ii. c. 68. If
they had given full credit to the accounts of thofc, vny-
ages, the former could not have entertained ich a
doubt, the latter could not have delivered luch an opi-
nion. Strabo mentions te voyage of I Edoxus, but
treats it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. 155; and, ac-
cording to his account of it, no other judgment can
be formed with refpec to it. Strabo seems not to have
known any thing with certainty concerning the form
and state of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib.
xvii. p. 1180. Ptolemv, the Inolt inquisitive and
learned of all the ancient geographers, was equally un-
.icquainted with any part of Africa situated a few de-
grees beyond the equinoctial line; for he ilppofls tllht
this great continent was not furroundcdl byx the feCi, but
that it stretched, without interruption, towards te lbutli
iole: and lie so far mistakes its true figure, tlh.t lhe
describes the continent as becoming broader in'l

bruo..!cr

broader as it advanced towards the south. Ptolcmai
Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Brietii Parallela Geogr. veteris
et novae, p. 86.

NOTE IV. p. 23.

FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very strong
and singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients

with respect to the situation of the various parts of the,
earth. When Alexander marched along the banks of
the Hydafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall
into the Indus, he observed that there were many cro-
codiles in those rivers, and that the country produced
beans of the fame species with those which were com-
mon in Egypt. From these circumstances, he con-
cluded that he had discovered the source of the Nile,
and prepared a fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to
Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. I020. This amaz-
ing error did not arise from any ignorance of geogra-
phy peculiar to that monarch; for we are informed by
Strabo, that Alexander applied with particular atten-
tion in order to acquire the knowledge of this science,
and had accurate maps or defcriptionsof the countries
through which he marched. Lib. ii. p. 12o. But,
in his age, the knowledge of the Greeks did ot
extend beyond the limits of the Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 24.
A S the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great

at the i:outh of the river Indus, this wuld

render the phenomenon more formidable to the Greeks.
Varcn. Gogr. vol. i. p. 251.

Aa 2 NOTE

NOTE VI. p. 28.

T is probable that the ancients were feldoin induced
to advance so far, either by motives of curiosity, or

views of commercial advantage. In consequence of
this, their idea concerning the position of that great
river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch
of the Ganges which he distinguishes by the name of
the Great Mouth, in the hundred and forty-lixth de-
gree of longitude from his first meridian in the For-
tunate Islands. But its true longitude, computed
from that meridian, is how determined by aflronomical
observations to be only a hundred and five degrees. A
geographer so eminent must have been betrayed into an
error of this magnitude by the imperfection of the in-
formation which he had received concerning those
distant regions; and this affords a striking proof of the
intercourse with them being extremely rare. With
refpe to the countries of India beyond the Ganges,
his intelligence was still more defecive, and his errors
more enormous. I hall have occasion to obfcrve in
another place, that he has placed the country of the
Seres, or China, no less than sixty degrees farther east
than its true position. M. d'Anville, one of the mofi
learned and intelligent of the modern geographers,
has set this matter in a clear light in two dissertations
publilhed in Mem. de l'Academ. des Infcript. &c.
tom. xxxii. p. 573. 604.

NOTE

NOTE VII. p. 29.

T is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
were made chiefly by land those of the moderns

are carried on chiefly by sea. The progress of con-
quer led to the former, that of commerce to the lat-
ter. It is a judicious observation of Strabo, that the
conquers of Alexander the Great made known the
Eatl, those of the Romans opened the Welt, and those
of Mithridates king of Pontus the North.' Lib. i.
p. 26. When discovery Is carried on by land alone,
its progress must be flow, and its operations confined.
When it is carried on only by sea, its sphere may be
more extehfive, and its advances more rapid; bt it
labours under peculiar defects. Though it may make
known the position of different countries, and afcer-
tain their boundaries as far as these are determined by
the ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with refpe to
their interior state. Above two centuries and a half
have elapsed since the Europeans failed round the
(outhern promontory of Africa, and have traded in
mot of its ports; but, in a considerable part of that
great continent, they have done little more than survey
its coaRls, and mark its capes and harbours. Its in-
terior regions are in a great measure unknown. The
ancients, who had a very imperfet knowledge of its
coalIs, except where they are wafled by the Mediter-
ranean or Red Sea, were accuflomed to penetrate into
its inland provinces, and, if we may rely on the tetfi-
mony of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, had ex-
plorcd many parts of it now altogether unknown.

A a 3 Unlcfs

Unlcfs both modes of ditcoverv be united, the ger
graphical knowledge of the arrh must remain illcoln
plete and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 34.
T HE notion of the ancients concerning such an ex.

T cefive degree of heat in the torrid zope, as ren.

dered it uninhabitable, and their persisting in this errol
long afterthey began to have some co0mercial intcr-
courhe with several parts of. India lying within the
tropics, mult appear so singular and absurd, that it
jnay not be unacceptable to some of my readers to pro-
duce evidence of their holding this opinion, and tu
account for the apparent incorifigclncc of their theory
with their experience. Cicero, who had bestowcd t-
tention upon every part of philosophy known to te
ancients, seens to have believed that the torrid zon
was uninhabitable, and, of confcqucn.ce, that there
could e no intercourse between the northern and
southern temperate zones. He introduces Africanus
thus.addrefling the younger Scipio: "You fee this
earth encompassed, and as it were bound in by certain
zones, of which, two, at the greatest difiance fronm
each other, and fuflaining the opposite poles of heaven,
are frozen with perpetual' cold ; the middle one, and
the largest of all, is burnt with the heat of the fulln
two arc habitable, the people in the southern one are
antipodes to us, with whom we have no connection."
Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek lhi!of,,-
pher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fr!e
doErinc, not in a popular work, but in his Elay TW'

I,;

iC lwofsna , a treatise purely scientific. " When we
[peak," fays he, " of the southern temperate zone,
and its inhabitants, and concerning those who are
called antipodes, it mull be always underflood, that
we have no certain knowledge or information concern-
ing the foutliern temperate zone, whether it be inha-
bited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the
tropics, we conclude that there is another zone,
situated to the fonth, which enjoys the fame degree of
temperature with the northern one which we inhabit."
Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus de DoFr. Tempor.
in quo Uranologium five Slemata var. Auaorum.
Amft. 1705. vol. iii. The opinion of Pliny the na-
turalii, with respect to both thefc points, was the
fame: " There are five divisions of the earth, which
are called zones. All that portion which lies near to
the two opposite poles is oppressed with vehement cold,
and eternal frof. There, unblest with tle aspec of
milder liars, perpetual darknels reigns, or at the ut-
most a feeble light refleted from surrounding snows.
The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the
fun, is scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery
vapour. Between these torrid and frozen difricts lie
two other portions of the earth, which are temperate;
but, on account of the burning region interposed,
there can be no communication between them. Thus
Heaven has deprived us of three parts of the earth."
Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers his opinion to the fame
effcet, in terms no leTs explicit: " The portion of
the earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid
zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib. ii.

A a 4 p. 154.

p. '15. To these I might add thaeauthority of many
other refpeablo philosophers and hiflorians of an.
'tiqity.

Is oderto explain the sense in which this dorine

· was generally received, we may observe, that Parmeni-
'des, as weare informed by Strabo, was the first who
divided the earth into five zones, and he extended the
limits-of the zone which he supposed to be uninha-
bitable.on account of heat, beyond the tropics. Ari-
siotle, as we learn likewise from Strabo, fixed the
*boundaries of the different zones in the fame manner
as -they are defined by modern geographers. But the
progress of discovery having gradually demonftratel
that several regions of the earth which lay within the
tropics-were not only habitable, but populous and
'fertile, this induced later geographers to circumscribe
-the limits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to afcer-
tain with -precision the bourdaries which they allotted
-to -it. -From a passage in Strabo, who, as far as I
'know, is the only author of antiquity from whom we
treceivE'ity'4lint concerning this subject, I Ihould con-
je'ture, 'that those who calculated according to the

unM~iirement of the earth by Eratosthenes, fippofed

the tocrrid zone to comprehend near sixteen degrees,
bott :eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such
·as followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted
About twenty'four degrees, or somewhat more than
rtwelve degrees on each fide of the equator to the torrid
gone. 'Strabo, lib. ii. p. xI. According tothe former
,opinion, about two-thirds of that portion of the earth
whIich lids betwcn thc-tropics was confidcrcd as habit-

abl; i

able; according to the latter, about one half of it.
With this reitricion, the dodrine of the ancients
concerning the torrid-zone appears less absurd; and we
can conceive the reason of their affertng this zoile to be
uninhabitable, even after they had opened a communi-
cation with everal places within the tropics. When
men of .science spoke of thetorrid zonli, tbey confider-
ed it as it was limited by the definition of geographers
to sixteen, or at the utmost to twenty-four degrees;
and as they knew.. alsmol nothing .of -the countries
nearer to the equator, they might till suppose them o
be uninhabitable. In loof and pop.ular ifcoutrfe, ithe
name of the torrid zone continued to 'be given to all
that portion of the earth vihich lies within the tropics.
Cicero seems to have been unacquainted with those
ideas of the later geographers, and. adhering to the
division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as
the largest of the five. Some of the ancients rejeted
the notion concerning the intolerable heat of the torrid
zone as a popular error. This; we are told by Plu-
tarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn
from Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopted
the fame opinion, lib. ii. 154. Ptolemy seems to have
paid no regard to the ancient doctrine and opinions
concerning the-torrid zone.

-NOTE IX, p. 60.
T HE court of inquisition, which effeaually checks

a spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improve-

mcnt, wherever it is eflablifled, was firll introduced
into Portugal by John III. who began his reign
A.D. 1521,

N O ' E

NOTE X. p. 71.
A N inRance of'this is related by Hackluyt, upo

the authority of the Portuguese historian Garci

de Refende. Some English merchants having resolve
to open a trade with the coast of Guinea, John II. o
Portugal dispatched ambafladors to Edward IV.,
order to lay before him the right which he had acquirei
by the Pope's bull to the dominion of that country
and to request of him to prohibit his fubjcas to prose
cute their intended voyage. Edward was so much fLd
tisfied with the exclusive title of the Portuguese, thai
he issued his orders in the terms which they dcfircd
Hackluyt, Navigations, Voyages, and Traffics of the
English, vol. ii. part ii. p. 2.

NOTE XI. p. 85.
T HE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly

ascertained by the following circumflanccs. It

appears from the fragment of a letter, addressed by himi
to Ferdinand and Isabella, A. D. o501, that he had,
at that time, been engaged forty years in a fca-fariig
life. In another letter, he informs them, that he went
to ea at the age of fourteen; from those fads it fl-
lows, that he was born A. D. 1447. Life of Clrill.
Columbus, by his son Don Ferdinand. Cliurclhill'
CollcEtion of Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484,485.

NOTE

NOTE XII. p. 94.
T H E, spherical figure of the earth was known to the

ancient geographers. They invented the method,

fill in ife, of computing tle longitude and latitude
of different places. According to their doctrine, the
equator, or imaginary line which cncompaffcs the earth,
contained three hundred and fixtv degrees; thei they
divided into twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal
to fifteen degrees. The country of the Seres or Sino,
being the farthefl part of India known to the ancients,
was supposed, by Marinus Tyrius, the molt eminent
of the ancient geographers before Ptolemy, to be sis-
teen hours, or two hundred and twenty-five degrees to
the cast of the first meridian, pasing through the For-
tunate islands. Ptolemi Geogr. lib. i. c. . If
this supposition was well-founded, the country of the
Seres, or China, was only nine hours, or one hundred
and thirty-five degrees wetl from the Fortunate or
Canary Islands; and the navigation, in that direction,
was much shorter than by the course which the Portu-
guefe were pursuing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had
described countries, particularly the island of Cipango
or Zipangri, fuppofedto be Japan, considerably to the
call of any part of Asia known to the ancients. Mar-
cus Paulus de Region, Oriental. lib. ii. c. 70. lib.
iii. c. 2. Of course, this country, as it extended fur-
ther to the call, was still nearer to the Canary Ifands.
The concluions of Columbus, though drawn froin
inaccurate obfcrvations, were jufl. If the fuppofi-
tiois of Marinus had been well founded, and if the

countlrits,

countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been situated
to the east of those whose longitude Marinus had afcer-
tained, the proper and nearest course to the East Indies

u .er have been to fleer direaly wefl. Herrera, dec. i.

lib. i. c. 2. A more extensive knowledge of the globe
has. now discovered the great error of Marinus, in sup-
posing China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and
twenty-five degrees east from the Canary Islands, and
that even Ptolemy was miflaken, when he reduced
the longitude of China to twelve hours, or one hun-
dred and eighty degrees. The longitude of the weflen
frontier of that vast empire is seven hours, or one
hundred,and fifteen degrees from the meridian of the
Canary Islands. But Columbus followed the light
which his age afforded, and relied upon the authority
of writers, who were, at that time, regarded as the
inftruaors and guides of mankind in the science of
geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 123.
,A S the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did

l not depart far from the coast of Africa, they con-

icluded that birds, whose flight they observed with
'great attention, did not venture to any considerable
distance from land. In the infancy of navigation, it
was not known, that birds often stretch heir flight to
an immense distance from any shore. In failing to-
wards the -Weft-Indian iands, birds are often seen at
the diflance of two hundred leagues from the nearest
coast. Sloane's Nat. Hifl. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30.
Catefby saw an owl at sea, when the ship was fix
hundred leagues difant from land. Nat. Hilt. of

Carolina,

Carolina, prcf. p. 7. HiR. Naturelle de M. Buffon,
tom. xvi. p. 32. From which it appears, that this
indication of land, oh which Colurnbtis seems to have
relied with some confidence, was extremely uncertain.
This observation is confirmed by Captain Cook, the
most extensive and experienced navigator of any age or
nation ." No one yet knows (fays he) to what distance
any of the oceanic birds go to sea; for my own part,
I do not believe that there is one in the whole tribe
that can be relied on in pointing out the vicinity of
land." Voyage towards the South Pole, vol. i.
p. 75.

NOTE XIV. p. 138.
IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Ifa-

bella, he describes one of the harbours in Cuba,
with all the enthufiaflic admiration of a discoverer.-

I discovered a river which a galley might easily

enter; the beauty of it induced me to found, and I
found from five to eight fathoms of water. Having
proceeded a considerable way up the river, every thing
invited me to fettle there. The beauty of the river,
the clearness of the water, through which I could fee
the sandy bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of dif-
ferent kinds, the tallest and finest I had fcen, and an
infinite number of other large and flourishing trees,
the birds, and the verdure of the plains, are so wonder-
fully beautiful, that this country excels all others as
far as the day surpasses the night in brightness and
splendour, so that I often said, that it would be in vain
for me to attempt to give your llighnelcs a lull ac-

count

count of it, for neither my tongue nor my pen could
come up to the truth, and indeed I am so much amazed
at the fight of such beauty, that I know not how to
describe it." Life of Columb. c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. 143.

F IE account which Columbus gives of the hum,-a
nit) and orderly behaviour of the natives on this

occaion is very firiking. " The king (fays he, in a
letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) having been informed
of our misfortune, expressed great grief for our loss,
and immediately sent aboard all the people in the place
in many large canoes; we soon unloaded the hip of
every tiing that was upon deck, as the king gave u;
great afliiance: he hinfelf, with his brothers and
relations, took all poflible care that even' thing flhcull
be properly done both aboard and on shore. And,
from titme to time, he sent some of his relations weep-
ing, to beg of me not to be dejeLed, for he would
give me all that he had. I can assure your highnc'cs,
that so much care would not have been taken in fecur-
ing our effets in any part of Spain, as all our pro-
perty was put together in one place near his palace,
until the houses which he wanted to prepare for the
custody of it, were emptied. He immediately placed
a guard of armed men, who watched during the wluo!e
night, and those on hore lamented as if they had leen
much interested in our Iofs. The people are so assec-
tionate, so tracable, and so peaceable, that I swear t,
your highnesses, that there is not a better race of I:::i,
nor a better country in the world. They love ihc.r

neighiy'r

neighbour as themfelvcs; their conversation is the
sweetest and mildefr in the world, cheerful, and al-
ways accompanied with a smile. And although it is
true that they go naked, yet your highnesses may be
assured that they have many very commendable cufloms;
the king is served with great state, and his behaviour
is o decent, that it is pleasant to fee him, as it is
likewise to observe the wonderful memory which ther
people have, and their dcfire of knowing every thing,
which leads them to inquire into its causes and es-
sects. Life of Columbus, c. 32. It is probable that
the Spaniards were indebted for this officious attention,
to the opinion which the Indians entertained of them
as a superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. 152.
EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus

is valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdi-

nand and Iabella, describing what passed on this oc-
cafion, exhibits a moRs striking pidtule of his intre-
pidity, his humanity, his prudence, his public spirit,
and courtly address. " I would have bccn lIef con-
cerned for this misfortunc, had I alone been in dan-
ger, both because m liife is a debt that I owe to the
Supreme Creator, ad because I have at other times
been exposed to the most iUmminent hazard. But what
gave me infinite grief and vexation was, that after it
had pleascd our Lord to give me faith to undertake
Ltis enterprizc, in which I had now been so successful,
that my opponen:s would have been convinced, and
tle glory of your ighnclfes, and ile extent of your
!crrtory increared by me ; it should pleafc the Divine

Majcfty

Maefty to flop all by my death. All this would
have been more tolerable, had it not beenm attended
with the loss of those men whom I had carried with
me, upon prontife of the greatest prosperity, who
feeing themselves in such difrefs, cursed, not only
their coming along with me, but that fear and awe
of me, which prevented them from returning as
they often had resolved to have done. But betides
all this, my sorrow was greatly incrcafed, by recol-
lecing that I had left my two sons at school at Cor-
dova, destitute of friends, in a foreign country, when
it could not in all probability be known that I had
done such services as might induce your highneflcs
to remember them. And though I comforted myself
with the faith that our Lord would not permit that,
which tended so much to the glory of his church, anil
which I had brought about with so much trouble, to
remain imperfet, yet I confidered that, on account of
my fins, it was his will .to deprive me of that glory,
which I might have attained in this world. While in
this confused state, I thought on the good fortune
which accompanies your highnesses, and imagined,
that although I hould perish, and the veflel be loll, it
was possible that you might somehow come to the
knowledge of my voyage, and the success with which
it was attended. For that reason I wrote upon parch-
ment with the brevity which the situation requ'ired,
that I had discovered the lands which I promiled, in
how many days I had done it, and what courfc I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country,
the characqer of the inhabitants, and that your high-
soefls subjects were left in polfelion of all that I had

9 difcovcrcd.

discovered. Having ealed this writing, I addressed it
to your highnesses, and promised a thousand ducats to
any person who hould dtliver it fealed, so that if any
foreigners found it, the promised reward might prevail
on them not to give the information to another. I
then caused a great cask to be brought to me, and
wrapping upthe parchment in an oiled cloth, and as-
terwards in a cake of wax, I put it into the calk, and
having ftopt it well, I catl it into the sea. All the
men believed that it was some a of devotion. Ima-
gining that this might never chance to be taken up, as
the ships approached nearer to Spain, I made another
packet like the first, and placed it at the top of the
poop, so that if the ship funk, the cask remaining
above water might be committed to the guidance of
fortune."

NOTE XVII. p. 157.
SOME Spanish authors, with the meanncfs of na-

tional jealousy, have endeavoured to detrac from

the glory of Columbus, by insinuating that he was
led to the discovery of the New World, not by his
own inventive or enterpifing genius, but by infor-
nation which he had received. According to their
account, a vessel having been driven from its course
by eatRerly winds, was carried before them far to the
vefl, and landed on the coafl of an unknown coruntry,
from which it returned with difficult; the pilot, and
three tailors, being the only persons who survived tlh
di(treffes wlich the crew suffered, froml want of pro-
\lilni, and fatigue in this long voyage. In a few tdas\

\ol.. I. B b aItcr

after their arrival, all the four died; but the pile
having been received into the house of Columbus, hi
intimate friend, disclosed to him, before his deatd
the secret of the discovery which he had accidentall
made, and left him his papers containing a journal o
the voyage, which served as a guide to Columbus ii
his undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know, is the
first author who publilhed this story, Hilt. c. 3
Every circumstance is destitute of evidence to fupporl
it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its deftinatior
is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one oi
the sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing either
to the Canaries, or to Madeira; others, that it was a
Bifcayner in its way to England ; others, a Portuguese
ship trading on the coall of Guinea. The name of
the pilot is alike unknown, as well as that of the port
in which he landed on his return. According to foine,
it was in Portugal; according to others, in Madeira,
or the Azores. The year in which this voyage was
made is no less uncertain. Monfon's Nav. Trads.
Churchill, iii. 371. No mention is made of this
pilot, or his discoveries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet.
Martyr, the contemporaries of Columbus. Herrera,
with his usual judgment, passes over ir in silence.
Oviedo takes notice of this report, but confiders it as
a tale fit only to arnufe the vulgar. Hifl. lib. ii. c. .
As Columbus held his course direcaly weft froun tle
Canaries, and never varied it, ome later authors have
-supposed, that this uniformity is a proof of his being
guided by some previous information. But the d!o
not recolled the principles on which lie founded all
his hopes of fuccels, that by holding a weferly courle,

1.c

he must certainly arrive at those regions of the east
described by the ancients. His firm belief of his own
system led him to take that course, and to pursue it
without deviation.

THE Spaniards are not the only people who have

called in queflion Columbus's claim to the honour of
having discovered America. Some German authors
ascribe this honour to Martin Behaim, their country-
man. He was of the noble family of the Behaims of
Schwartzbach, citizens of the first rank in the Im-
perial town of Nuremberg. Having studied under the
celebrated John Muller, better known by the name of
Regiomontanus, he acquired such knowledge of cos-
mography, as prompted him to explore those regions,
the situation aud qualities of which he had been ac-
customed to investigate and defcribc. Under the pa-
tronage of the Duchess of Burgundy he repaired to
Lisbon, whither the fame of the Portuguese discoveries
invited all the adventurous spirits of the age. There,
as we learn from Herman Schedel, of whose Chronicen
iMundi a German translation was printed at Nuremn-
berg A. D. 1493, his merit as a cosmographer raised
him, in conjunction with Diego Cano, to the corn-
mand of a squadron fitted out for discovery in the year
1483. In that voyage, he is said to have difcovcred
the -kingdom of Congo. He fettled in the island of
Fayal, one of the Azores, and was a particular friend
of Columbus. Herrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 2. Magel-
lan had a terrefirial globe made by Bclhai , on whlich
hedemonftrated the course that lie Iurpoid to ho!l ii
search of the communication wsith t South Sea,

B b 2 which

which he afterwards discovered. Gomra Hilt. c. 9.
Herrera, dec. I1. lib. ii. c. 19. In the year 1492,
Behaim visited his relations in Nuremberg, and left
with them a map drawn with his own hand, which is
still preserved among the archives of the famiyv. Thlus
far the flory of Martin Bchaim seems to be well au-
thenticated; but the account of his having discovered
any part of the New World appears to bc metely con-
jecAural.

IN the first edition, as I had at that time hardll

any knowledge of Behaim but what I derived from a
frivolous Dissertation de vero Novi Orbis Inventore.
published at Francfort, A. D. 1714, by Jo. Frid.
SFtuvenius, I was induced, by the authority of Herrera,
to fuppofc that Behaim was not a native of German ;
hutt from more full and accurate information, com-
nmunicated to me by the learned Dr. John Reinolt
Forftcr, I am now satisfied that I was miflaken. Dr.
Forfrer has been likewise so good as to favour me with
a copy of Behaim's map, as published by Doppelnaver
in his Account of the Mathematicians and Artists of
\Nuremberg. From this map, the imperfec'ion of
colfmograpllical knowledge at that period, is manlitclt.
Ilardly( one place is laid down in its true firuation.
Nor can I discover from it any reason to fuippofe that
Bclhaim had the Icaft knowledge of any region in Ame-
i,-a. He delineates, indeed, an island to which lie
ti\cs thle name of St. Brandon. This, it is imagined,
ia;iv he some part of Guiana, supposed at firfl to e na
illai.l. Hle places it in the fame latitude with the
(t'C.i Verd illes, and I fufpeft it to be an iiiainary

sil~a1d

iflatd which has hben admitted into forne ancient
maps op no better authority than the legend of the
Irish St. Brandon pr Brendan, whose flory is so child-
ilhly fbulou4 as to he unworthy of ay poticc.
Girald. Cambricifis ap. Milingham Florilegium S$iuc-
totrln, p. 427.

TtIE pretensions of the Welfl to the discovery of

America seem not to reft on a foundation much more
solid. In the twelfth centur, according to Powell,
a difputc having arifcn among the fols of Owen
Guyneth, king of North-Wales, concerning the fuc-
ceflion to his crown, Madoc, one of their numnber,
weary of this contention, betook hlumfelt to sea in quell
of a more quiet fettlemcnt. He fleered due wefti
leaving Ireland to the north, and arrived in an n-
known country, which appeared to him so desirable,
that he returned to Wales, and carried thither lfveral
of his adherents and companions. This is fid to
have happened about the year 170, and after that, he
and his colony were heard of no more. But it is to
be observed, that Powell, on whose teftinionll the au-
thenticity of this fiory relts, publilhcd his hilory
above four centuries fron the date of the event whicl
he relates. Among a people as rude and as illiterate
as the Wcllh at that period, the nmemlory of a tranlac-
tion so remote mull have been very impcrtcctly pre-
fenred, and would require to be confirmed by lome
author of greater credit, and nearer to the ara of Ma-
loc's voyage than Powell. Later antiquaries have
indeed appealed to the tcilimony of' lcredith ap Rliees,

B b 3 a Wlflh

a Wellh bard, who died A. D. 477. But he too
lived at such a difRance of time from the event, that he
cannot be confidered as a witness of much more credit
than Powell. Besides, his verses published by Hak-
luyt, vol. iii. p. i. convey no information, but that
Madoc, dissatisfied with his domestic situation, em-
ployed himself in searching the ocean for new ponef-
sions. But even if we admit the authenticity of
Powell's story, it does not follow that the unknown
country which Madoc discovered by fleering weft, in
such a course as to leave Ireland to the north, was ay
part of America. The naval kill of the Welsh in the
twelfth century was hardly equal to such a voyage.
If he made any discovery at all, it is more probable
that it was Madeira, or some other of the weflern isles.
The affinity of the Wclfh language with some dialects
spoken in America, has been mentioned as a circum-
stance which confirms the truth of Madoc's voyage.
But that affinity has been observed in so few inflan-
ces, and in some of there is so obscure, or so fanciful,
that no conclusion can be drawn from the casual re-
semblance of a finall number of words. There is a
bird, which, as far as is yet known, is found only on
the coasts of South America, from Port Desire to te
Straits of Magellan. It is distinguished by the name
of Penguin. This word in the Welsh language figni-
lies 1I/hite-head. Almof all the authors who favour
the pretensions of the \V'cill to the discovery of Ane-
rica, mentiol this as an irrefragable proof of the aHi-
nity of the Wclfh language with that fpokcn in tis
region of America. But Mir. Pennant, who has given
a scientific dclcription of the Pcnguin, obfrvcs, tli.ir

all

all the birds of this genus have black heads, " so that
we must resign every hope (adds lie) founded on this
hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New
World." Philof. TransaCt. vol. Iviii. p. 91, &c.
Betide this, if the Wellh, towards the close of the
twelfth century, had fettled in any part of America,
some remains of the Chriflian do&rine and rites must
have been found among their descendants, when they
were discovered about three hundred years poflerior to
their migration; a period so hort, that, in the course
of it, we cannot well suppose that all European ideas
and arts would be totally forgotten. Lord Lyttelton,
in his notes to the fifth book of his History of Henry II.
p. 371. has examined what Powell relates concerning
the discoveries made by Madoc, and invalidates the
truthof his flory by other arguments of great weight.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the di-

covery of America, seem to be better founded than
those of the Germans or Wel(h. The inhabitants of
Scandinavia were remarkable in the middle ages for
the boldness and extent of their maritime excursions.
In 874, the Norwegians discovered, and planted a
colony in Iceland. In 982, they discovered Green-
land, and etablifhed settlements there. From that,
some of their navigators proceeded towards the welf,
and discovered a country more inviting than those
horrid regions with which they were acquainted. Ac-
cording to their representation, this country was sandy
on the coasts, but in the interior parts level and
covered with wood, on which account they gave it

B b 4 the

the name of Helle-land, and Mark-land, and having
afterwards found ome plants of the vine which bore
grapes, they called it 1min-land. The credit of this
story rells, as far as I know, on the authority of the
saga, or-chronicle of king Olaus, composed by Snorro
Sturlonides, or Sturlufons, published by Perinlkiold at
Stockholm A. D. 697. As Snorro was born in the
year 1179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
centuries after the event which he relates. His ac-
count of the navigation and discoveries of Bisrn, and
his companion Lias, is a very rude confused tale,
p. 104. o1. 326. It is impofflible to discover from
him, what part of America it was in which the Nor-
wegians landed. According to his account of the
length of the days and nights, it mult have been as
far north as the fifty-eighth degree of latitude, on
some part of the coalt of Labradore, approaching near
to the entry of Hudson's Straits. Grapes, certainly,
are not the produ&ion of that country. Torfcus
supposes that there is an error in the text, by rectify-
ing of which, the place where the Norwegians landed
may be supposcd to be situated in latitude 49'. But
neither is that the region of the vine in America.
From prufing Snorro's tale, I should think that the
situation of Newfoundland corresponds betl with that
of the country discovered by the Norwegians. Grapc.,
however, are not the production of that barren iflanll.
Other conjectures are mentioned by M. Maller, In-
trod. i 'Hil. de Dannem. 175, &c. I am not fufii-
cicntly acquainted with the literature of the north, to
examine them. It seems nianifefl, that if the Nor-
wcgiatls did discover any part of America at that

period,

period, their attempts to plant colonies proved uSfUC-
cc&fui, and all knowlcdge of it was son lot.

NOTE XVIII. p. 59,
p TER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Mlanefe

gentleman, residing at that time in the court of

Spain, whore letters contain an account of the tranf-
actions of that period, in the order wherein they oc-
curred, defctibes the sentiments with which he himself
and his learned correspondents were asseted, in very
striking terms. " Pra: ltitia profiluiffe te, vixqua a
lachrymis prae gaudio temperafTe, quando literas ad-
fpexifti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti hac-
tenus, te certiorem feci, mi fuaviffIme Pomponi, in-
finuafli. Ex tuis ipfe literis coiligo, quid fenferis.
Senfifti autem, tantique rem fecifli, quanti virum fum-
ma dotrina infignitum decuit. Quis namque cibus
fublimibus praftari poteft ingeniis, ifto fuavior? quod
condimentum gratius? A me facio conjeauram.
Beari fentio spiritus meos, quando accitos alloquor
prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt provincia.
Implicent animos pecuniarum cumulis augendis miferi
avari, libidinibus obfcceni; noftras nos mentes, post-
quam Deo pleni aliquando fuerimus, contemplando,
hujufcemodi rerum notitia demulciamus." Epift. 152.
Poinponio Lato.

NOTE XIX. p. 175.

O firmly were men of science, in that age, perfuad-
ed that the countries which Columbus had dif
covered were connected with thc EaRl Indics, that

Bcrnaldcs,

·Bernaldes, the Cura de los Palacios, who seems to
have been no inconsiderable proficient in the knowledge
of cosmography, contends that Cuba was not an iflnd
but a part of the continent, and united to the domi
.ions of the Great Khan. This he delivered as his
opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest for
some time on his return from his second voyage; and
he supports it by several: arguments, molUy founded
on the authority of Sir John Mandeville. MS. pene
me. Antonio Gallo, who was secretary to the nia-
gifracy of Genoa towards the close of the fifteenth
century, published a hort account of the navigations
and discoveries of his countryman Columbus, annexed
to his Opufcula Hiflorica de rebus populi Genuenfis;
in which he informs us, from letters of Columbus
which he himself had seen, that it was his opinion,
founded upon nautical observations, that one of the
islands he had discovered was distant only two hours
or thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts
of the geographers of that age, was laid down, upon
the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. 3. as the mos
cafterly place in Asia. From this he concluded, that
if some unknown continent did not obftrud the na-
vigation, there mull be a hort and easy access, by
holding a westerly course, to this extreme region of
the Eafl. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum,
vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE

.NOTE XX. p. 182.

ERNALDES, the Cura or Reaor delos Palacios,
a contemporary writer, fays, that five hundred of

these captives were sent to Spain, and fold publickly
in Seville as saves; but that, by the change of climate,
and their inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they
all died in a short time. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. 199.
COLUMBUS seems to have formed some very

singular opinions concerning the countries which

he had now discovered. The violent swell and agita-
tion of the waters on the coast of Trinidad led him to
conclude this to be the highet part of the terraqueous
globe, and he imagined that various circumflances
concurred in proving that the sea was here visibly
elevated. Having adopted this erroneous principle,
the apparent beauty of the country induced him to fall
in with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that
the terrcitrial paradise was the highest land in the earth;
and he believed that he had been so fortunate as to
discover this happy abode. Nor ought we to think it
firange that a person of so much sagacity should be in-
fluenced by the opinion or reports of uch a fabulous
author as Mandeville. Columbus and the other dif-
coverers were obliged to follow such guides as they
could find; and it appears from fevcral passages in the
manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend of Colum-
bus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was given
to the teflimony of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldcs
frequently quotes him, and always with rcpecd.

NOTE

NOT XXII. p. 214.
IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara nor Oviedo

the most ancient'Spanifh historian of Amrica, no

Henrera, confider Ojeda, or his companion Vespucci
as the first discoverers of the continent of America
They uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus
Some have supposed that national rcfntrment againf
Vespucci, for deserting the service of Spain, and cn-
tering into that of Portugal, may have prompted theft
writers to conceal the adtions which he performed.
But Martyr and Benzoni, both Italians, could not be
warped by the fame prejudice. Martyr was a contem-
porary author; he resided in the court of Spain, and
had the bell opportunity to be exacly informed with
refpeC to all public tranfa&ions; and yet, ecither in
his Decads, the first general history published of the
New World, nor in his Epifiles, which contain an
account of all the remarkable events of his time, does
he ascribe to Vespucci the honour of having sirs dif-
covered the continent. Benzoni went as an advenl-
turer to America in the year 1541, and resided there
a considerable time. He appears to have been animated
with a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his natie
country, and yet does not mention the exploits and
discoveries of Vespucci. Herrera, who compiled his
general hiflory of America from the most authentic re-
cords, not only follows those early writers, but acculcs
Vespucci of falsifying the dates of both the voyages
which he made to the New World, and of confound-
ilng the one with the other, in order that he might ar-
rogate to himif the glory of having discovercd the

4 continent.

contineht. Her. dec. . lib. iv. c. 2. He alferts
that in judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal
fircal, it was proved by the teltiinony of Ojeda himself,
that he touched at Hispaniola when returning to Spain
from his lirit voyage; whereas Vespucci gave out that
they rettrned diretly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria,
and touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage
and that he had finished the voyage in five months
-Whereas, according to Vefpucei's account, he had
employed seventeen months in performing it. Viag-
gio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo,
p. 45. Herrera gives a more full account of this in-
qteft in another part of his book, and to the fame
cffteE. Her. dec. . lib. ii. c. 5. Columbus was in
Iifpaniola when Ojcda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed
Ojeda's attempt to excite a new infurredion, and, of
consequence, his voyage mull have been poficrior to
that of the admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84. Ac-
cording to Vespucci's account, he set out on his firit
voyage May loth, 1497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At
that time Columbus was in the court of Spain prepar-
ing ftr his voyage, and fccmns to have enjoyed a con-
ilderable degree of favour. The affairs of the New
'World were at this junCiture under thc diredcion of

Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbuts. It is not
probable, that at that period a comlniffion would be
granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral,
by undertaking a voyage which he hinirelf intended to
performi. :'onfcca, wlho patronized Ojeda, and granted
the licence for his vovagc, was not recalled to court,
and rciJtlatcd in the dc tion of Iindianl al!:irs, until

T11,t

the deathof prince John, which happened Septembej
1497, P. Martyr, Ep. 182. several months poterioi
to the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set oui
upon his voyage. A life of Vespucci was published
at Florence by the Abate Bandini, A. D. 1745, 4to.
It is a work of no merit, written with little judgment,
and lets candour. He contends for his countryman's
title to the discovery of the continent with all the blind
zeal of national partiality, but produces no new evi-
dence to support it. We learn from him, that Vef-
pucci's account of his voyage was published as early as
the year 1510, and probably sooner. Vita di Am.
Vefp. p. 52. At what time the name of AMERICA
came to be firfi given to the New World, is not cer-
tain.

NOTE XXIII. p. 273.
T HE form employed on this occasion served as a

model to the Spaniards in all their subsequent

conquefls in America. It is so extraordinary in its
nature, and gives us such an idea of the proceedings
of the Spaniards, and the principles upon which they
founded their right to the extensive dominions which
they acquired in the New World, that it well merits
the attention of the reader. " I Alonfo de Ojeda,
servant of the most high and powerful kings of Caflile
and Leon, the conquerors A)s barbarous nations, their
messenger and captain, notify to you and declare, in
as ample form as I am capable, that God our Lord,
who is one and eternal, created the heaven and the
earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you and

we,

,rwe and all the men who have been or hall be in the
world, are descended. But as it has come to pass
through the number of generations during more than
five thousand years, that they have been dispersed into
different parts of the world, and are divided into vari-
ous kingdoms and provinces, because one country was
not able to contain them, nor could they have found
in one the means of fubliflence and preservation;
therefore God our Lord gave the charge of all those
people to one man, named St. Peter, whom he confi-
tuted the lord and head of all the human race, that
all men, in whatever place they are born, or in what-
ever faith cr place they are educated, might yield obe-
dience unto him. He hath fubjeded the whole world
to his jurifdicaion, and commanded him to eflablifl
his residence in Rome, as the mot proper place for
the government of the world. He likewise promised
and gave him power to cftablifh his authority in every
other part of the world, and to judge and govern all
Chriflians, Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all other
people, of whatever fed or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope, which signifies admir-
able, great father and guardian, because he is the fa-
ther and governor of all men. Those who lived in
the time of this holy father obeyed and acknowledged
him as their lord and king, and the superior of the
univerfc. The fame has been obfcrved with rcfpc to
them who, since his time, have been choren to the
pontificate. Thus it now continues, and will con-
tinue to the end of the world.

" OVE

" ONE of these pontiff, as lod of the world, hath

made a grant of these iflandi, and of the Tierra Firmc
of the ocean sea, to the Catholic kings of Caifilc,
Don Ferdinand and Donna Iabella, of glorious me-
mory, and their fuccefforb, our foveeigns, with all
they contain, as is more fully exprefred in certain
deeds passed upon that occasion, which you may fee,
if you desire it. Thus his majesty is king and lord of
these ilands, andof the continent, in virtue of this
donation; and, as king and lord aforesaid, most of
the ilands to which his title hath been notified, have
recognized his majesty, and now yield obedience and
fubjeaion to him as their lord, voluntarily and with-
out refiancec and infantly, as soon as they received
information, they obeyed the religious men sent by
the king to preach to them, and to infirud them in
our holy faith; and all these, of their own free-will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Chris-
tians, and continue to be so; and his majesty having
received them graciously under his proteftion, has
commanded that they should be treated in the fame
manner as his other fubjeas and vassals. You are
bound and obliged to at in the fame manner. There-
fore I now entreat and require you to confider atten-
tively what I have declared to you; and that you may
more perfecly comprehend it, that you take such time
as is reasonable, in order that you may acknowledge
the Church as the superior and guide of the univerle,
and likewise the holy father called the Pope, in his
own right, and his majesty by Ilis appointment, as
king andt lovcrign lord of there islands, and of tlhe
Ticrra t'irl:m ; and that you content that the aforesaid

ho)

holy fathers lhall declare and preach to you the doc-
trines above mentioned. If you do this, you at
well, and perform that to which you are bound and
obliged; and his majesty, and I in his name, will
receive you with love and kindnels, and will lyc
you, your wives and children, free and exempt from
servitude, and in the enjoyment of all you polfefs,
in the fame manner as the inhabitants of the islands.
Besides this, his majesty will bellow upon you many
privileges, exemptions, and rewards. But if you
will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey my
injuncEion, then, with the help of God, I will enter
your country by force, I will carry on war against
you with the utmost violence, I will fbbjet you to
the yoke of obedience to the church and the king, I
will take your wives and children, and will make
them slaves, and fell or difpofi of them according
to his majesty's pleasure; I will seize your goods,
and do you all the mischief in my power, as rebellious
fubjets, who will not acknowledge or submit to
their lawful sovereign. And I protest, that all the
bloodshed and calamities which flall follow are to be
imputed to you, and not to his majesty, or to me,
or the gentlemen who serve under me; and as I have
now made this declaration and requisition unto you,
I require the notary here present to grant me a cer-
tificate of this, subscribed in proper form." Herrcra,,
dec. i. lib. vii. c. 14.

VOL. I. Cc NOTI'

NO TE XXIV. p 292. :

ALBOA, in his letter to the king, obferevc
that of the hundred and ninety men wor he

took with him, there were never :aboe :eighty fit
for service at one time. So much did they susser
from hunger, fatigue, and ficknefi. Herrera, dec. i.
lib. x. c. 16. P. Mart. decad. 226.

NOTE XXV. p. 38.

O NS E CA, biLhop of Palencia, the principal
diretor of American affairs, had eight hundred

Indians in property; the commendator Lope de
Conchillos, his chief associate in that department,
eleven hundred; ad other favourites had confiderablc
numbers. They ent overseers to the ilands, and
hired out those slaves to the planters. Herr. dec. i.
lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 340.
T H OU G H America is more plentifully fupplii

with water than the other regions of the globe,

there is no river or fircar of water in Yuc.tan.
rlis peninsula projeEls from the continent a hundred
leagues, but, where broadef, does not extend above
twenty-five leagues. It is a flat plain, without moun-
tains. The inhabitants are fibpplicd with water fron

1 0 its.

niV 4l #I>he(vedbey-fidig theniaid it! in 'abund-
aeS z4lt. is probtblil froii. allJthofi ciicumftanmei

W\ .iTl,,.u<bey

Iw-va<fornt eijr, w'.cxred by Ithe, feo

^ktirit: D1?#(pi.-;,rid ia:.dtccidacitalis, p.; i4
Hj^str NgtUlql,lI)W Ml.. dtBuflffony tomn i.
plhaS93r 1!

' io i -".. . ' r:J. ( 1 *r '. ' '-*
. .

* ,' . -? ; : .1 - ; 1' ;- . i .,

I,;
[ NOTE, Vol. I. p. 344 1. 2. omitted in

its proper place.]

NM
. CLAVIGERO cenrures me for having repre-

sented the Spaniards who failcd with Cordova

and Grijalva, as fancying, in the warmth of their
imagination, that they saw cities on the coast of Yu-
cutan adorned with towers and cupolas. I know not
what translation of my hiflory he has consulted, (for
his quotation- from. it is not taken-from the.original),
but I never imagined that any building ereEted by Ame-
ricans could suggest the idea of a cupola or dome, a
flrulure which their utmost skill in architecure was
incapable of rearing. My words are, that they fancied
the villages, which they saw from their hips " to be
cities adorned with towers. and, pinacles." By pinarles
I meant some elevation above the ref of the building;
and the passage is translated almost literally from
Herrera. Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 1. In almost all the
accounts of new countrics given by the Spanish disco-
verers in that age, this warnth of admiration is con-
fpicuous; and led them to dcfcribe there new objeis in

tile

te ioft rfplenmd ter. When Cordova and hb cO~'
pa first behld. a Indian village of greater mag.
atai than ny tiey had behked in the ifands, they
dipgified it with the namo of rasd Cabie, b Diaz,
c. 2. From the ame cause G~ijaluadUlii affRociatet
thought the country along the coast of which they held
their course, entitled to the name of New Spain.

I r.
AND. OF THE IRST' VOLUME.

13RITAN

:·-: ~~..
*. I

1.

M~~~~~~~~~~~
ht. ~ ~ A(' l~.'A

4~~ 77
....- Ba -
-. e

n~~~~~~~~~~qator or Equingta

rrwpp 4%hz 1'·-Ain 1

~Q~r~ ~t~A RA 7' .1 C

A\ ~B~I PI~1Y1 -·LA \ I \`T s~UP I~Zp a am o s
5 5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~X-

13 -4 S 1 L7 A3~AI J -~y.~F~PJ I

r,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

51C~~~~~~ B A

211 mu c 0 lq~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~uao

r

~ni
ta]Ln

B~~~~~~~~~~~~YJ Yw~ MB ve

OP1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

-- - 'Cl
515~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~h

_-~~~~~~S~ ~
SO 30~~~c~~b

5 .1.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~&I

Jr~~~~~~~~~~~p1--~sn ,
,-...

30s 30

3S de~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

05 to !is W 'Ll ;01

~~~~~ ~~~~~A -

j Pnc~~~~~~he :~~~~~~b~~northllvgDRobrhr~,

t~~~~~i 9089 /38 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~oJ
iqus s~e~ca

;;.la 040 j &4

Th~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

4,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ,

4' ""

0 " r
Y~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~1 4d y 5

'p77~~iM
sP'U1h4rI, /~Wvt4S~r
