SOL Y MAN

A N D
A L M E N Ao

A N
, RI IE N T AL TAL E.

BY DR. JOHN LANGHQBNE

--ZIBFT PART.HO TORQUER, CYDONIA CORNU
SPi CIJVU -----LA- ----------- V 1 RG(

LONDON: 1PRINT-1:D,

EAST- W INDSOR :

(C 0 1CN N E.C T I C U T)
T'N-l.'iINTVFI), /INI) S(O.Il) VWIIO)Il-,,AI. *I.& l'.TA I [,3,

t;¥! sJ l' tI.lt. 1'i{A'r rl'

# CHAP. I.

J'O .L MA'LM. N A`;,
SOLYMAN ^'D AALLNVh

G H A P. I.

] ET the foi'' aiid daughters. of aof-
fsicion receive comfort fron hope---
The motion- of the sunbeams 3n. the
wave, is n.ot more 'ic'ertaiin than the.
condition of hurman life:. misery, there-
fbre, has mucth to hope, and happ'ine 7s:
much t:' fear ; but virtue 'las 'always
a' reource in. Providence, whiech not
only improves .the b'tfIi.gs.. but miti-
gates the evils of.r life.

IN a.pleafant v.alley of Mesopotamia,

on the.banks of' the ri-wan lived Soly.
man, the son of Ardavan the sage.-
lIe was earlyr inftruted in all the learn-
ing. of the east; but as. his underfand-'
ing opened he grew weary of the la-
boi-s-of' . rudy,, and thh-Ied only. for- the

kno.wledge of .mankind. \Vith imuch
ilpo!r-unity he prevailed on. his father-
tr) permit him- to travel. '" My- ufo,'
faid.A.rda-van, ''' let not yoa.-r ctcriofity
interrupt your happiness :: all that na.,
ture can give you is in.the valley of Ir-
wari,h ete yoyb are .cherished by.the ee.
of affeaion, and indulged with all the.:
bounties of the eternal fun;. Travel is
often dangerous, and always inconven-
ient -your knowlecge of 'men.. niay be.,
purchased by experiencing their. treach-
ery, their cruelty and' their pride; the-
tinfufpecting Innocence of your heart'
wxill expose you to the. designs of tlhe
selfish, .and the inbolence of-the vain ;:
you \will' w'ander from place to place,
only for armuferue nt ;' as your h!eart can'.
have-no connec/'ions that time or inte-.
reft halve rendered' dear to you, ybu,.
will be liitle affecteid- by any thing you
;fee: and,,;V:'bat is mo-e than a.ll, your.
virute wvii.lbe endangered ; wlhen yo...
behold the universal prevalence of vice,.
wvc!.n yqur eye is. attra&ed by the flow- .
ery paths in.wlhiqlh she. seems to-tread, '
you will 'fi.nd it difficult to with.fand the ;
force of examnple, and. the blandilh-.

iiinei(s of pleasure.' Sol'yman'humbblec'
hTimfelf, and replied--'" Prince of the:
fages that dwell between the rivers,
let your ear be patient to the words of
youth-. Can Ardavain-lioubt the integ-
rity of the' heart, which, his pvecepts:
have formed to virtue-; or fear that
Solyman {hoUid' become the slave of
vice ? I am nnot a.ftrang'er' to ;t-ie man-
niers of meri, thiough 1 have 'mixed but-
little an-rong them ;' nor am' t

unac.

.iuain ted with the temptrations t'w hicih
1-ihall be exposed,- nor unprepared "to
withitand' them., Travel' may be at-
tended With' some inconveni'ence, but
it has- many advantages.::'next to' the
1imowitedge of otkrfel!ve-s, most valuable
i's the knowledge of nature;- ahd this'
is to-be acquired only by attenc'ing lier
throuigh the variery of her worls, s the'
more we, behold of toiefe, the mor e
our ideas are' enlarged and extended ;
ian'd thle rinbler and more.e worrhy con-
eSptioiis' w.e must entertain of that:

owe{rj who -is ithe parent of.umvcrfaie

, 9C MV y son.," said Ardavan, if
you :are determined. to travel, let your.
er attend to the, in.rui ion of age.-
Move not one piace from. the ,.alley of
trwan, if your heart rely nxot on.. the
]Eternal. Pro.vidence ;.., it is that confi-
dence alone vwhich r'ust support you.
inrder all the.. pofTible contingencies of
tii-refs .:- O let it not depart from yo.u ;
it, is the sovereign. antidote to the evils,
of life ! the- day- is not lighted up- in-.
v-ain,. let it :n-ot-pafs without the pradtice
of virtue ; dare not to behtold the ever-
laflinm- fun :go downy. if th'ou haft. waft--
ed.. his light in-- idleness, or. van-ity. -
ign-orance, nmifry, or want, will al-
ways- afford thee the n.e.ans of benifi=.
cence-?'"

M; '

y-A -:thlat -irmmortal B1eing, w-hose.

eye is oover all his. ci-eatures, fave-thee
from. felly and- from . vice i may- his.
hand direC-' thee in..the hour of: negli,
gpence, and his spirit- guide thee through
the- maae of- error ! -Xhen tlhy-. 3ind-:
Iliall be enriched with the:know ledge of-
his works, may. he..reftore. thee, more-
v.-..u..o.us,. to.Q.te...v 1ley:. of. wIr-wan,. to..

# CHAP. II.

ihe forgive -this tear, which - prioceeds-
not fromi adifruit of his Provid.enee,:;
buat falls for the loss of" Solyman.'.'

CH A P.. II.

1 HE morning was fpread.-upon thej"
mountains, and Solyman prepared. to-
depart : but fi:rl pPoftrating. hlimreif
towards the fun,. he thus addrefled that.
glorious luminary-' . Incomparable,.,
and everlasting ! thou. that,; ii.ghteft .u>p
a. thousand .worlds, and extendeft thy
p.roteding power to the, midiuteft parts.
of: nature '. let: thy universal eye look.::
with favor-upon Solyyman,. :When l wan-
d-er over the waftesbof deflation, may thy
cheerifl ;rays comnfort. and sup:port-' me .
when-i'g ito i'to the cities.:of men- may-
eft -thou iipillio6ok.up'on. me ; teaclh me-
..to discover the dark designs of malignio
ty, .and to. unfold th'e intricacies of
firaud ! so' m.iayeltt thou, rif wlith seven--
'fold lustre .ovei- tbe .waves of I-ndus; so
nayeft. :thlou be. adored by those fLavage,
Blaotions;.w.ho 1exp erienc.e . thy gpodincf.'

"without acknowledgement' ! - After
this ihort address he lung :tlhe folóowing.
hiymn.

I-YMN: TO THE RISI-tN SUNi't
FR)OM the red wave'rifng briglit,,.

Lift on litgh thy' golden head ;

O'er the milly mountain, spread'
Thy fiiiling, rays- of orient light;;

See tie GoldetiGod appear !'
Flies the fiend of 'D;rknefs drear ; -
Flies-;'and'ihn hi glbomyr train,'
S'abli.griefg andd oare, and paii;,'

See the Goldbn God ad'vance !.:
On Taurus' heights his coursers prance .
- With hini:lldalt'the verbnal hours, . . -

Breathing,fweets,. and diropping flowersi .

.: au'g.iihnj;S'nirimer at liis fide, -
·WVaves her loc3is in rosy pride ;
And autumnn bland, with afpe&' kind,
Bears his goTden lieafbehind.

0' halle and spread the purple'day
O'er al- the wide etluerial way t
Nature mourns at thy delay '
Go: of glory, haste away !'

From the red wave rising bright,

Lift on high ithy golden head; .
O'er. the tn'ty.r moutnai'd, spread

,

Thy fmllng 'rays of' orient light -*

WII-,EN-Solyman had finifiled his de-

votions, he 'pasted' over thieiTigris into
the -kiiigdomrof 'Persia ,

TH ERE is some' secret attradtion ir'

the place where we have pafied th t
cheerful innocence of childhood, that
holds our hearttro-'it during the remain-
ing part of life.. No fooner.had Soly-
.ian afcendided. an emibence that gave:
him a retrofpeaive view ds tbe valley
of Irwan; than he turned his eye onp
his native fiels, -and gazed for- some"
time withl a kind of pensive compla-
ceency. -" ;Happy: scenes,"' said -he,
x. where I have beheld the everlaftinrg
fun so often rife and set ! yonder is the
grove where I repsed -at noon; 'and.
thatis the hill, where I riufed at eve,.
In-yon mansion, I si-ft, drew the breath-
.of Heaven ; and there per.hap.s Arda-
van may yet be weeping for my de?"
parture. . . . .,

# CHAP. III.

TH E gentle heart- of -S:'yfaan tlhu's

indulged ikfeif a while, till the declining..
day called upon him to proceed.

C H A P. III. I

WAiHEN he had reached the: foot o-
T';urui, the liadows of evening fel1
from the iiun:taihs ;. hle, therefore
rti>ght to *redpofe himrfelf in the village
of Abdat: but as he was advancing to-'
wards it, he was topped by t..excea--

aci'orn of f orrowv, ,that .poceeded fromim
art adjaceifc wood,. As he was:in hopes
of relieving some difirefs, h.e scrupled-

ai't to cir'ia 'near enouigh, to-lifen: ; -and"
s£on discovered, that-the -persons he'
h'eard speaking, wvere two lovers, who :
liad stolen. a fcret i.tterrview, before-'
their final separation.;.

TK Es. hiearts of Solyrmar had nevev?

set the passion of love ; and he was,
therefore the, mortecurioius to fee the
effeas -of it. JBut how great was his
atnti8mn'ent,. iwhen, as he approached"
the place from whence the voices camne

· e'beheld the:lover lying .in all the ag-
onies of sorr-ow, at the feet. of-his. wee-
ing mistress: .t" Immortal Power !l
said he, ." I have been told that love
was the best of thy gifts · is this mifera.
ible, this painful, fight, a proof of it.? -Be-
:hold that wretched youth, how his heart
labors and Riruggles under it's oppref-
.sion; while the ariable maiden, who
f.iems to be the cause of his misery,
hiands over him in tears and silence, as
-if incapable of relieving mhim ! Hea-
Yens, what -agonies? eaon will be
driven-. from- her feat. HaI- natiur
-gives place .; ;e faints l '"
_

So.I0 Y,IAN ;perceivinghigS affifancE

.vas now become-necefl'ry, rushed: into
,the thicket, and raised the unhappy lo-
,ver froml the earth.' At length hlis feni-
fes returned; but his grief, w-hich
:had before been -i6 exquisitely viol ent,
wras -changed into 'gloomy ,ftupiclity.
Solyman, hiowever, by the soothing
.founds of pity, -aw:oke ,his attentioni,
and by gentle-.importunity drew from.
sim' the cause of his diftrofs; .

. c STRANGER,' faidthe.youth, ' who-
.ever thou art.thine. appearance entitles
thee to regard, and the conlpaffon thou
.aft fliewn.me merits my confidence.
Thou now ,beloldeft tlhe.moft unhappy
of men. That.lady, at whose feet'i
-so lately lay i.nsensible, is the daughter
of a mercenary wretch, who has .fold
her to the Khan of;Buikharia : and to-
pnorrow she is to.be conveyed to him
·without expoflulation or reprieve,"

"WHAT ! ' replied Solyman, " is.it

,poffible.that any thing can induce a pa,
rent to make his child miserable.! J
was not ignorant of the depravity of
;:an ; but: Ithoiughbt.Alhe a.taffet ion s of
.aature could .not have been overcome.
-Yet, if it is so, cap there .be any obli-
.gation on the child to.take the portion
of misery that.her.parent holds out to
her ? The obligation of children to
parents, can only be .founded i. grat-
itude ; and where no .favor is Ihewn,
no graticude can,be.dule. It is impofli-
kble that., in any circumstances, yu
ihould be more: miferahle; .but it..is
yery poflible, that you may be happier,

Fly, while the motments of liberty re-
main: and let.not those hearts which
Heaven has formed for each other, be
separated by man. 'The roof of Ar-
davan has always been a refuge to in-
nocence in distress: I will myself con-
du&t you to the valley of Irwan, where
my father's venerable character, and
the retired situation of his abode, .will
secure you;friom detetion ; and I fiall
rejoice ;to ,be the means of cdelivering
yoeu from misery.'

TH.iS offer was too interef i ng to be

refused. The-lovers put themselves un-
der the condut of Solyman-; and he
now repaflfedthe:roads be had travelled
by the light of the fun, with superior
pleasure, even:in the gloom of n-ight; so
delightful is beneficence to a virtuous
mind I

WH -E N th-e morning began to appear

they had reached the banks of the Ti-
gris. " It will not -be neceftriy:,' said
Solymar, ' that -l sho.uld attend you far-
-ther ; yonder is tthe valley of Irwan,

. : . . ' ^ 'P

and the house of Ardavan. To know
that you are unhappy, will 'be a fuffi,-
cient motive for him to recive you; arid
your spry .will:procure you his protec-
tion. -Iwill now take leave of you,
*because I would not again take leave of
.my father. Tell him, that I recom-
mend you to his care ; be will rejoice
to hear that Solyinan has been the
mzreans of your happiness : buttell him
not, that-1 returned to the banks of the
Tigris.' .Having thus partedwith the
*]overs, he proceeded on hisjourney, and
in five days arrived at Ifpahan.

-TH E beauty and magnificence of
that extenfive'city engaged his atten-
tion for many days: he was now as-
tonifhed at the stupendous effets of
induitry, and how delighted by the ele-
gance of art. But by thefehe thought
himself rather amused than inftruted:
and lie perceived : hat day after day
departed from him, without-being dii-
tinguifhed either by the acquisition of
:nowledge or the pracice of virtue; he,
therefore frequented the places of pub.
lic resort, and endeavored to form iur h

# CHAP. IV.

connections as were moSt likely to pro-"
mote both.

C HE A P. IV.

'AMONG those whose convairifation'
he found most inftruding and enter-
taining, he was particularly fond of an
Engliffi mrerchant, who had resided
f6me time at Ifpahan, and spoke the
language of- the country: the mer-
chant also perceiving in Solymnan a fu-
perior understanding, and a benevolent
heart, was'delighlted with his ccmpany,
and cultivated' his frienclihip. ' lTey
frequently met ; and their'converfation.
.generally turning on the manners andc
purifuits of' men, they mutually gratifi-
ed each other by accounts of their'
different countries.

"iYou," said Solvmran, "' have

e'njoyed the advantages which I am still
to piocure. You have seen many-dif-
ferent parts of the world, and can form
a colletive idea of it's inhabitants:
.your commercial engagements u{ft

have led you much into the interefft
and designs of men ; and you mufl,
consequently, be well acquainted with
the prevailing propensities of the heart.
But [ {hould be particula-rly obliged to
you for an account of your own coun-
try, of which I have yet had but an
imperfect description."

" THE difference of men;" faidthe

merchant, " lies only in their com-
plexion and mannes : their principles
are the fame, in all ages, and' in all cli-
mates ; and felf-intereft is the prevail-
ing principle from Indus to the Thames.
I am not, however such a school philof
opher, as to think the whole humanr
species fllould come under this conclu-
sion: I have experienced the delights
of friendhlip, and the confolatioris of
benevolence, where interest was no mo-
tive; I have even known many, who
have contributed to remove the miseries,
of their fellow creatures, though by the
diminution of their own fortune.-
That excellent, that truly useful spirit
of munificence, in a particular manner
charadierizes my countrymen. Were

you, my friend, in the metropolis of
Great Britain, you would behold spa-
cious edifices ere&ed for helpless indi-
gence ; and find the fame skill and care
employed for the health and the lives
of the poor, that the mot affluent cir-
curfrances can procure for the rich."

" BuT munificence is not the only

ornament that diftinguifies my coun-
try : there, too, dwell liberty and
justice; liberty, that, however strange
it may feemn to you, delights in the pro-
tection of a monarch ; and juflice,
which he causes to be adminiiieired
without partiality. The greatelf bafa
in Great Britain cannot invade either
the life or the property of the meanc- f
fubljed with impunity ; he is eaqua.ly
obnoxious to the laws, and would flffer
indifcirlminately with the mofi obiCure
malefacor.

"6 THIS general security of proper-

ty and life excites an unwearied spirit
of induflry, and. difperfcs the sons of
colmmeree over the remotest regions of

B. 2

of the earth.. -Hence, my friend, we
visit the towers of Ifpalian, and the
gulphs of B-afidra ;. our fails are fAretch-
ed from the most distant islands of the
Atlantic to the shores of Japan: and
London is supplied with all the luxu-
ries of nature,. and all:the labors of:art.'

C You. give me,"' said Solyrna-,

5C- a very magnificent, and a very
pleasing- idea of your country. But
will not commerce, as it enriches th;
people, corrupt their manners ? Will
unbounded affluence produce neither
riot nor debauchery, vanity. nor pride ?
The inhabitants of, Great. Britain may
be. more splendid and luxurious; but
the dwellers in Mesopotamia are, per.
haps, happier, in proportion as they are
more innocent.: for Ardavan my. fa-
ther, has . frequently told me, that
weal.h corrupts the heart of man..':)

<" ALL: the goood- things of life,'

answered the. merchant, " are comn-
plicated with evils. If wealth be not
desirable because it may lead us into
luxury, or inflame ua.iwith pride; no.

more would'the sanguine cheerfulness
of health, les. it should betray us into
licentioufiefs.' There are, it is to be
feared, many whoife manner: are de-
praved by riches, but, there are, like-
wiie, many wvjho employ them in the
diffusion of- knowledge-, or the relief; of
indigence.

" T'HES'E, 9" said S'oiyman, " 'are

glorious ends,' and would alriofit excite
me to turn merchant, for the- acquifi-
tion of wealth. But give me some ac-
count of the. literature of your- coun-
try.'

" OF 'that,"' replied the rmerch'ant,

s' 1 am--carce a completent judge, the
grateft part,.of' my time' having been-
employed in commercial 'ludie's. namn:
not, howeer, wholly unacquainted
wtith it:; for! ihave always thought, that.
a.merchant i-ould" ot neglect-' the ac-
complifliments of a. gentlemanTl The
present- fate of literature in Great Bri.-
tain will be. seen best by' confidering
the performances of the learned . in
their respective clafi's;.. We. have buit

of the earthl. -lHence, my friend, we
vi{it the towers of lfpahan, and the
gul phs of B3-affdra ; .our fails are. fretch-
e.d from the most distant islands of tle
Atlanti, to the shores of Japan: and-
London is supplied with. all the luxu-
ries of nature,. and all..the labors of:art.2'

" You, give me,"'- said Solyrnmaza,
C- a very mragnificent, and a very
pleasing idea of your country. But
will not commerce, as it enriches the;
people, corrupt their mnanners ? Will
unbounded affluence produce neither
riot nor debauchery, vanity nor pride ?
The inhabitants of. Great -Britain may
be.more splendid and luxurious; but
the dwellers in Mesopotamia are, per-
haps, happier, in proportion as they are
more innocent: for Ardavan my. fa-
ther, has frequently told me, that
wealih corrupts the heart of man..'

A L L: the good - things of life;"

answered the merchant, " are com-
plicated with evils.. If wealth be not
desirable because it may lead us into
luxury, .or inflanme uss.with pride ; no

more would the fanguiine cheerfulness
of health, -left;:it hould betray us into
licentiouiiefs. There are, it is to be
feared, many whose manners: are de-
praved by riches, but, there are, like-
wife, many- who employ them in the
diffusion of knowledge;, or the relief of
indigence.

' TnHESE, ' said S'0oyman, * 'are-

glorious ends, and would alimoft" excite
me to turn merchant; ,for the acquifi-
tion of wealth. But give me some ac-
count of the. literature of your- counI.
.try,''

" OF that,"' replied thne merchant;,

6 I amn scarce a competent judge, the
grateft part-,of'my ti-me having been
employed in commercial l-udies. L -amn
not, however, wholly unacquainted
with it ; for Ihave always thought, that
amerchant fiould 'rot negl'ec. the ac-
complifhments of a .gentlemanl- Tlhe
prefent-ftate of literature in Great Bri~-;
tain will be. seen best by confidering
the performances of- the learned . in
their refpeaive clafles. . W'e have buit

few hiflorians of real merit either their
style is slovenly and unharmonious, or
their matter undigefled and consuled ;
they are either the tools of a faction, or
the slaves of a bookseller. But I have
had the pleasure of hearing, since I came
to Ifpahan, that the histories of England
and Scotland, the two divisions of Great
Britain, have lately been written with
considerable sprit, accuracy, and ele-
gance. As to the histories of other
countries, which have been published
in Great Britain, they are fuchmere
compilations that they deserve not to be
called the labors of art.'

" FROM this account of your hitorLi

ans," said Solyman, " I cannot enter-
tain any great idea of them ; but what
are your orators ?"-" As to rhetori.
cal writing," answered the merchant,
we have many that are truly excellent ;
spirited and elevated in fentirnent, in
language harmonious and corret : but
the powers of composition are render-
ed inefficacious by a spiritless pronun-
ciation. The art of public speaking,
however important in ifelf, seems en-

tirely to be negle&ed ; and the orator'
pionounces his discourse from'the rof.
trum with as little feeling himself, and:
as'little influence upon his audience, as
if he were reading' the newspaper of
the day'.'-" Then'I suppose,,= said
Solyman', 6' that:your orators fpreak on'
unaffesting, or unintereftihig ftibjeds.-.
'' That is not the cafe," replied the
inmercharit ;' the fiibjeds tliey treat' are
of the last importance : the duties we'
owe' tle Supi-ene B'eing, the difpenfa-
tions of his providence, the eternal oblii
gations-of moi'ality, the charms of vir-
tue, ard the delightful exercises of jus'
tiee, mercy', and charity."-'-:- Holy
Mithra ['1 in'terirupt:ed' Sblyi-ian , can;
the speakers be unafifeed· while they'
are treating these feu-'jeas- Do they
then think them of that impo-rtance'
they really are ;: or dho your teachers'
clifbelieve and disregard their own doc-
trines ; or are they unconcerned-what
effect they may have upon'the people ?.
'' It would be uncharitable,' said the
merchant, ,' to:admit generally any of
these' suppositions. Their unanimated
-and unaw\akening manner of speaking

miay proceed from innocent caupfes~
Which those you mention are not.

I take it for granted," said Soly-

man, " that as you have orators, at
lreat in point of composition', you have
also poets; for rhetoric and poetry
are nearly allied. Besi3des I have- been
infoimred that. every country has it's
poets 5 and that even, on the 'frozen.
mounitaris of the nortthe..t herd-y in-
hiabitants open thi'eir mouths to sing.'"
" The love of harmony-,'. replied the
nierchant, c< is in nman a natural passion.
There is, fomethin' metricarl-and nu-
merous in his m6tios, his acions, ' and'
h'is tor'ds, and he has aiways endeavored
tb reduce the-laft to a kind of poetical
nea fare, e,'een' vwhere the- art of writing
w7as unknown or nnpPratifed. The
art;ofr' pie'try itni Great'Britain; has of
late years been brought to great perfec-
tron ; the language of the country is.
'both nervous and harmonious, and cal-
culated to express the tender and the
sublime, in both which species of wri-
ting we have poets that have: never
aben excelled. Though the Etnglilih

are, in general, of a less sprightly
turn than their neighbors the French ,
yet, in the aaive powers of imagina-
tion, in the flights of fancy, and the
firains of humor, their writings are by
no means inferior. Hence the Engliih
poetry is not only harmonious, but fen-
timental and piLurefque,' abounding
with flrong: images aud lively defcrip-
tion. ,In short, my countrymen have
attempted every different flecies of
poetry, and have excelled in each.'

s ,Th- nccount you give me of your

poetri-y,' Iid .Solyman, " makes me
very de:irous to learn your language.
There is no species of writing that gives
me equal pleatlre :.L caught the entllu-
fiIfmi from nature, from the' harmolgy
and symmetry of her works. if y.ou,
who have so long been accufomned to
the elegance of the English, can bear
a specimen of the Mefopotarnian poet-
ry, I will repeat to you a performance
of -my own.7 .....

A FAREW.EL HYMN, TO THE VAL-

LEY OF IRWAN.

AREW.EL the fields of Irwan's vale,
My infant years where fancy led ;
And.footh'd me with the western gale,

Her wild dreams waving round my head.;

,While the blythe blackbird.told his tale.
tFarewel,.the fields f Irwan's vale-
The primrose on the valley's fide,

The green thyme on the mountain's head.;
-The wanton rose, the daisy pied,

The wilding's bloffor bluffning red.;

.No longer I their.fweetsinhale.
F'arewel, the.fields of Irwan's vale.
How oft, within yon vacant slade,

IHas ev'ning clos'd my careless eye!
Hlow oft, along those banks, I've f{ray'Al,

And watch'd the wave that wander'd by!
Ful long their loss shall I bewail.

Farewel, the fields of Irwan's vale.
Yet still within yon vacant grove,

To mark the close of parting day .;
Along yon flow'ry banks 1o rov'e,

And watch the wave that winds away.;

Fair fancy sure flall never fail.
Though far from these, and Irwan's vale ;

# CHAP. V.

.C H A P. V.

IN social intercourfete te merchant
pasTed many days wvith -Solyman, and
while he gratified his curiolity, engaged
his affections. 'Being suddenly called
-by business to the court -of Baffora, he
came one morning to take a final leave.:
but the traveller was too much attach-
ed to his friend, to :susser any thing but
necessity to part them. -" Permit:ime,'
.,aid he, to attend you on your -present
expedition. I-have not appoin.ted to
:myfef any-particular rout, but travel
as occasion or *inclination leads me; I
an sensible L shal-l gain more from your
-experience and observat-ion, than I can
-from -my own.' This offer was too
agreeable to the inmerchant, not to be
-eagerly embraced ; .and, after the ne-
,ceflary preparations, they -,et out froni
Ifpahan, and met the .morning on th.e
;mountais-.of Aryan.o

TH-E- ifun appeareed-above the hlori-
.on, and Solyman prostrated hir-nfelf in

..P

A FAREW.EL HYMN, TO THE VAL-

LEY OF IRWAN.
jAREWEL the fields of Irwan's vale,

My infant years where fancy led.;
And.footh'd me with the western gale,

Her wild dreams waving round my head.;

,While the blythe blackbird.told his tale.
,Farewel,.the fieldsof Irwan's vale-
The primrose on the valley's fide,

The green thyme on the mountain's head,;
.The wanton rose, the daily pied,

The wilding's blossom blufling red.:

,No longer T their.fweets inhale-
*Farewel, the.fields of Irwan's vale.
.How oft, within yon vacant slade,

Hlas ev'ning clos'd my careless eye!
*How oft, along those banks, I've ftray'"d,

And watch'd the wave that wander'd by:!
Full long their loss hfall I bewail.

Farewel, the fields of Irwan's vale.
*Yet still within yon vacant grove,

To mai.k the close of parting day .;
Along yon flow'ry banks to rove,

And watch the wave that vwinds away .;

*Fair fancy sure fllall never fail.
T.hough far from thetr, and Irwan's vale i

-C H A P. V.

iN social intercourse te e -merchant
passed many days with -Solyman, and
while he gratified his curiolfty, engaged
his affteions. 'Being suddenly called
by business to the court of Bafbora, :he
came one morning to take a final leave.:
but the traveller was too much attach-
.ed to his friendi, to ;susser any thing but
:necessity to part them. -" Permit me,'
i aid he, to attend you on your prefen.
expedition. [4Liave not appointed to
mnyfalf any particular rout, but travel
as occasion or inclination leads me; I
am sensible 1 "hall gain more from your
-experience and observation, than i can
-from -my own.' This offer was too
agreeable to the ;merchant, not to be
.eagerly embraced ; a-rnd, after the ne-
,ceffary preparations., they -set out from
Ifpahan, and mnet the .lorning on the
;mountains o.f Arvan.o

TH-E-fun appeared above the lori-
;gon, and Solyman prostrated limfelf in

*

. '
^.

the profoundest adoration. When he
arose from his devotions, he advanced
towards his fellow traveller, with a
look of kindness mixed with pity and
concern. The merchant underflood
him: but as he was unwilling to con-
trovert the principles of his religion,
he made no apology for his conduct
during the devotions of Solyman.

TH E mild morning light which was

diffused over" the vallies and fireams,
the various beauty of the meadows,
the regular: cifpofition of bloflomed
hedge-rows, the soothing murmurs of
bees at their early labor, and the full
concert of the feathered creation, drew
their conversation on the universal be-
neficence of nature. " I feel,' said So-
lyiman ' a delight, which i can neither
account for 'nor describe. These
mountains gilded with the rays of the
orient fun,' those painted vallies that
shame the rich carpets of Persia, yon
distant waters which gleam with the
ihifting effulgence of light, the general
bury voice of joy and activity in the an-

imal creation, conspire to fill my heart
with inexprefiible pleasure."

{" THAT pleasure,' replied the mer-

chant, " 1 believe, proceeds from sym-
pathy: it is scarce poflible, unless you
have rome peculiar cause of misery,
.not to be pleased when you fee every
thing around you happy. On the con-
trary, if you go into the mansions of for-
row, it willbe impossible to withstand
the infection of it. The God of na-
ture feemns to have given us there fyrm-
pathetic feelings, to link our affetions
in the great chain of ociety : hence,
social virtue is not left to depend solely
on the moral will, but is founded on
the principles of our nature.

' BUT the object of your adoration

is £o profuse of his favors, that I should
now be glad to find tome convenient
shade. I think, I discover a cave on
the southern declivity of the mountain ;
let us retire to it during the heat of
the day."

As they were advancing towards the

cave, they perceived. a beaten pathl
leading direftly from -k to a- diiaiant riv-
ulet: this made them apprehensive that
it might be-the-habitation of some wild'
beast, that had worn the pa'th by con--
fiantly going to drink at the stream :
but their fears were soon removed upon
the appearance of an aged hermit, ad-
vancing slowly towards the rivuleut with
an earthen pitcher. At fight of the
travellers, he haft-ed to his abod-e with-
all the feeble precipitancy of age; they
agreeod not to disturb him, and only
took the -advantage- of' the rock whichl
'projeteed over his cell to. ihelter them-
filves friom the fun ; but tley had not
long continued in this situation, before
the hermit, perceiving them to be in-
offeniive travellers, invited them into
his cave..

· You will excuse,' said' the lioary

sage,. " the caution of years :- tlhefe
mountains are not f{cure from the rav-
'uge of human ferocity ; and tihefe grey
hairs would be no defence from the
wanton cruelty of man. I have susser-
ed so much fiom my own species, that

I have at iafl forsaken their society : I
thought it'better to g.ive up. the conven-
iences of it, than to bear the evils ; and
I have long. lived in, this fslitary cave
on nothing more than wlat uncultiva-
ted nature would afford me."--Thofe
sufferings,' said. Solyman, must, indeed,
have been extraordinary, that could
-make you giv.e up one of the greatest
advantages of life, thefocial intercourse-
of your fell:ow-creatures.' -"' The
narratives of age," replied the hermit,
" are seldom agreeable to youth-; but
as in ftrucion can be gained only from
experience, you will do lwifelyto learn
it from the misfortunes of Abbas.

" I wAs born to a competent for-

tune in the province of Lurefan: but
'being early left an orphan, my affairs
-eame under the cognizance of a jufli.-
ciary court,. which the members of it
call the court of equity ; but so equi-
table were they with regard to me,
that they claim-ed two parts of my little
j fortune for their care of the tiird.'-

Would to God, that were never the

. 2.

cafe in Great B.ritain !' interrupted the;
merchant. " But proceed.' Though
I had such an. early and convincing
proof of the treachery and rapacity of
mankind ; yet, as I had always exercL
fed the benevolent virtues myself, I
could not think others totally devoid of
them; and at my three and twentieth
year being inclined to travel, I without
scruple entrusted the remains of my
fortune with a person whom I had long
known and refpeted ; a person, Holy
Allah ! who lifted his hands to thee ; but
I had not been absent from Lureftan
more than three moons, when he pre-
tended a commrniflio.i to dif pose of my
effeLts, and imnmediately left the place.
Upon my return therefore to the prov-
ince, I found neitler friend nor for-
tune ; and being bred to no. ufinefs, I
was reduced to the molt difirefsful state
of indigence. I applied, however, not
without hopes of redress or relief, to a
person of power and eminence, whom
I had often heard speak of his friend-
fiiip wlth. my father. After long and
frequent attendance,. I was. admitted to
an interview . I laid;oped rny diflrefs to

him 'with that kind of eloquence which
the- milfries we susser from the treache-
ry of others always suggests ; and.
which however unaffgcted it may be to
indifferent persons, utters its complaints
with dignity and lefentnment. I was
heard half way through my story, and
dismissed with the following reply:

It is not neceflfry, young man, to,

proceed with your complaints ; I per-
ceive you have been abused, and I am
sorry for you. But that shall not be
the only prrof of my regard for you ;,
1 will give you a little advice -you
should never depend so muchl on the
benevolence or integrity of any human;
:being, as to trust him with your f-or-
tune or your -life." Thus ended my
hopes from the friend of rmy father;
wihofe b-enevolence extended no farther,
than to inftruelt me how to secure the
fortune that was ffolen, and to preserve
the life which I wished to loose..

I HA'D now no choice, but to enter

as a common soldier, into the army of
the Sophi. I had always delighted in
j martial exercises, and was: expert in the

afe of arms; my dexterity and address,
drew upon me the attention of my offi-
cers ;: and in a thort time obtained a
fmnall commission. I -had now almofi
forgot my miseri'es, and embraced my
new situation: withl cheerfulness and
ihope ; but Fortune, who: had for a
Ivhile ceased to persecute me as below
her notice, as if she had ;been indignant
at my fatisfation, and jealous of my
profpets, now renewed and redoubled
her severity.

'- MY commanding officer had a

daughter of extraordinary beauty, and
an urrcommon capacity. Zara was the
object' of universal admiration: but she
-iad set her heart on the unfortunate
Abbas. -he first moment I beheld her,
I discovered in- her tooks the most ten-
der and: affe&ionate regard for me,
·which I imputed to her eompaflion for
my' misfortunes ; though at the fame
time I wi'shed, not knowing why, tliat
it might proceedT from another cause.-
She aflked me for thle flory of my life:
I' told it in the plainest and most pathet-
ic mianner ; yet, when I- had finished he

desired me to repeat it. From this
moment I had done with peace ; her
infeaious, terndernefh had: such an influ-
ence upon m-y heart, that I could thiink
of nothing but Zara ; without Zara
I- was miserable. A thousand times
did I flatter mryfelf, that there was'
.fomething.more than. mere compassion'
in her lobk and manner : and not ma-
ny days: had passed, before IE was con-
.vinced of the dear fatal, truth-fr.om this
: letter--"

6 ' liO ABBAS.' .

"6 YOIUR merit and your firtferingsi
- have a claim to foiietlinig more than'

compafion : to espouse the caife of
Abbas, is to dilcharge a duty which vir-
tue cannot dispense with.l Meet me onR
the parade this evening, and you ihall
k anowv more of thef entiments of

ZA A ARA X

' i THE emotions I felt on tlhe re;

eipt of this letter can only be conceiv-
ed by those who, in the midil of def-
g pairi-g love,- have beheld a gleam of

hope. The tumult of my heart hutrri.
ed me to the place appointed, long be-.
fore the time I walked backward and
forward in the utmost confusion, totally'
regardless of every object about me ;
sometimes raising my hainds and eyes
in the fudlden effusions of transport, and
sometimes smiling withl the complacen'.
cy of delight°

'. AT length the day departed, and

Zara came;, My heart bounded at her
fight I was unable to speak, and threw
mzTyfelf at her feet, She was alarmed at
my excessive earineffnefs and confusion;
but conmmanding me to rife, C Abbas,,'
said she', 6 if your confifionrproceeds
from your' modest grati'tude, restrain it,
fill you' find whether I am able to serve
you ; if it arises from any other eaufe,
I miuft leave' you this nmoment..' I en-
treated mhe would tell me, to what
I was indebted for the Ihappinefs of this
intervew, and I would be calm and at-
tentive. "' My regard for your merit,
aid my compassion for your sufferings,'
said she, ' make me wiTs to serve you.
Tell me, Abbas, can I affill you througlh

# CHAP. VI.

thie inter.elf of my father ?' .1 faltered
out my acknowledgments: telling her,
;that to her L mufl owe. all my hopes of
fuiture hapinefs,

S SHE .left me immediately with-

out reply. The singularity of my be-
haviour on the parade before the conm-
ing of Zara, had drawn upon me the
attention of an officer who was secretly
lher admirer, and who, either through
,curiosity, or suspicion, though unobfervy-
: ed by me, had waited at a ;:convenient
distance to watch my motions. No
sooner did he perceive the approach of
Zara, than) as well to gratify his re-
venge, as to ingratiate himself with her
father, he immediately told him of our
interview.

.... .I .

C H A P. Vi.

A l ZAR.A, ignorant of what had
pafled, with her usual freedom and good
nature, begai to express her conIpaflion
for the mrisfortunes of 'Abbas, talked of
his merits, and wified to fee lhim pre:-
feried.. The old general, who was na-

-turally' jealous and- impetuous, ex-
:claimed, with a burfi of indignation,
:' Yes, ilafall prefer him l.!" Early the
next morning he *sent .my discharge;
and while I was gazing in stupid aston-
ifnment upon my general's letter, a
youth, masked, brought ane a fmali caf-
ket, with a letter from Zara, which, to
the best of my remembrance, was as
follows-

,'C TO AB.BAS

"' BY some unlucky circumitanc-e,
which I do not now underRand, in;fead
of promoting .you, I have -been the
cause of your dismission. 'The bearer,
who brings you a .small caRfket of jew-
els for your support, has my coriwnands
to condu& you the shortest way over
the mountains: follow him iimrmedi-
ately, left the rageof jealousy meditate
new persecutions. He wears a mask
that he mnay not-be taken notice of as
one of the .general's donmeftic.ks: his
attachment too rre will make him -faith-
ful to you. Tipnte may bri.,ng about
'happier events:. Adieu, adieu !

7. A*R A._>

· IN the anguill and confusion -of

my heart, I 'followed my guide with!-
'out knowing whither he was leading
me, or what It was about-to do. i ven-
ted my grief in broken ejaculations,
frequentlyacalling upon the name of Za-
,ra, but not once ,addressing myself .to
my attendant. By the evening -of the
:fcond day, we had advanced forty
miles southward from the province of
:Lureftan ; when-<how .hall 1 .-relate
the last horid scene of mny miseries !-
pardon me !-these aged eyes have yet
a tear left, yet a tear for the memory
of Zara !--we were attacked by -a band
-of robbers. My guide was Zara:! in
her fright Ihe threw off her maik, and
-cried "Zara ' Love, rage, fear.andven-
geance, gave me .supernatural strength ';
three of the villains fell by my fabre ;
a fourth disarmed me; and the reft of
-thc gang carried off Zara."

AT this cri'is of his -tory, the spirits of

-the aged hermit were exhausted by their
own violence; and it was some time.
before he could proceed.

" You have now,' continued he,
'- heard the completion of my misfor-
tunes. When l-was recovered of the
wounds I had received, I spent ornme
mnonths in a fruitiefs search of Zara:
at last, despairing to gain any intelli-
gence of her, I transmitted an account
of the affair to her father -; not without
hope, that' his Power, or his wealth,
might be a means of finding her out,
and redeeming her but I was deceiv-
ed, and had soon the mortification to
hear, that the unnatural wretch exult-
ed in our misfortunes, and uttered the
mos- dreadful imprecations on his only
child.

'DEPRIVED of hope, and deje&ed

with melancholy, I could no longer bear
the society of mankind: I therefore be-
took myself to these foii tary mountains,
where this cell has been my habitation
for years, that have pafled away in un-
varied sorrow ; and where you are the
sirs-: of human beings that have heardl
me tell my tale.?

# CHAP. VII.

C'- A A P. VII.

SOLYMAN expatiated on the susser,
ings of Abbas with the moit tender fen-
-ibility, and inveighed against the base-
ness of manlkind with all the rare of
honefi resentment. " Surely,' said he
to the mei-chant, " man is the vilest of
all creatures ! in proportion as he ex-
cels them in reason, he exceeds them in,
the ability to do mischief; and being
equally eruel, the mischief he does ren-
ders him more deteflable. Sacred Mi-
thra ! why dost thou lend thy light tc
the villain and the tyrant ? Were it
not for the enijoyment of your compa-
ny, my friend, I should have few in-
ducements to go farther from the-valley
of Irwan ; for poflibly to fee more of
human life, is only to know more og
it's crim-es and miseries.."

': FRO'M the complicated diffreies of
one person,' replied the merchant, you
draw a partial image of the life of man,
Bsut-the day declines : let us haften over
Whlefe mountains, that we may repose at

night in some village of the valley.')
The travellers.took leave of the hermit;.
and about the close of day arrived at
the village of Arden.

AT their entrance--they were met by

aperfon of a plain dress, and a cheerful
eountenance, who without ceremony,.
-invited them, as travellers, to partake
of his house and table that night. They
accepted his invitation ; and the mer-
chant,. addreiimng himself to Solyman,
said, " From the family of this man,
you shall not only be convinced, that
'there is both happiness and virtue in hu-
:mani life ; but you, flhall fee also, how
much the former depends upon the lat-
ter, I have been entertained by him,
in travelling this way before : he is
never more happy than when he has an.
opportunity of gratifying his benevo-
lence. His inheritance being. much les-
fened by the lofles of his. father, who
was a merchant, he has but little
-wealth, except what arises fi-om the
industrious cultivation of a farm, which
he purchased ten years ago with the
-Qhief part of his fortune ; yet he is sag

liberal to the poor and the ifranger, as
if he had large possessions ;: his known
hospitality and generolity make his
house the resort of the'traveller and ther
indigent; and after he has finiffied. the
labors. of the day, he is always ready to
entertain the one, and" relieve the other.;;
hence that serene and easy cheerfulness
which- vou fee in. his countenance. In
his family you. behold thle influence of a
good- exa.mple ; his w5ife, whom he
i.bves, and' by whonm he is beloved withI
tlle most cordial Sincerity, goes hand inu
hand with-. him, not only through their
mutual cares,but also in the exercises I
benevolence. It is the principle of'her
economy,, that domestic frugality .is
the support of liberality; and ihe dif-
penses- her own,. and her husband's
bounties, with that propriety and easy
cheerfulness, which double their value
to the receiver,. The children inherit
the benevolence of their parents, and
learn .the exercise of it from their ex-
ample. IBye and bye they will croud
about your sofa, solicitous to serve you:
you- fnall fee them preven.ing your

*
a . *r .

wants, and- watching your requests,.
with a. busy emulation whihll shall' do
you, the. mofl fCervices."'

SO.L;YM-A-N li'teried' witi delight to-

Mis description of the villager's family ;:
and hafted, with the most ardent curios-
ty, to behold that virtue he so much ad.,
mired; W hen he found that every tlingt
exceeded:. the- merchant's- account and
his own expec-ation, " it is enough,:
faid-he, '-,. I; al again reconciled to my
own species., Notwithftanding-the ir,.
preflion I received- fronm the itory of
the unfortunate- Abbas, virtue has yet
her temples among men ;; but, surely,
Ihe is a villager, and-her votaries are the
inhabitants of' the field !" Full of
·these thoughts, and delighted" with the
family of his host, he retired to his
chamber, and, before he slept, comnpo-
fed the following ode-

THE HAPPY VILLAGER..

T-IRTUE dwells in Arden's vale:

There her hallow'd temples rie ;

There her incense greets the ksies,.
grateful as the morning gale .

There, with liumble peace and her,,
Lives the. happy villager;
There the golden fniles of morn!
Brighter every field adorn ;
There.the fun's declining ray-
Fairer paints the parting day:
There the woodlark louder sings%.
Zephyr moves on fofrer- wings,.
Groves in greener honors rife,.
Purer azure spreads the Ikies;
There the. fountains- clearer flow,.
Flowers-in brighter beauty blow,,;
For, with peace and virtue, there
Lives the happy villager !

Distant flill from Arden's vale-
Are the woes the bad bewail;
DiRant fell remorse, and pain,
And phrenzy fniiling o'er her chain !
Griefes quick.pang, defpair's.dead groan.
Are in Arden's vale unknown:
For, with peace and virtue, there.
Lives the happy villager. !

In hiis hofpitabie cell,
Love, and truth, and freedom dwell.-
And, with asped mild and free,
The graceful nymDh, fimpliciy.,.

# CHAP. VIII.

IHail, ye liberal graces, hail !
Natives all of Arden's vale:
For, with peace and virtue, there;
Lives the'happy villager!.

C H A. P. VIII.

WVHEN the dawn- of the morning'
broke, Solymran and the merchant, with
the nmof grateful- acknowledgments of
the ho'pitality vit with wich they had
been enitertain.ed,.left die village:of Ar-
den, folHo wed by the kind wiihes of their
hofr, and his amiable family., They tra-
velled for some days through the south-
ern-provinces of Perila, without any re-
miarkable occurrences, or any other en.
tertainment; than such as could be found
in tle diversity of profpecs, and the
different labors of men, Sometimles
they amul]ed. themselves with the con-
templation of' those places, which his-
tory had marked ouc as the, scenes of
great events ;- and sometimes had occa-
sion to reflfe onl the perifliab.le vnonu-
aemits. of human- magniiicence..

Tn E noble plain on whicih food the-

once glorious Persepolis afforded them
i;nexhaustible- matter of curiosity and
meditation: this plain extending about
nineteen leagues, abounds every where
with villages, and is watered by the
great river Araxes. Nature has been;
so indufirious in: the defence of it, that
flhe-has: raiied before it mountains, that
bear all the appearance,. and might an--
fwer the endrof artificial fortifications.
From. hence the travellers were amused'
with the ruinous remains of many-
noble edifies, that had:once adorned the
range'of mountains :-butwhenthey were-
come- to' that part. of them- which cov,
ered the ancient; palace of Persepolis,.
the stupendous- ruin firuck. thenm with
silent aftonifli-ment. Porticoes, which:
had withstood- the assaults of time more
then: two. thousand years ; broken coo
Iumns of different lengths, riling at con-
fiderable diflances within the limits of
the fame pile ;: sculptured portals,-
through whose frowning arches the-
winds pass with a hollow murmuring ;
numberless figures engraven on the pi-
lasters of those portals ; and multitudes

of hieroglyphics on the different parts,
of the spacious ruin; gave the travel-
lers a mournful and magnificent idea of
the prifine grandeur of this edifice.

TH E merchant observing Solyman to

be totally absorbed in thought, would
not interrupt the melancholy pleaflr-e of
his contemplations.;. but waited, in si-
lence, till, with aan air of unaffe&ed con-
cern, he thus expressed his sentiments on
Persepolis..

'" r A M at a Iof;--my fiiend, in the

midt: of thee- nagnificent ruins, whe-
ther I fhio.uld think, more highly or more
meanly of mankind. Pride rai'ed this,
kffty edifice, and pride deflroyed it.-
The vanity of a Cyrus, a Darius, or a
Xerx-es, adorned those fuberb columns ;,
and the vanity of ana Alexander defaced
them:. These domes were not reared.
solely for regal magnifieence and fecu-
rity, but to aid the appeties of pover-
ty- and luxury, and to secrete the royal
pleasures, from. those that toiled to grat-
ify them. Thus, as this noble ftruture
.was poiib!y raised not only for Yanity

but for riot; oi, probably, by -vanity.
inflamed by riot, it fell : !probably at
the request of a smiling harlot, the tdw-
, ers of Persepolis blazed for her diver-
sion ; probably, because the conqueror
had taken too'large a draught of wine,
this palace, the glory of eastern art,
funk to the ground : a firiking winfiance
oof the vanity of human labors, and
the depravity of luliman nature'! on the
other:hand, while I confider the work
of the artist; while I am delighted with
the fymetry and proportion, whlich is
yet to be traced thro.ugh these -maimed
ruins, and struck with the bold relief of,
the ancient Persian archi tceture ; I forget
the motives both of the erection and de-
molition of Persepolis ; and admire the
indufiry and ingenuity of man, that gave
such grace and beauty to .these massy
fiructures.

"C YOUR sentiments " said the mer-

chant,are .' much the fame with my own,
but give me leave now to conduct you
to a mountain, about two leagues dif-
tant from these ruiiis, and situated be-
tween two .of the most beautiful plains

in the worldc. This mountain consists of
.one entire rock, capable of the-molftex-
quifite polish : 'it-is reduced to-form by
art, and-its fides are perpendicular-; so
that, at a distance, it has the appearance
of a wall. Upon this rock are several
pieces of bass relief, exquifitly perfor-
med-; in one of. which is represented
a combat between the king of Persia,
and the king of the Indies ; the latter of
whom, according to the tradition of the
times, was.fubdued. There are, besides
-mrany other figures, of which, though
-you may not discover the design, you
.will be pleased wi th the -execution.^'

-' So L. Y MA N. proceeded vwith his friend
to the mountain, much delighted, as well
with the extraordinary appearance of
the rock, as theuncommon beautyofthe
plains that were spread on either hand
beneath, interfierfed with villas fhaaded
;by trees, exterifive meadows, and pas-
.tures filled w:ith flocks. When they had
gratified their curiosity, and indulged
their speculations, they proceeded on
.their journey, and in a.fhort tine arri-
ved at the Gulph of Bafforas

# CHAP. IX.

The merchant, having here found the

veflel he expected, told Solyman, that if
his inclination led him to Europe, he
colld accommodate him with a conven-
lent passage; informing hi m, at the fame
time, that his own affairs would detain
hi fbmne years longer in Persia. So.
lyman, whose heart was firmly attached
to the merchant, long hesitated between
friendship and curiosity: however, as
he mull have parted with him had he
continued his travels in Asia, and was
not totally without hopes of feeing himt
in what he called the new world, he de-
termined to accept his offer.

C H A P. IX.

As the ship was to remain some time
in the gulph, Solyman took the oppor-
tunity to make the tour of India. In his
way he visited the Isle of Ormus, than
which no part of nature wears a more
difima appearance. Excepting a few
houses, which make the capital of the
place, the whole looks like a heath blaf-

ted by lightning, or burnt up by design.
Y .t here, in this scene of dreary defo-
latiion, Solyman had the mortification to
meet with an exile from the cit y of If
pahan.

' SUR. ELY,' said he to. tle unhappy

man, " you mutl have been so unfor-
tunate as to commit some enormous
crime, condemned as you are to this
miserable abode ?"

' S-T R ANG ER, replied the exile, " I

have been unfortunate, but not unjust.
One day, being at the Persian court, I
told a gentleman who stood near me in
a low whisper, that I thought the Sul-
tana M{oratte extremely beautiful.-
This was my crime ! and it was the de-
cree of imperial justice, that for this I
should wear out the remains of life in
thlis dreary solitude.`

"''HEAVENS !' said Solyman, "what

mnadnefs mufi possess mankind, to lodge
unlimited power in the hands of a-
ay one. human being ! when the de-
cree of juifice nmull. be issued by num-

bers united, there are many means of
restraining pRartial or illegal sentences:
fclf-intei-ei, revenge; envy, and every
otlher cause of perverting jufice, would
then operate feebly, when opposed by
public lhaime, divided interests, and the
open appearance of equity. But what
comfort can you receive fromi useless
declamation ? I cal help you to the
means of deliverance from this wrerch-
ed prison ; and I think that you are re-
tr-ained by no principle of duty from
embracing them ; for it is impossible,
that Divine Power iould enforce obe-
dience to the decrees of injustice. I am
nowi about to travel through India:
at my return I will again visit Ormus
and you ; and if you fliall be inclined
to exchange your prison for the spacious
kingdoms of Europe I will procu:e
you a paflage thither.'

TH E exile heard these words wiLth in-

conceivable tranfmort ; he threw him-
self at the feet of Solyman, and expreflT
ed his delight in one emphatical wtord
crying out-(" Liberty, liberty !' the
pleafulre of the traveller was fcacrce

# CHAP. X.

inferior to that of the exile. " Surely,9
iaid he to himself, "1 the diffusion of
happiness is the highest bliss that the hu-
man heart is capable of ! I feel more
delight in the hope of defeating the ma-
lice of injurious power, than in any
thing I have ever met with, either be-
fore orfince the beginningofmy travels,

C HA P. X.

SOLYMAN now leftOrmus, :and pro-
ceeded towards the frontiers of India.
Though the country lies nearly in the
fame clirmae with the bouthern provin-
ces of Periia, yet the. afpedt of it is
different ; and it is furnished with
other kinds of plants and animals, as
well as with people of a different conm-
plexion, and different manners: in-
deed nature seems to have made the
intercourse of different nations neceffa.
ry, by supplying each with some pe.
culiar conveniences.

SOLY MAN paifed not through the
provinces of the Mocul's empire withoiub

infrlTuaion as well as amusement. He
wvas fiklled in -the natural hiflory of
plants and animals; and he found here
abundant opportunity to exercise that
kind of knowledge. He was often
amnufed by observing, how nearly bru-
tal sense borders upon human reason,
in the reflecing sagacity of the ele-
phant, and the adroit minfchief of the
baboon.

SMAL .L, howrever, in compari'fun,
vwas the pleafire lie received from the
natural rarities of India, to that which
the excellent adminilfration of julice in
the several provinces afforded h1m.--
'he- police of' that country appeared tuJ
hitm'mofi wifely calculated for the pre-
servation of peace and property ; the
magifi-rates that were aptiinied to ad-
mIirifter juflice in their ieverai disLri&l,
being obliged to keep persons contiu-
ually employed to watch the dealing:
of commerce, and attend both to pub-
lic and private tranfadions; for the
ii niuity of svwhich thcmifves were to

a 2

be accountable, and the emperor night
always be appealed to.

BUT when he came to Delhi, the

capital of the Mogul's empire, his
opinion of the Indian policy was much
altered. He there had the mortifica-
tion to find a ministry of wives, and a
court of concubines, at whole difcre-
tion the principle posts in the civil and
military eftablifhinents were usually dif.
posed of ; and he who was most re-
commended by his person and address,
was sure to obtain the highert office in
the legislature orthe armly. To findthat
the bands of music at court confifded
only of wnomen, gave him no difutft:
" There," said the traveller, '" the
ladies are in their proper sphere. ILet
them cultivate all the fobt and engaging
graces : let them employ themselves in
the embellifrhments of art and the excur.
lions o-f fancy.: but let them not inter-
fere in the inportant concerns of gov-
ernment ; nor raise those to the places
of power, whose acconipliafhmens are
iuiaed only to their tafle.:'

As Solyman was displeased' with the-

caballing arts of the Indian: ladies, so he:
was shocked at their inhuman and un-
natural superstition. With horror and
amazement did lie sometimes behold a
woman, in the bloorm of life and beau-
ty, rush into the flames tot accompany
the manes of her dead husband : and if
nature shuddered at the thought of this
dreadful. sacrifice, or female foftnefa
lhrunk into. fear or irresolution, he be-
held a number of diabolical priests, with!
execrable screams, and faces of horror,
pushing. forward the poor trembling
relucaant woman to the burning pile.
" Eternal Mithra !P said the affited
youth, '- what havock does fiperfli-
tion make among thy works ! when.
once that fiend enters the human heart,.
nature and reason are driven out ;
their sacred lights are lwholly extinguill-
ed ; truth and humanity are tram.pled
upon; and the detefed fury leads her
infatuated votaries through the horrors
of dark-ness, into the arms of death. !'"

# CHAP. XI.

C H A P. XI.

SOLY'IMAN was the'i more affected by
this infe'nal custom, as lie feared it
migit one day be the fate of a lady,
witlh whom he had contracted an inti.
mate friendfhlip, and for whoni head
the most tendei- rerpa-d. This amiable
perfol was a native of Delhi, and her
name A lnlena. As the houses in which
they lodged were contiguous,. file first
drew his attention by her music, which
was her faivoiite cmplo7yment, and in
which she was greatly ikilled. Soly-
man had a taste ror all the fine arts
and, after the inquiries and observations
of the day, he felt an irrefi 'ib!e plea-
sure, in listening, from his portico, to
the evening music of Almena. i;is
heart soon became prejudiced in favor
of a lady, who had zffolrded him It
much entertainmren;t'; and he viifihcd
for nothing nmore than an opportunity
of exprefing his gratitude.

Ir was usual for Almena to take a

morningo walk in the iubu-bs of
Delhi'

Solyman observed this ; and. introduced
himself to her conversation, by paying
his acknowledgments. There is some
Cfcret attradion in congenial natures,
which draws them together, without
tlle forms of a long acquaintance. So-
lyrnan was soon convinced, that he dif-
covered, in. Almena, a-difpofition per-
fedly suited to his own : her:converfa--
tion was the pidure of a inind enlarged
by virtue, and enlightened by learning :
fle had none of the trifling follies or
the insignificant levity of her sex ;' yet.
her manner was animated and chear.-,
ful : tie had no ebullitions of giddg
wit; but her language was thie clear-
and natural image of poliihed fenie, and;
unaffeced knowledge. Solyman left:
no means unattempted to cultivate a.
friendship, that :promised. f much feli-
city... He conflantly attended Almena
in her morning walk ; and,.at every
int.erview, entertained some. newr senti-
me.ncts in her favor. Her heart was not
less benevolent than his own : Yotu
-hiav.e.'eeinr,. -my friend;." said she, " al-
mofi every thing in Delhi, that is worthl
thle attention of a ilranger; but I sup-

pose you do not make it your business,
as a traveller, merely-to attend to what
is. uncommon or magnificcnt ; not
merely to explore the different opera-
tions of nature, and manners of men.
Travel. must afflord you many opportu-
nities to relieve the indigent, to com-
fort the afflicded, to inform. the igno-
-rant, or rescue .the oppressed'- Within
.the compass -of my morning walk, there
is a village, the inhabitants of which I
call my people ; they are all poor ; to
those chat are able to labor, I propose
rewards for the greatest induflry; and
those who are incapacitated by age or
ficknrefs £ take under my own prote6t-

IT is easy to conceive how much

Solyman would be delighted with this
account of Almena-. When he found,
that, -to all' the elegant graces of female
softness, ihe added the virtues of benev-
olence, his friendilaip for her was height-
ened inlto the. Ioft -refined affetion.
On the. other hand, her regard for So-
lyman increased, as she became acquaint-
ed with his improved understanding,

# CHAP. XII.

and generous temper : for virtue loves
her own image, wherever it is found.

C H A P. XII.

SOLYMAN had now passed many
days at Delhi, in this pleasing inter-
course of friendship ; happy to assist his.
Alniena in the diffifion of happiness,
charmed with her virtues, and delight-
ed with her conversation. The time,
however, approached, when he was to
think-of his expedition into Europe :
but the friendlchip of A lmena bound to
his heart by fironger ties than that
which he had before contraced with the
merchant, overballanced at once every
thought of his voyage : he had, there-
fore, determined.to remain at Delhi;
when the poor exile at Ormus came in-
to his mind. He started at the thought,
as he would have done at the ghoit of
Ardavan. c' Tis done !" said he ;
'c Adieu to Almena ; adieu to the dear
delights of her f-iendfhiip, if th' y 1mu.f
be purchased at the expence of' vi .."e

There is no precept of human wis-

dom conceived to be of greater use, and
-therefore none more frequently urged,
than that we should learn to avoid the
evils of life, from the irregularities and
,-misfortunes of others ; yet important as
this . precept. may be., it is, like most
others, universally neg.l;eced. We 'ob-
ferve,':indeed, the events of life'; and
inquire into their causes with insatiable
curiosity ; bur we seldom 'draw any
conclusions for the direcion of our own
conduct: we hear or read only for
amuimemnt ; and the story passes by,
without leaving any traces of infiruc-
tion.

SOLYMAN, w7ho, from the first set-

ting out ol his travels, Lad received
.the firongeff conviAions of the difirefies
of love, without the leafi. caution or
resistance, suffered that paflion to make
.its inroads under the appear-ance of
friendship; and he -now felt all the an-
guilh, which he -had before been a wit-
ness to near the village of Abdat. Not
once, however, did be hefitare between
love and virtue : the toirrent of his

griief for the loTs of Almena, violent as
-it was,, could not bear down .his deter-
.nmi-ned integrity.

:W I.T H. a heart full of the: most pierc-

;ing sorrow,, he .went to take: leave of his
·beloved friend : he resolved, neverthe-
.less, to explain the caufe.of h-is depart-
:ure-with the oeft serene indifference,
determined not to asse't his-Almena by
.the appearance of sorrow ;herefolved,
-and threw himself at her;feet in-fpeech-
:iefs anguiih.

-.AL M EN-A beheld his grief with lunL

ted sorrow and surprise ; and, witl
tears that flowed from pity and friend-
- Ihip, entreated him to discover the cause
·of his distress. - It is in vain, A-line-
na,' said he, ".it is in .vain any longer
-to hide my heart from you : 'nor, in-
;deed, should I a-a the part of friendship,
,to dissemble it's feelings. ', -who was
yesterday :the happiest of ,mankind in
,the enjoyment of yo.ur conversation,
.am now the most miserable. By the
indifpenfible laws of honor.and .human-

ity, I am called from Delhi: but alas !
by the love of Almena, I am induced
to flay. 1 know, my friend, there is
no alternative: but that knowledge is
my misery. I go, then, from you and
-from. happiness; perhaps never more
to enjoy either: but 'when I am far
-from you, it will be some consolation to
believe that you will remember the love
and the truth of Solyman.'.

Almena, as well as the emotions of

her heart would give her leave, replied,
' Go my friend ; go where your virtue
leads you, and providence be your guide!
Your fricndfhip, while I have life, shall
not be forgotten : no; Almena ihall
always refpet your memory, and love
you with the fame affection as the does
the dearefl of her friends.'

A FLOOD of tears followed these

words; and Solyman, unable any long-
,er to behold her sorrow, precipitately
w.ithdrewo

# CHAP. XIII.

.--- - ,' ,t , r

C H A P. IIIr.

CDEPRIVED of.that serenity which
ever waits on conscious virtue, when
free from the great calamities of life,
the innocent, the once happy Solyman,
was nowbecome the child of afflicion.
He repassed the provinces of India in
deep melancholy, unaffeaed by every
thing that might excite curiosity or ex-
ercife speculation. But, behold the
power of virtue ! and be convinced,
whoever thou art thatreadeft this fro-
ry, that there is nothing equally capa-
ble of alleviating the afflitions which:
are incident to human life.

WH-IEN he arrived at Ormus, and

beheld the joy of the poor exile at the
fight of his deliverer, he felt a torrent
of pleasure in his breast, overflowing all
the oppositions that grief had raised
against it. "( 0 that Almena,' said he,
" were present! that I could commu-
nicate to her the happiness I feel in ref,
cuing this poor Persian from the op-
pression of tyranny ! how would lh.ea

gentle heart rejoice; and indulge itself
with Solyman in the-delights-of benev-
olence ! Fate has been severe in divi-
ding those whose fouls were made for
each other : but it has left me this hap
piness, and I enjoy it."

S o L Y M A N was no'w about -to apply

to his friend the merchant, who was
still! upon' the coa{f, to procure: a passage
for the exile, but he could not resist the
desire of wvritihg immediately to Al-
mena ;. and: from-Ormus he: sint, the
following: letter-

- T 0' A'L M-EEN A'.

S-
SIHALL Sollyman be pardoned, if be
intrude once moree: on· the quiet of' AI-
mnena ?: Dearest, best of women, I
come not to wound thiy gentle heart
with my complaints :. you fliall' not be
told-what I liave fuflered since my de-
parture: no, Almena ! you fa!l: only
know what I, have enjoyed. The poor
exile whoni I mentioned to you at Del-
hi, is fill' in Ormnus. When he per-
ceived me from the rocks on' which. he

# CHAP. XIV.

Cfed to wander daily to watch my com-
ing, he flew towards me in an extacy
of joy, crying out-" Liberty ! my
deliverer ! I,iberty !' Here was a
scene, my friend, that might have over-
ballanced every thing but the iofs of
your company. For that, Almena-
forgive me-for that I muff yet sned a.
tear. Adieu !.

SOLY M AN. '

C H A P. XIV..

AFTER the difil-iflion of this letter,.
he went immediately to visit the mner-
cliant,. who received him with the
warmest exprefflons 'of friendship.-
" Welcome. said he, '" my valuable
friend ! wliofe uncommon virtues have
made you devote the pleasurable season
of life, to the acquisition of knowl-
edge, and the diRfribution of happi-
ness.,.'

" FOR the latter of these purposes,'
said Solyman, ' I now wait upon you,.

F 2

.I the iWe of Ormus is an unhappy
Persian, whom the capricious cruelty of
his prince has condemned to perpetual
exile in that dismal prison. Were he
a criminal, juffice should have it's
course ; I might then have beheld him.
with pity, but should not have medita-
ted his deliverance, but he is innocent,
my friend, he is innocent, and suffers.
Cannot you afifiF me to effect his es-
cape ? cannot he have that paflage to
Europe, which you, obligingly offer-
ed me ?

:' To facilitate the escape of an ex-

ile,' replied the merchant, ':' were as
xn.ucch as my interest and safety are
worth in Perfla. I mufr not be con.
cerned in it ;- but I will introduce you
to the captain of a flip, and ngage him
to serve you in every thing you shall
desire: after which if you can take the
exile along with you in disguise, or by
any other means, as your friend or at-
tendant, perhaps he nmay escape with-
out much difficulty or danger. I have-
dispatched my business on the coafs,.
and ala obliged to. return to Ilpahan::

let us now therefore, if you please,
wait, upon the captain."

SO. LY M: An, as he had been in- hopes

of procuring the exile a passage with-
out going hims'elf into Europe, fron
which the friendsiip of Almena had'
weaned his inclinations, was somewhat
embarrassed by this account. -owe.eo
ver, as he was determined at all events
to deliver the poor Perfia'w, he went-
immediately to- the apartments of the'
captain, to whom tile merchant recomr
mended him as a particular friend, who
vwanted to make the tour of Europe.-
The . captain received them with the
freedom and cheerful-ness peculiar to
his station, and promised Solyman the
best accomodation' of his ship ; but toldl
him, that fie must remain there a few
months. before she could get out of the
guslphli

OF this delay, .though n-ot *anfwer.a-

.ble to his impatient wiihes for the de-
liverance of the exile, Solyman refolv-
ed to make use, in visiting his father
and the valley of Irwan. As soo

# CHAP. XV.

therefore as lhe had acquainted the exile
with what he had to'hope, and advised
him to provide secretly for his voyage,
and his fubfi'-ence in a diflant country,
he failed from the-gulph up the Euphra.
tes as far as where the Tigris empties
itself into that river, and fi-om thence
proceeded by land to the valley of Ir-

Wan -·

,1
.

C H A P.- XV,

1 HE venerable Ardavan had afcen-
ded' an eminence near his house, to en.
joy the beauties of the summer evening,
and to' offer up a.prayer to-the depart-
ing' fun' for Solyman, when Solyman
appeared before hinm.

WHAT language can paint thle emo-

tions of paternal affedtion ? The feeble
remains of aged life twice fainted be-
neath the wait of joy. At length re.
covering, he cried-" It is. enough!
-Solyman lives ! Heaven has regarded
the virtues of my son, and restored himn
to the arums of Ardavan."

SOLY.MAN' was not less affeated by-

this meeting.; nor less delighted to find
his aged parent still enjoying health and
reafiri ih. the decline of life. But his.
happiness, was allayed with anxiety.--
He visited the favorite scenes of his na-
tive -valley in hopes -of finding that de--
light which -he thought -to be con'neAed
with..theidea of them ; but his imagin-
ation: was still at Delhi;-. As love and
melancholly 'are of tlie sisterhood of'p.o-
etry, he had not been' long in the val-
ley before le -wrote tlie foi'owing lines---

T-O AtMENA, FROi' THE BANKIS? OF THS':

X. RK WAN

TT7LE.RtE titemb'iirg-. poplars- thade; theiir'
- ' pare.nt vale.,-

And- tune te-nmeloldyr the mountain gale :;'
Where Ir.wan muurmus mfi'ally flow,
And breathin.g breezes. through:his osiers blo.w. "
Friiend 'o.f my hea.rt,. behold. thy poet laid
In the dear silence of his native thllade :
Ye sacred vale1:. where oft the .Muse, unseen, ;
Eed amy li.ght ft ps. long the moon light green ;.
Ye scenes, whe-re p.gace and fancy. held the.!p

re*i.Ig .

Forever lov'd, and once enjoy'd again r
Ah ! where is,npow, that nam'eless blifs-refin'd'
That tranquil hour, thlat vcacancy of mind ?
As fxveet, the wild-rofe bares it's balmy breast f
A-s Toon the breeie with murm-ur:s soothes to

reft ;

As frnooth, the flream of silver rwan flows ;
As fair, each flower along his border blows:
Yet dwells not here that nameless blifsrefin'd,.
That tranquil hour, that vacancy of mind.
Is it that knowledge is allied to woe;
And are we happy, only ere we know ?
is it that Hope witholds her golden ray',
That Fancy's. fairy visions fade away ?
Or can I, distant far from all that's dears
Be happy only when Almena's near ?
That truth, the feelings of my heart disclos'e
Too dear the friendship for the friend's ret

pose.
Thus mourn'd the muse, when, thro' his osiers

wild,

The hill-born irwan rais'd his head, and finil'd a
" Child of my hopes," he fondly cried, " for.

bear ;

NTor let shy Irwan witness thy despair.
Has peace indeed forsook my flow'ry fore ?
Shall Fa'nie; and Hope, and Fancy, charm ino

more g

Tho' Fame and Hope in kindred air depart,
Yet Fancy Uill liould hold thee to her heart:
For,at thy birth, the village hind has seen
HIer light wings waving o'er the shadowy green ;
With rosy wreaths lhe crown'd the new-born

hours,

And rival fairies fill'd thy bed with flow'rs:
In vain-if grief fllall waste thy blooming years,
And life diff6lve in solitude and tears !P'

WH ERE are the delights of the vaL

ly of Irwan, where the flowery varie-
ty of it'spaftures and meadows, it's hills
that rose gradually to meet the morn.
ing fun, and it's groves that spread their
soilage to exclude the heats of mid-
,day ? Wrapt in the gloom of pensive
solitude, the son of Ardavan was now
negligent of these, and of all that once
delighted or amused him. In vain did
his father desire a relation of his travels;
and in vain did he begin it: when he
attempted to speak of Persepolis, he
gave a description of Delhi ; when he
was asked after some other place,
he mentioned the vilage of Almena:
infiead of describing the people of India,
he described the person of Almena; and

# CHAP. XVI.

iwhen an account of their. manners was
-requef ed- 6Hern manners, he replied,
.' are such asthe inmortal Mithra lookj
-down,upon with delight.

C H'A'P. XVI.

jARDAV.AN was now no longer at a
.Joss to account for the gloomy inconfif.
tency -of his son's behaviour : but will-
ing tobe fill more:convinced of what
:he fufpeaed to be the cause, 'he appied
to his passions the frlory of those lovers
whom he had recommended to his-care.
At the.mention of ,the lovers, :Solyman
.was roused from his melancholy negli-
.gence, into the most eager attention.
"' Tell me, my father,' said the impao
tient youth.: . tell me, ' cntreat you,
the fate of the lovers 'P

"' I thank you'.replied thefage, ' for

,putting it in my power to assist the un-
fortunate. From your compafIion for
the sufferings of these loversi' and your
.atempt to alleviate them, you will feel
- more :.enfibly the power of the fme con-

folation, when your own heart becornes
a prey to the distresses of love.'

SOLYMAN discovered, by his emo-

tions, the effecs which this short prc-
face had upon him.

cc You know,5 continued Ardavan,'

" a fila.l1 building .which i ereaed fomen
years ago for a retreat in the bumrer
months : you remenber it's ituation,
.in the depth of a spacious wood ; which
is only accefible by one narrow paflage,
to which I have provided a door, Ib be-
set with evergreens, that it is impoflible
:for the mioft curious eye to perceive it:
the canal of running water in the miid
die of the wood, and the beautiful grass-
plat I have extended, since you left me,
to the -summer-house. To this place I
conducted the lovers as soon as I had
heard their ltory. There they contin-
ued for fomne time, attended by one of
my faithful domestics, who fup-icd
them with every nececfar-y ; and they
were visited almost every day by myself.
0, my son, how exquisite was the de-

C-

light, to behold the happiness of this in-
nocent pair, and at the fame time to
confider myself as in some measure
contributing to it ! Surely this was to
partake of the pleasure of the Deity,
which we believe to consist in his uni-
versal power of removing evil and dif-
pensing good !

" AFTER some time I was inform-

ed, that the khan of Bukharia, who
had purchased the maiden of her father,
was deposed a!id banifled by tihe So.
phi. This gave us new hopes ; and
it was agreed that the youth thould re.
turn to Abdat, to learn the disposition
of the unnatural parent. He accord-
ingly went; and told him, that he
would endeavour to find his daughter,
upon condition that he would content
to their marriage. The wretch,
though he was no firanger to their
miutual paflion, infilRed that no man
flhould ever have his daughter who
would not pay the fame price for her
which the khan of Bukharia had of-
.sered.

"; As this price far exceeded the

ability of the lover, he returned to Ir-
wan, fallen from those pleating hopes,
which he had so lately formed, of en.
joying at once his love and his liberty.
The father, convinced that his daugh-
ter was in the pofleffion of the young
man, and not now without hopes of
recovering her, and offering her again
to sale, hired a set-os ruffians to watch
his return, and to extort from him a con-
session of the place where ihe was fecre-
ted. Of this design, however, he was
timely apprised by an honest villager of
Abdat, to whom one of the ruffians
had coinmunicated their bufincfs ; and
he came off in disguise, and eicaped
their notice.

k' ABOUT two imonths after, it was

reported that the father had died of
vexation for the disappointment of his
avaricious views; I, therefore dispatch-
ed a servant to inquire into the truth
of this report; and finding it confirm-
ed, conducted the lovers to Abdac
without farther apprehension. The
maiden, who was an only childI inheri-

ted her father's fortune, which was veC
ry cobfiderable but as great part of
it had been amaaied by opprcliion, r. e
made reflitution to t hoe hom his av-
arice had injured, and file now enjoys
the. remiainder with happiness and iLer
lover."

WA .HAT you tell mIe,' fid Soly-

Ian, "' gives me inexprelbicLl fatisfac-
tion: for the lovers :re pores:c'd of
eminent virtue; and to be infrruinen-
tal to the happincfs of virtuous lovers,
is the motr delightful task within the
province of benevolence. lndeed, thofil
h2earts only that are generous and no-
bie can be capable of the tender fenri-
biity of love : for the breall which!
1har.bors maigniry and envy, can never
feel the rjimpartetic tcenaerness which
is the very. efience of that gentle pal

Y YouR obfervafion,' replied thie

sage, C "may 'be very.juft ; and it is
the-refore. the more necessary for those
to whom nature and the principles of
a lvirtuous education have given the

blessing of an open heart, to guard
against the inroads of that pafion': if
there is no probability of an uninter-
rupted enjoyment of its objel&, they
ihould.look upon it's advances, as of an
evil that will defroy their peace.- The
pleasures of real love are, perhaps, the
most refined, the mrof delicate and fen-
fible, of any that we are capable of
enjoying : iat believe me, those are
fortunate lovers, who are indemnified
by these, for the many uneasy hours-,
the refllefs anxieties, and the painful
apprehensions they undergco."

IN' these gen'eral terms did Ardavaln

deliver his inft-rucions to his son, who
received then- with a silent convic-ion
of their truth and propriety ; and iin-
'mediately after this conversation, reti-
red to- ofrer up the following prayer to,
the Sun for Almena.-

"' 1NCOM: p ARAx.S L . and E'verlasting !.

wiVhof universal eye fees.nothing fairer,
nothing more virtuous, than Alme"
na ; 0 let that eye look upon lhe-

G..

# CHAP. XVII.

*with ,the vigilence of a parent. She
an oft resembles these in the continual ex-
*ercife of beneficence ; cherifl, there.
-fore, those virtues that are congenial
with thy own ; and let the dear pof.
,fefor, through thy benignant influence,
enjoy the constant b'lessings of health
-and cheerfulness: but if some portion
of sorrow be the birthright of every

.human being, immortal Mithra ! may

Alimena only figlh for the absence of
iier friend .!"

C H A P. XVII'

I'N fiich exercises did Solyman employ
S;is retired hours, till the time approach-
ed fdr his return to Ormus. As he wam
d.etermined, if possible, to avaid going
into Europe, he made no mention of
that circumstance to his father : his en-
gagements to the exile were a sufficient
-reafn' for his departure; and, in a sho t
time, he arrived at the -gulph, and wait.
cd upon the English captain, who was
preparing for his voyage. Solyman in-
form-ed hilAm, that upon some irntercring

occasion he was obliged to relinquish his
design of vificing Europe; but that he
would recolmmend a Persian lady to his
care, who was bound for England ; and
lie begged that fie might enjoy all the
retirement her situation could afford-,
As no objection was made to this pro-
pofal, he privately purchased the habit
of a Persian lady, which he concealed
sone days on the coast of Ormus ; and,
under favor of the night, he found no
difficulty to procure a boat to the En-
glifl vessel. In a few hours they got
under fail; and havi-ng received repeat-
ed assurances of the captain's care, and
cngaged the good offices of hlis c-rew by
a handsome gratuity, he procured a
passage by sea to the coast of India.

TH E state of his heart was now Vei

ry different from what it had been a
few days before : he had discharged his
engagements to the ile, wthall the
success that he could wis; and his face
wvas now set towards Delhi. On he
-travelled with the eager pace of a lov-
,er, and in a few days reached the cap-
ical of the Mogul's cmpire.

TiHE evening he arrived, he flew

to the house of Altmena, who received
iiim with emotions of tenderness which
ile was scarcely able to conceal. When
the first salutations were palsed, she ask-
ed him how he had disposed of the exile,
and why he did not accompany him to
Europe as he had proposed.- HIe in-
rornmed her by what meanshe had pro-
cured the exile's escape ; adding, that
from' the letters he had Written, if ,he
iad'received them, iifhe might at once fee
the reaibli both' of his rejeding the Eu-
ropean voyage, and: his return to Delhi,.

:& W'H Ay would it avaled' me;' said

le, '" to have visited the ciflant regions
of the' uniierfe !' What pleaf'ure.or a-
mluflemint could I have expeled to find
inEulope, when all my heart holds dear
was Aill in Alia ?: Beiieve me, this place
is now mnore than the wlhole world to
me 'e; and the i-iendihip of Almena is
the only pleasure I: can enjoy.."'

" I HAV'E received your letters,' said

she ; c- and if they speak the language
of your heart, I am no firanger to i's-:

feelings. To'deal ingenuoufiy with
you, i am sensible of your merit, anid
adwmire your virt-ues: and were I not
2more happy in my present conldition,
thani I could hope to be in any other, .[
sno'.v' not the man, with whom I. would
rather divide t'he enjoymienits of lifeD,
than- with- Soilllman.-'

" Is it possible, then,' slid Sclvmaia,'

c" that you can ti!ink the condition rof
celibacy happier than that of marri-
age ? UndToutedly, !the principal hap:-
pinefs-of mankind depends on the ilre-'
course of focietvy and tle connefions of'
friendfllip- marriage is not-hing else but:
a slate of friendihip, in which the friends '
by unitiing their interels, ihave a con-
slant and uninterlutecd' enjoy.imert of
each other. Nature aids this union, and'
rea:son approves it: can any condition'
bid fairer for happiness, than tiat iI
which the mutual delights of friendfllip
can only be torn from us by the hand;
of death ?

' TH ER E may be some truth,' an-:
fwered fle . " in whatyou observe; but.

thleie is an inconflancy in hunman nature,
that rrakes it dangerouis e.veii for two
fi-iends to enter into any connetdion that
cannot be broken ; and an unaccounta-
ble caprice, that makes us quarrel with
Our happineifs because we are sure of en-
joying it."

". WTER we deterred from every

jurfuit,' said Solyman, " by the ap-
prehension ofthofe i ncon veniences w hich
the foibles and frailties of our nature
mnight bring upon us, we should never be
either vircuous or happy; but might lan-
gtuiif away o'ur lives in foitaipy and unfo-
icial indolence.; 'T' avoid the inconven-
iences of liuman inconflancy, marriage is,
surely, the best inflitution in the 7world;
for What could be more likely to fix the
iriconftanr, tlan the habitual i-itercourfe
of kindness aiid good offices ; than that
tradtitude, which is due to the long ex-
ercife of affedionate teridernefs; and
tiosde dear pledges, which must depend
for happiness and support on the unan-
imity of their parents ?"

* T1HH ERE is, indeec, an infuperabIe

,objeAion to your being married in India -
I mean, that contempt, or the horrid al-
ternative oP torture, which is entailed
on tie unhappy woman who survives
her husband. But that objeaion flall
Yaniffi immediately,' continued the lov-
er, with a look of passionate earnef.-
ness: 'c let us go, my friend, let us go
to love and happiness in the valley of
Irwan. That place, which ro lately
afforded a retreat to the lovers whose
difrreffes I have related to you, {hall then
become eternally sacred to love and
Triendfip: that place, wlhofe beautiful
scenes I so lately beheld with indiffero
ence, I thall then visit with rapture.--
Extafy is in the thought ! to enjoy,with
Almena th-e ihades of Irwan ; with her
to walk in my native fields; ,,ith her to
fit down on' the banks of my favorite
stream; for her to pluck the flower,
whose beauty may have drawn her at-
tention: to lead her through those ro.
mnantic scenes, 'tht delighted the inno-
cent enthusiasm of my childhood: and
to Thew her the more solitary retreats,
which I fought when her friendship had
first taught me to sigh 1."

TH us Solyman poured out the natural
and pafionate sensations of love; and
Alnmena, whose heart was far firoml be-
ing indifferent to him, easily caught the
enthufiafmn. ' To your :holor a.-d
your friendship,' said ihe, ' I can truf
every thing. I am ready to attend you
to those scenes, of which you have given
me so lively a description : whether
Lhey may answer it or not, or whatev-
er they may be, the friendship of Solyo
man will make them agreeable-'

IT is easier to conceive than to ex-

press the joy which the lover felt upon
this declaration. Within a few days
they set forward from Delhi, on their
journey to the valley of Irwan ; and
-for the greater expedition, and the: less
fatigue, they determined to go by sea,
and accordingly proceeded to the coast,
lwhere they went on board a trading
veil¢ bound for the Periaan guiph,

." i . -_ .. * -

^
.

# CHAP. XVIII.

C H A P. XVIII.

AT that time there was a war be-
-tween two petty princes of the hither
peninsula of India ; and unfortunate-
ly, the ship in which they embarked
belonged to one of these powers.-
They had not proceeded above five
leagues from thle coast, when they
were pursued by the foe. After an
obstinate and bloody engagement, they
were boarded ; and their enemies,
when they had -stripped the vessel of
-every thing valuable, difinifled it.

TH EY dismissed the vefrel ; but they

took Alniena. What heart does not
bleed, what eye does not filed a tear,
for the mifirable Solyman ! They dif-
miffed the vefiel; but they took Alme-
.na ! Prayers and tears, and agony and
anguish, were vain. The lover saw
his dear, trembling, fainting maid,
drao-aed -by the hanlds of the unfeeling
sailors into .their own ship, after they
:had bound him, to prevent the c¢fTeld

H

of his rage. " I afl not for your
mercy,' cried the wretched youth:
" only take me into your vefliel along
with that lady, and prepare your tor-
tures, your racks, and wheels : for me
prepare them, and let me perish, be-
fore these eyes lose fight of Almena i'.

WH I L E Solyman was vainly utter-

ing there pitiable exclamations, the enec
my steered away, and was in a flort time
out of fight. The men of the lhip in
which he was, apprehensive of some
bad consequences from the violence of
his rage, were prudent enough to let
him continue bound ; while he now
loaded theim with the reproachful
te-ms of laves and cowards, and now
excitedl thenm by promises, or entreated
them by prayers, to pursue the foe.-
The ship having loft her freight, did
not proceed on her intended voyage,
but returned to the coafi of India.

WVHEN they arrived, Solyman was

informed that the vefi'Tl which had ta-
ken them belonged to the king of Sun-
dal, who at that time was at war witl

the king of Kanara. Upon this infor-
iation, as soon as he had received in-
telligence of the situation of the king.
dom of Sundah, he went immediate.
ly in quest of Almena. Though al-
most worn to death with fatigue and
sorrow, lie travelled night and day,
till he reached the country. But, alas !
when he was there, what could he do?
Stranger as he was to the people, and
in a great measure to their language,
he had as much to hope from chance,
as from application, for the discovery
of Almena,

1HE would now have funk under the

weight of his misfortunes, had he not
availed himself of the first advice cr
Ardavan, and firmly relied on the
Eternal Providence. 'I Immortal Mi-
thra !' said the affliSied youth, " thou
beholdeft me opprefied with rmiiery:
but thy beams still shine upon me ; and
while I enjoy thy light, 1 will hope for
thy favor !'

THus comforting himself, he flill
continued his search : depending, for

of his rage. " I afl not for your
mercy,' cried the wretched youth:

only take me into your vessel along

with that lady, and prepare your tor-
tures, your racks, and wheels : for me
prepare them, and let me perish, be-
fore these eyes lose fight of Almena ! ,

\VH I L E Solyman was vainly utter-

ing these pitiable exclamations, the ene.
my freered away, and was in a fliort time
ouc of fight. The men of the ship in
which he was, apprehensive of some
bad consequences from the violence of
his rage, were prudent enough to let
him continue bound ; while he now
loaded - them with the reproachful
terms of slaves and cowards, and now
excited them by promises, or entreated
them by prayers, to pursue the foe.-
The flip having loft her freight, did
not proceed on her intended voyage,
but returned to the coast of India.

WV-IEN they arrived, Solyman was

Infoirmed that the vessel which had ta-
ken them belonged to the king of Sun-
dail, who at that time was at wa'r with

the king of Kanara. Upon this infor-
mation, as soon as he had received in-
telligence of the situation of the king.
dom of Sundah, he went immediate-
ly in quest of Almena. Though al-
most worn to death with fatigue and
sorrow, he travelled night and day,
till he reached the country. But, alas !
when he was there, what could he do?
Stranger as he was to the people, and
in a great nieafure to their language,
he had as much to hope from chance,
as fiom application, for the discovery
of Almena.

HE would now have funk under the

weight of his misfortunes, had he not
availed himself of the first advice of
Ardavan, and firmly relied on the
Eternal Providence. " Immlortal Mi-
thra 1' said the affli&ed youth, " thou
beholdeft me opprefled with miiery:
but thy beams still shine upon me ; and
while I enjoy thy light, I will hope for
thy favor !'

THu s comforting himself, he frill
continued his search : depending, for

the nece!fary supports of nature, on the'
precarious bounty of the villages thro'
which he paflsd; fi-equently making
the mountain rocks the refuge of his
night's repose, when nature, exhaufled
with toil and sorrow, in her own de-
fence inclined him to sleep. He wan-
dered inceflantly from town to town,
and from province to province;. often
exposed to the' attacks of savage beafs,
and often. suffering the infltls of the
more savage people.

HAVrNG in vain gone over a large

tra& of the inland country, he now
confined his search to the coast, in
hopes that. he might again fee the vessel
'which took his Almena. Day by day
"le wandered on the beach, eonflantly
casting his eyes on the immense wafle
of waters, and watching the approach
of every vesTel he f.tw, 'with the fame
impatience of expectation, as if he had
'been aftured that it contained Almena.

# CHAP. XIX.

C H A P. ^IX.

AS he was walking one evening by
the castle of Sevafir, he heard a mourn-
ful voice proceeding from a garden-
within the fort. Solyman, never neg-
le2ed the voice of sorrow : he went
nearer to the place from whence it
seemed to proceed ; and looking thro'
the iron palifadoes, with which tlie
garden was encompaifed, lie beheld a la-
dy fitting in a mnelancholly posture on'
a flower-bank at a finall diflance.

IN tlie irrefiflable tranfpbrot of'his.

heart, he cried aloud-<" Almnena !'
The lady roe ; and as {le came to-
wards him, he perceived his miil:ake.-
6' Pardon me, Mladarn,' faidl e ;- '":
am an unhappy man who hla.e tofr
every thing that is dear to me, in a la-
dy whom I have fought in vain for ma-
ny months in this province; where r
have fsill realfon to believe fie is confi-
ned, if indeed fie yet lives ;.if Ihe is
not fallen a sacrifice to her own mirl-

El 3.

ries, or to the barbarous cruelty of the
villains who tore her from me.

' STRANGER,' said the lady, " it

is long since I have known any comfort
niyfelf, and I am afraid I can have lit-
tie for you. Your miseries asset me
3nuch: the fame did my beloved hus-
band once undergo, for whom I now
m'urLn, and must forever mourn in
hopclefs sorrow. v

"s Is your husband then dead ?' said

Solyman ; " or is he only loft to you
as iAimena is to me ? if the latter is the
cafe, you may yet have hope; the all-
feein-g eye of Providence looks down
upon all his creatures, and he will as-
firc-dly redress the misfortunes of the
Nirtuous.

T WE were inhabitants,' replied

nhse lady, " of the kingdom of Kanara.
'lle Sundians, who made an incursion
into our territories, arnongft many oth-
er wretched people, carried off my hus-
band and me -' " How, madam !, in.
terrupted Solyman : they were 1ner-

ciful, if they suffered your husband to
accompany you.'--" Their mercy,'
said flie, " did not extend so far : they
presented me to the governor of this
caffle ; and my hulband they imprison-
ed in a distant part of the kingdom.

EVER since I came within there hated

walls, their savage mafler has aggrava-
ted my miseries, by the mortifying of-
sers of his love ; totally regardless of
my sorrow and diffraction, a thousand
times has the unfeeling wretch insulted
rmy torn heart with odious caresses, and
frill continues to persecute me in the
fame manner, upbraiding me with in-
gratitude for what he calls his kindness
in permitting me to live- But I am
not alone in my misfortunes ; here are
numbers of unhappy women under the
fame confinement, whose sufferings too
nearly resemble my own. Some of
them, like me, have still reffled the im-
portunities of the tyrant : while others,
more, I hope, through fear than inclina-
tion, have unhappily submitted to his
will, .

AT tliefe words, terror and appre-

'ienfion were again roused in the heart
of Solyman, and created a conflict ;which
'lhook his frame.' He st'ood aghast and
.motionless for a moment-: at last recol-
lecting himself--' Is.there' said he,
' tell me, Madam, is there a lady with-
in these walls, a native of Delhi, who
was taken forne' months ago fiom on
hoard a Kanarian veilfl' by the Sunm
dians ?2

sc To thjat quellion, ' said the lady;
t' Ican make no answer:: we are all
kept' in different apartments,. and not
allowed to converse with each other;
webare noc even- permitted,. but alone,
to'walk. in these gardens: and Phqnld
: now be obferved'to- tal'. with you,
Lthough through' these detefed bars, my
ftture liberty would probably be en-
dangered. All' that you can' do to'
know, whether the lady you Have loft
Ple in this place, is to attend at tlie dif-
ferent hours of the day near these pal-
ifadoes; w-here you will be able to ob-
fervc, in thcli respeative turns, the ap,
pearance of the 7womein in the gariensk

# CHAP. XX.

]ut you will incur great danger in the'
experiment : and, after all, Ihouldyolu'
find that your lady is here, what can it'
avail you ' You will only have the-
mortification to know it, without being'
able to rescue her.,

H-; A P.' XX

DOLYMAiN took his leave of the 1a-'
dy ; and having formed his resolution,-
waited withi the utmoAl impatience for
the light of maorning. He happened,
indeed, to be so f- fecul-ed from fufpii-
cion., as to be dseffed in a Sundian habit,-
Vwhlich belonged to an officer of'the ship
that carried off Almena, -who compeled:
him to take it in excia-noge for his- ow n.
But insensible of danger, at' the earliest'
dawn he hafte.d to his poq', and passed'
the day in alternate hope- and delfair :-
he saw mrany women,.but he fahw not
Almena. In the evening therefore,
regrettiiig the disappointment even -of
th6fe expectations which he dreaded to
ave. confirmed, he resolved to quit Wis';

flation till the return of morning, when;
by the glimmering of the moon, he per.
ceived another lady enter the garden.

As Ihe came nearer, herimage glanc-

ed through his heart more swiftly than
the lightning finices the traveller on the
mountains of H-ima. The lady was Al.
mena. In a burst of transport, hecri-
ed-" Aimena ! Solyman !' Struck at
once with the voice, the name, and the
figure of Solyman, surprise overcame
her, and she fell senseless upon the terrace.

So LY. MAN, unable toenter the garden,

in an agony of terror cried out-" Save,
save my Almena ! at the fame time
running round the walls in the utmost
diflira&ion. His exclamations alarmed
the guard, who immediately secured
him ; though, from his cries and confu-
lion, they concluded him to be mad, and
made their report of him as such to the
governor of the camle, who ordered him
to be immediately brought before him.

SOL IYMAN, the moment he beheld the
governor, fiercely cried out- " con-

jure thee, if thou art a human being;
let me instantly fly to the relief of a lady
in the garden.' The governor was a-
larmed by an appearance of reason in
this request, and ordered him secured,
while he went himself into the gardens
to know if there was any foundation
for it. There he found Almena sup-
porting herself againit the wall, not
having perfectly recovered either her
firength or reason. " Art thou, in-
deed, my Solyman ?' said she: " if
thou art my Solyman, support me in
thy arms.' In his arms he took her,
and bore her to a pavilion: where he
held her till her reason returned. She
turned her eyes full upon him ; and,
with a look of fear and sorrow, flirunk
from his embrace.

" TEL L me, Madam ; I beseech

you tell me,' said the governer ;
' Twhat is the cause of this difiradion ?
MWhy are those dear eyes so full of wild-
ness and horror ? and why do you look
upon your proteeSor with such aversion ?
Is there then ftome other person more
happy in your favor and affeision ? a-nd

must I forever languih at your feet in
.vain ?'

-IF thou haft any other affe&ion

,for me,' said Alm ena, '" than that
which is inspired by brutal inftin&e ; if
thou haft more feeling than the wails
that surround thee, thou wilt. surely pity
.me. The dear, unhappy man, whom
I fear ere now thy guards have seized,
is the friend for whose loss thou hafl
known me mourn ever since I came
within thy power. Yes, thou wilt pity
me for thou haft wept: when I related to
thee.my miseries, the tears ofcompaflion
.flowed from thine eyes. Let.us throw
ouribelves at thy feet; let us owe our
lhappinefs to thee, and thou fhalthave
all the affe&ion Vwhich is not due to Soly-
..mnan.

Ti E v weeping beauty, as file uttered

tthefe words, threw herself -before him
in such an agony of sorrow, and such a
posture of supplication, as would have
moved any heart in which vice had not
.extinguished every spark of humanity.
.Far from being affteed by it, the gov-.

,ernor of Savafir made her the following
.answer--" Absurd and vain ! to fuip-
pose that I tlould tamely yield that hap.,
piness to another, which I could never
obtain myself.: Krnv, Madam, that
both you and -your lover are now in
my power ; and that he has no indul-
gence to hope for but what your kind-
ness to me may procure him.' With
there words he withdrew ; rather leTs
offended at the thought of having a
rival in Almena's affecions than pleas-
ed with the hope that he might terrify
her into compliance by his menaces
against her lover.

ALMENA remained in the most piti-

able difres, fhiarpened by painful ap-
prehensions for her own honor, and the
life of Solyman ; and wandering alone
into the garden tile added one night of
fo'!row more to the many Ple had sus-
sered.

GR'EAT GOD what nmifery rmay
tie villain, arnmed with power, bring
tpon thy creatures ! \Vere there not a

# CHAP. XXI.

slate of existence, where vice fllall be
punished and virtue rewarded, how
would thy works seem .to reproach
their Almighty Maker !' Bu.t let tle
b'ns of men learn, that he who is infi-
nitely wife, is also perfectly jull ; and
that he can as easily take.cognizance of
the moral condua of his creatures, as
he could at firnf create this irrmenfe
fyltem of the universe, in which the
minutest creature declares the Lkill of
of the Architet.--

C H A P. XXI.

1.HE impious tyrant of Sevafir en-
joyed the balm of seep and the re-
freihlment of reft, while the virtuous
Solyman and Almena fufered the moti
grievous afflidion.

WH rEN the morning appeared, Na-

grakut, that was the wretch's name,
went at his usual hour into the garden.
Almena who was flill there, overcome
by the weight of continued forrowv

had funk into a transient slumber on a
bench in the pavilion. Nagrakiut ap-
proached and flood by her as the slum-
bered. There was a fight that might
have excited tenderness in the breast of
a savage: but it moved not the heart of
Nagrakut, nor awakened any other pas,
sion in him but that of a libidinous de-
fire. in a dream, she waved her hand,
and cried, with a voice of mournful.
tenderness, " Do not murder him, Na-
grakut! Let my Solyman live !' then
letting fall the hand file had raised, file
funk again into silent flumiber.

NAGRAKLUT yet felt no pity ; but,

placing- himnfelf near her on the bench,
iniclofed her in his arms. She awoke ;
and, finding herself in the cmbraces of
the tyrant, 1hrieked out with the most
distressful horror. Her cries pierced
the cell where Solyman was confined.
With the united ftrengt- of rage and
terror, he burst the door of his prison ;
and running through the apartments of
the castle with a dagger in his hand,
which he had fortunately 'iatiched up
in the way, he flew to the gardcu.

ALMENA was still shrieking and

firuggling in the arms of Nagrakut,
who endeavoring to tootlh her to his
embraces, had not observed the ap-
proach of Solyman. " Villain,' laid
Solyman, 6* remove thy execrable hands
from. the person of that lady, and em-
ploy them in the defence of thy own !"
NTagrakut, who. was the imotf abjcci
coward, called aloud to his guards.
" Coward' ! slave !' said Soliyman;

dC draw this snflant, or my dagger shall

pierce thy hears."' Nagrakut then fell
at his feet ; and begging for lmercy,
promised himn Aliena and liberty.
' This monment then,' fa;d Sol man,
' difinifs us from tly curscd prison.'
No sooner had he uttered thclfe wods
than,' the gualrds appeared. INTagrakut
iilimediately -;ccklo;cd to t them to seize
Iimn: but Solyman, ob!'Crving his nio-
tion, haflily ran up to him,. and plung-
ed his dachi c ilnto his hea-rt.

THE tyrant fell. No way of escape,

however, was leIft for Sol) man : ;e
zwas infianity seized by the soldiers,
I ;aidcd witht heavy chaiins, anid fliut up.

with Almena, in a firong apartment of
the cafile: with Almena he was shut
up, for jealousy now no longer parted
them ; and fne was confidered as an
accomplice in the murder of the gov;
ernor.,

TH I s circtimflance adrlinilfered i'-

exprefible connfolation to them both.
" At last, my Alrnena,' said the lover,

fortune has brought thee to my ai ms ;

but after what mi!-ifes, good H-ieaven !
and in what circumIfances ! Yet rmy
heart never once doubted the jufice or
the care of- Providence ; we tiall yel
be happy in the valley of Irwani'*

THE fI)irits of Al'mena were fr ex-

haufted by thle fucc;efive ravages of ter-
ror, sorrow, and surprise, that iihe re-
clined for some time in the arms of So-
lyman, unable to speak, and only vent-
ing her grief in broken and feeble fi;Rghs.
The offcers of dae c-alle )f Sevafir had
sent in the mean time to the king of
Sundah, to know in what'xmanner he

3 ~2

would have the murderers of the gov-
ernor executed.

TH E death of a villain is seldom re-

gretted, even by those to wvhom his
villainies have been of service. l'he
king of Sundah always hated the gov.
ernor of Sevafir ; but he dared not de-
pose him, because he had been e.rablifl-
ed under him by the mogul : he, -there-
fore, fert no other collmarids to the
officers of the castle, but that the pli,
foneis flhould remain there till farther
orders.

NOT long after this, a body of Ka-

narians entered the country of Suncdal,
and laid siege to the cattle of Sevafir.
As the death of the governor had
thrown all into confusion, the fort was
eafi!y car-ied ; and the Kanarians took
prisoners all that were within the cafle.
Solymlon and /l Imena, though they
could not be displeased at this change of
fortune, had yet another to encounter,
which might prove as fatal to their
happiness as any they had escaped could
haave been.

# CHAP. XXII.

Ir is a custom in the eafrern nations,

to p, eient the women that are taken in
war to the kings, that they may 'eleet
whom- they like: and the reft are divi-
de' anmoing the officers, according to
tie3ir feve:-a! ranks. All the ladies that
Ms\e-e taken in the cafile of Sevailr,
h.dl this fate to undergo ; and as the
governor had been curious in hiss choice
t-.efe women were looked upon as a
mofl valuabl capture.

C H A P. XXII.

.T HEY were immediately conveyed
to the court of K(a ara, and pr-eleled
to the king for his choice. They all
flood before him at the fame time ;
and he looked upon each of them for
some minutes: but his eye dwelt long-
er on Almena than the refi. Unfbr-
tunately, lihe obrerved tIlis; and her
fear and confusion new animated her
features, and gave frefli beauties to her
complexion. The king imrnmeci t.-ly
feleded her, and the reit we'-e di'
iffl, ^d,

SOLrMAN was all thiS time kept

-with the garrison of Sevafir, as a prif-
oner of war ;but at length having
convinced the Kanarians, that he had
no connecions with. th:e king of Sun-
dah, and that he' wa's willing. to enter
into the service of their prince% his lib-
erty was restored him. This was the
only means by which he could attempt
the- recovery- of Almena ;' who, as he
was nowr infrmed, was retained by
the king. He immediately repaired to
the capital of Kanaria ; and signifying
to the officers of the court, that he had
fbme important intelligence relating to
the war, to communicate to his majef-
ty, he gained an easy admittance to
himo,

'VHEE. the king appeared, he prof.

trated hiumfelf before himn ; and being
commtanded to f'eak, he ihus expreircd
himself : " Le the kintg of Kanaria
live ! for his ear is open- to the com-
plaints of the unhappy, and he defpi-
feth no man for the miseries whichl
chance hath biought upon him.'" E
am a man, 7 interposed the king ;

¢' proceed. -'' It was my hand thas:
put an end to the life of your enenmy,
the governor of Sevafir.'--"- In that,'
replied the prince, 6" you did me a fig-
nal service: bur let me know you-r
motives ; and I fiall be better able to'
judge of the action, as well as of my
obligations to you for it'..

" 0 PRINCE !' said Solyman, "'ó

was poifitfed of a lady, more beautiful
than the liar that overflows its urn in
the evening, and dearer' o me than
the life-drops of my heart.. W'e were
on board. a Kanaiian vefel that was-
trading to 'the Persian Gulph ; and.
were bound to the valley of Irwan in,
Mcflipotamia, the p!acc of r.y nativi-
ty : but alas before we had proceed,.
ed many leagues from our cosi:{, we
were boarded by a pirate of Sundali
\7We were plundered and difmnifbd ; but
the dear partner of my heart was ta-
ken friom me. After long search, I
found that fihe was in the poflc-ffion of
the governor of Sevafir ; who r-egard-
less of her miseries, or the prepoflcffion
of her heart, cruelly continucd to ia-

ult her with the offer of his love.'"-
" Inhuman wretch ! interrupted the
king: '" but proceed."--This ejacula-
tion gave Solyman new hopes, and he
continued his relation.

"W WA L X rI ,G corc evening by the gar-

dens of the foit, I discovered her on a
terras at a finail distance. She was so
snuch surprised by the luddennefs of my
appearance, that flie fainted. Ieing
unable to enter the g ardens, in my dif-
trefs I cried for help; and my cries a-
armning the guard, I was seized. Th.:
night I was confined in a dungeon of
the caflle ; but early the next morning
hearing the fihrieks of a female voice,
which I either knev or fear imagined
to be that of my love, rage and terror
gave me more than natural strength2
and I buril open the door of my prifi)j.
] wuas unarmned ; but, fortunately, a
dagger lying in my way, I snatched i:
up, and flew to the garden fr'om whl-ence
the voice proceeded. There I beheld
.the dear obje& or' my affections trem-
bling in the enmbraces of the tyrant
at the filh' of me,.he calicd aloud ts

his guards, cowardly refuting the offer
I gave him of defending himself againfi
my dagger ; nay, he meanly begged
his life, and offered me, on that con-
dition, liberty for myself and tie la-
dy; but the guards immediately after
cominig up, he beckoned to them r.o
seize me: I found time, lhowever, to
thrust my dagger into his base heart.
thus the villain periled.'"--" And
jufice,' said the king, "' direted your
arm.'p

¢ 0 PR

I i

C E ' Cnttiued Solynlan,

I am fill milera:!e. I have reason to
believe, that some of your o.ficers will
detain the lady, as a prize taken in the
cafile of Sevan!r.'-" No (ichner of
mnine,' replied dLie king, * h al ! be iu cf
ser:ed to detain hIr: let mne know her
name, and she fhtall be i.rn-ec('ltcly re-
tfored to you.' -" Feri- ame,' said So.
lyman, " is Alnena."'

THE king appeared difrurbed, and

walked backward and forward for ioiba
momlents in the utmofi: confusion. f:Be
knew, that Alhnena w'as the lady whom

# CHAP. XXIII.

'Ie had felered from the captives ; and
he had the molt ardent affe&ion for her.
In a few moments he withdrew, and
*commanded Solynian to attend him tkhe
fpllowing day.

C H A P. XXIII

HE heart of the king was, in the

mean time difrrated by diferent pas-
Lions ; urged by the most powerftu
love to detain Almena, and difiuaded
-fromn that by truth, humanity, and
Shiame. "A A.m I,' said he, ( posses-
fed of a throne, and shall I have no
more power to indulge my wvifhes,
than the peasant of the field ! what is
the vworth or the end of absolute pow-
er, if kings mufn tamely sacrifice their
inclinations, to the creatures they wtere
born to command i Shall I give up
,such beauty as that of Alm.ena ! a
beauty that has frnitten my heart, and
infjpired me with such tendernefs.of as-
fe&tion as I never yet felt for vwomnan !
But Almena was Solyman's !-It miglh
he so ; but fie is now mine. Poflbc-

sion goes from one to another, accord-
ing to the laws of nations ; and, by
those laws,lAlmena is mine.'

WEH Y then do I feel there uneasy.

£enfations, as much at the 'thoughts of
keeping, as of parting with her ! the
laws of nature, the unvariable laws of
nature and truth create them. The
laws of nations ought always to be
founded on these; and these fuggeit to
me, that to keep Almena, would be
most injurious and inhuman. Shall I,
who have condemned that in another, as
a crime which deserved the punishment
of death, commit the very fame my-
self ! what a deteflable hypocrite should
I appear ! Shall I, who promised the
lover that none of my officers Ihould
deprive him of Almena ; fnall I degrade
the king, by doing what I would have
punished in a fubje& ? I love Almena,
and flould be exquisitely happy in the
enjoyment of her; but shall I, there-
fore, make her miserable ! How flould
I ever partake of happiness, if the ob-
jet& of my affetdions lived with me in

fullen discontent, or inconsolable for-
row ? Base and unworthy of the'heart
of man, must be that love, which
would purchase it's gratification by the
misery of ites objeEt ! The heart of Al.
lnena is Solyman's, and so shall be her
person: painful is the alternative; but
truth, and honor, and virtue, muif pre-
vail !"'

THtus the generous king of Kanara

overcame the efforts of importunate
defile, by the force of virtue'and rea-
son ; and nobly scorned to avail him-
self of his power against an unhappy
man, who had been long persecuted by
misfortune, and difireffed in his love.

TH E hour came at which he had or-

dered Solyman to attend him. The
king received him with a condescending
smile; and without the least appear-
ance of uneasiness or dissatisfaction in
his countenance, desired him not to be
apprehensive about Almena, for that he
thould. hortly be put in poffellion of
her..

HIAVI NG thus spoken, he went im-

mediately to her apartment, and gently
taking her hand, " Most beautiful of
the daughters of India,' laid he, " cease
your sorrows I I am not come to offer
you my love ; but to recommend to
you another lover, who possibly may be
happier in your favor than I could ever
hope to be : he is now in the palace ;
and if you will give me leave, I will
introduce him to you.'-- -" My heart,4
said Almena, 1" has been so much accuf-
tomed to ne.w diflreffes, that it is not
now shocked by their frequency: but if
you have any pity for me, fiffer me to
bewail my omiferies in foiltude, Not
to be interrupted in my sorrows, is all
I afi ; and that is not, surely, too
much for you to grant.' The king an-
fwered with a simile, " If I am not to be
happy in your love, I am determined
that none but the person whom I am
about to introduce to you, shall be so ;
and haflily quitting the apartment,
returned with Solyman.

THE lovers flew to each other's
arms; ' My Solyman !'--' My Alme¢

-a !' In a few moments being recol-
lecled, they threw themselves at the
feet of the king; and Solyman, as well
as the transports of his heart would
give him leave, expresSed his gratitude:
6 Generous prince,' said he, ' the
thanks of Solyman are not worth your
acceptance. But you will not be with-
out a reward : yours shall be the fu-
preme pleasure of conscious goodness;
yours shall be the care of Eternal Prov-
idence, and the prayers and- bleffngs of
Solyman and Almena !'

IN the gratitude of his heart, Soly-

man offered the king his affifiance in
the prosecution of the war with the
Sundians: but he humanely refused his
offer; tellingr him, that love and war
were no allies ; that his sufferings had
-already been too many and too great;
and that neither he Should be exposed
to danger, nor Almena to fear, on his
account. He moreover told them,
that if they were inclined to return by
sea to the valley of Irwan, they should
be attended by an armed vessel, to fe-
eure them from the assaults of an ene-

# CHAP. XXIV.

iny. But this obliging offer they de-
clined; Solyman was unwilling any
more to rifque that which was dearer
than life ; and lAhnen 7yet trembled at
the thoughts of the Sundian pirate.
They, therefore, notwithstanding the
length and tedioufnefe of the way, de.
ternlined to go by land; and having
taken leave of the king, who supplied
therm with every neceiFary, and lent
theri his osxn beasts and attendants,
they set their faces towards Delhi.

C H A P. XXIV.

HEIR road was through a moun-

tainous country, troubilefome to the tra-
veller ; little cultivated by the labors,
or enlivened by the habitations of men.
Butt what are the difficulties which love
and hope cannot fuirmount ! they def-
piie the threats of danger, and the toils
of labor; and proceed with refolu:
tion through those perplexities, which
by other eyes are beheld with despair.
The travellers, thus animated, and look-

.-X .2

ing foward to those delightful scenes of
ress, those days of rural ease and happiness
which they should enjoy in the-valley
of Irwan, passed over the rugged moun-
tains that opposed their way, without
the least sense of weariness or fear.

AFTER travelling many days, with.

out any accident or delay, more than
the necessary refresnment of nature rc-
quired, they arrived at Delhi. At the
fight of h-r native place, Alinena shed
a tear of joy, and the lovers embraced
each other with more than common ten-
dernefs: so much is there in the power
of extei-rnal circumflances, to improve
and exalt the pleasures of tile mind. AL
mena always loved her Solyman with
the rrmoi tender aie nion ; but fie lov.
ed him at Delhi, more than in any
other place : delight is inseparable from
the idea of those scenes, where we
have pawed the happy hours of child-
hood ; and though, when in a maturity
of life we revisit our native countries,
we cannot enjoy that innocent thought-
less chearfulnefs, of which we still re-
gain fonme notion ; yet we are delightc-

ed with the remembrance of it, and
those scenes are always dear to us.

A L MENA forgot not to visit her vil-

lage, and the people whom t-e called her
own. The poor inhabitants, at the fight
of their beneracarefs, wept with pleasure;
and {lie did not leave them without giv-
ing them new exhortations to their duty,
and new inflances of her beneficence.
Indeed, in all generous ads she now
doubled her afiduities ; for flie conclu-
ded, that, on account of her great and
singular obligations to Providence, fne
ought in gratitude to have a fuperio:
portion of virtue.

AFT ER a Ifort flay at Delhi, Soly,-

man and Almena renewed their joruney,
and set forward to Ifpahan. This route
was longer ; but it was more easy, and
less exposed to robbers, than that which
led to the Persian Gulph. When they
arrived at Ifpahan, Solyman had the
pleasure to find his friend the merchant,
who was fRill detained by business in
that city. He easily made his apology
for not accepting, as he had proposed,

his kind offer of a passage into Europe,
by introducing him to Almena. He
related to him their various interesting
adventures, to which he listened with
the eager curiosity and concern of a
friend, acknowledging all along the
hand -of Providence in their preferva-
tion. For the amiable and acconipliflh.
ed Almena, he felt great esteem : her
pathetic descriptions, and her just and
natural observations, were extremely
entertaining and affetaing. But he was
mnoft charmed with the charader of the
king of Kanara; and requefled Alnie-
na to relate every particular of his be-
haviour'

" WHEN I firl beheld him,' said

ihe, "< I perceived in his countenance
a noble affability and opennefG, whicl
seemed to speak a great and generous
mind. This gave me some pleasure;
as I might have hopes from his compaf-
lion, should it be my fate to be feleeed
by him : such, you know, it was.-
When I was conduted into an apart-
ment -of the palace, he waited on -me
with the mofi affable politeness; and

feeingme in tears, he gently tool ms
hand, and spoke to the following effeEt
Be not difreffed, fair Almena ! Though
you are in the power of a prince, you
are not in the hands of a tyrant. If
time and the afiduities of tenderness
may prevail on you to return my love,
I fhlall be happy ; if not, you shall nev-
er be made miserable by cruelty or by
violenice." 'D Confitent with this dec-
laration, was his whole conduc to me,
during the time I was in his polfeifion.
How I regained my liberty, you have
already heard."

To the charaSer which you have

already received of cne xanarian prince,
said Solyman to the merchant, " I will
add a poetical portrait, which possibly
may not be disagreeable to you: my
gratitude for his favors, and my admi.
ration of his virtues, induced me to at-
tempt it.'`

THE AMIABTE KING.
T HE freeborn mul her tribute rarely

brings,
Or burns her incense to the power of kings

But virtue ever (hall her voice command,
Alike a spade or sceptre in her hand.
Is there a prince untainted with a throne,
That makes the interell of mankind his own ;
,Whose bounty knows no bounds of time or

plac ;

Who nobly feels for all the human race:
A prince, that assin rcafon's fready fpherc,
No slave to pailion, and no du2-c to fear;
A breast where mild humanity resides,
Where virtue dicates, and whore wildori

guides;
A minJ, that ftreteh'd beyond the years of

ou th,

Explores the secret springs of tafle and truthi
These, these are virtues, which the muse fl:al

sing;

And plant, for these, her laurels round a king!
Kanara's monarch ! this fiall be thy praise:
For this be crown'd with never.fading bays !

" YouR verses,' said the merchant,

" are very agreeable to me: for they
are justly applicable to a prince whom
every merchant in Great Britain has
the grciteft reason to refpea ; and
who is beloved by his fubjeds, as much

as a father by his children: He too is
young, as is the king of Kanara. But
I have lately had the pleasure to hear
of his marriage: and at the fame time
I received, from a literary correspond.
ent, an ode on the occasion ; which as
you have a poetical taste, I Ihall make
no scruple to offer you.>'

HYMENEAL.

I.

A WAKE, thou everlafsing lyre I
.-k- That once the mighty Pinder firung,
When, wrapt with more tlini mortal fire,

The gods of Greece he sung:

Awake !

Arrest the rapid foot of time again,
With liquid notes of joy, and pleasurEs melt.

ing strain.

IT.
Crown'd with each beauteous flower that

blows

On Acidalia's tuneful fide;
With all Aonia's rosy pride,
Where numerous Aganippe flows;

From Thefpain groves and fountains wil,
Come thou yellow.vefted boy,
Redolent of youth and joy,

: Fair Urania's favorite child !
'George to thee devotes the day:
lo Hymen hafe away !

ilI.

Daughters of the genial main 1
Queen of youth and rosy finiles,
Pueen es dimple-dwelling wiles;
Come, with all thy Paphian train !

P give the fair that blooms for Britain's throne,
Thy melting charms of love, thy foul-enchant.

ing zcne !

IV.

Daughter of the genial main !
Bring that heart.diffolving power,
Which once in Ida's sacred bower
The foul of Jove oppos'd in vain :
The fire of gods thy conquering charms coc.

fef ;
'And vanquilh'd funk, funk down on juno's

softering breait.

V.

She comes ! The conscious sea subsides;
Old ocean curbs his thund'ring tides
Smooth the silken surface lies,
Where Venus' flowery charriot flies.i

^ See Catullus.

Paphian airs in amibul sleep;
On the still bosom of the deep;
Paphian maids around her move,
Keen eyed hope, and joy, and love ;

Their rosy breasts a thoufind Cupid's lave
And dip their wanton wings, and beat the

buxom wave.

VI.
But mark, of more than vulgar mien,

Writh regal grace, and radient eye,
A form in youthfnl m;ljefty
Britain, hail thy favor'd queen

For her, the coufcious sea subsides;
Old ocean curbs his thund'ring tides z
O'er the glafi-.bofom'd main,
Venus leads her laughing train ;

The Polapian maids move graceful by herfide;
And, o'er the buxom waves, the rosy cupids

ride.

VTI.

Fly, ye fairy.footed hours !
Fly, with aromanc flowers !
such asbath'd in orient dews,
Be.iury's living glow diffuse ;
Such as in Idalia's grove.
Breathe the sweets, the foul of Icve I

i,.

VIII.
Come, genial god of chaste delight,

With wreaths of festive roses crown'd,
And torch that barns with radiance bright,

And liberal robe that sweeps the ground F
Bring thy days of golden joy,
Pleasures pure that never cloy I
Bring to Britain's happy pair,
All that's kind, and good, and fair I
George to thee devotes the day !
lo Hymen ! Halle away !

IX.

Daughters of Jove ! ye virgins sage,
That wait on Camus' hoary age;
That oft his winding vales along
Have fmoeth'd your filver-woven song;
0 wake once more those lays sublime,
That live beyond the wrecks of time !
To crown your Albion's boafLed pair,
The never.faiding wreath prepare;

Wihile her rocks echo to this grateful firain,
.d The friends of freedom and of Britain reign!'

T" TF]E ode you have obliged me

with,' said Solyraan, "t though I do
Ilot very well underfland it, gives me
rome idea of the emthufiafm and har-
rnony of the English poetry. But I

am less pleased with the producions of
art in your country, than the affeeion'-
ate duty which the people shew to
their'king : for that is the basis of civ-
il happiness; and indeed every humane
prince, who has the interest of his sub.
jeds at heart, will always reign in their
affedions,

BUT now, my friend, if you are

not too much taken up with your con-
cerns at Ifpahan, will you be prevailed
on to visit the valley of Irwan ? As
you are a lover of nature, and of the
muses, you will there meet with much
to entertain you ; at least, you will find
a retreat from the fatigues of business,
and the plagues of popularity. Alme-
na too joins in this request, and will be
glad of so entertaining a friend in the
first flages of her retirement.'"

TH i merchant accepted the invita4-

tion, and they left Ifpahan the follow-
ing day. He was desirous to hear from.
Almena the story of her captivity, and
took the first opportunity to request it :
s I have heard,' said he, "( from Soly-

fnan, the greatefi part of your adven-
tures; but I have not been informed
how you pafred that unhappy period of
time' from your being taken by the
Sundians, to your departure from the
castle at Sevafir.3D

''You call back memory, ir,' said

Almena, "' to the days of misery: but
as I can, at this diflance, look upon
them without terror, I will endeavour
to describe them to you.

"' WHxEN I was first taken by the

-Sundians, my difrracqion was so great,
that I retain no idea of what paitid,
till the captain of the ve]T'el conveyed
me on ihore to the caffle of Sevafir, and
presented me, terrified and almost fran.
tic as I was, to the detefled governor;
who, as I have been finca informed, re-
ceived such kind of acknowledgments
from the seamen, for proteding them
in their illegal and piratical captures.

<' TH E wretch, as well as I remem-

ber, seemed totally insensible to my
inifery ; and, with a finile upon his coun.

tenance, ordered his domestics to con-
vey me to my apartments. These, in-
deed; wanted neither elegance nor con-
venience ; but I despised the one, and
negleeed the other. The first even.
ing .I pafled in the most painful anguish
for the loss of Solyman, and the most
dreadful apprehensions of injurious
treatment from the governor. The
women that were about me, seemed
the wretched remains of ruined inno.
cence, wvho had first been viCtims to
the desires of the tyrant, and after.
wards made his slaves. Dreadful was
the scene I had before me ! Some of
these unhappy creatures seemed to pity
me, and to be concerned for my ap-
proaching misfortunes ; while others,
who with their virtue had loft their hu-
manity, looked upon me wich a care-
less scorn; pleated, I fear, with the
thought, that they should fee one wo-
man more, as miitrable and as defpica,
ble as themselves.

"' EARLY the next morning, the
governor came into my apartmcnt'.

!L 2

and caffing his eyes upon the bed on
which I had not reposed, ó" it seems,
madam,' said he, with a scornful smile,

I' that you approve not of your lodg-

ings ; but a little time, it is to be pre-
fumed, will reconcile you to us."
These morning visits he contauntly paid
mne; and as he always found me in
fullen sorrow, he behaved much in the
fame manner. At last, he changed his
address ; seemed to pity me ; alked me
for the story of my misfortunes ; and,
I believe, wept when he heard it: but
as I was aware of the hypocrite, I was
equally regardless of his pity, as I had
been of his scorn: and fill continued to
look upon him, with the fame forbid-
ing aversion and disdain.

" T U s passed my days in this con-

finement; but they would have been
more intolerable, had I not found a
harp in my apartments, which proba-
bly had been left there by some unhap-
py lady, who had possessed them before
me. With this instrument I amnufed
nlyfelf for many a melancholy hour,
which must otherwise have pafied away

in the mor miserable languor. I also
composed a song, suitable to my fiate of
mind and misfor:ul-e; which I adapted
to my harp, and which, 1 think, was
as follows:

- S 0 N' G
'TIS o'er-the pleasing profpeces's oe'r !

My weary heart can hope no more;

Then welcome wan despair !

Approach with all thy dreadful train;
Wild anguish, discontent, and pain,
And thorny.pillow'd care 1

II.

Gay hope, and ease, and joy, and ref,-
All, all that charms the peaceful breast,

For ever I resign:

Let pale anxiety, instead,
That has not where to lay her head.

And lasting woe be mine.

lII.

It comes ! I feel the painful woe ;
My eyes, for Solyman, will flow

In silent grief again;
Who wand'ring o'er some mountain drear,

Now haply Iheds the pensive tear,'
And calls on me in vain.

IV.

Perhaps, along the lonely fliores,
He now the sea's blue breast explorier

To watch the distant fail:

Perhaps, on Sundah's hills forlorn,
le faints, with aching toil o'erborn-e

And life's last spirits fail.

V.,

Ah ! no--tle cruel thought forbear.
Avaunt, thou fiend of fell despair,

That only death canst give !

While Heaven eternal rules above,
Almena yet may find her love,.

And Solyman may live t

Su SUc'H, Sir, was my life in the

®eafle of Sevafir; which passed like the
waters of Zenderoud, that in some
places are tortured by rocks and preci-
pices, and in others languish in dull
Ragsnation. 5'

# CHAP. XXV.

C A P. XXV.

T HE travellers had now proceeded
on their way to the valley of Irwan, as
far as the village of Abdat ; where So.
lyman proposed that they flould visit
the lovers who owed.their preservation
to him. Of this he was. the more de-
firous; as he had never seen them, since
he had first recommended them to the
proteaion of his father ; but the pleas-
ure he proposed to himself from this
visit, arose not fromn a desire of bei-in
flattered with their acknowledgments,
but of beholdinr and enljoying their
happiness.

TH E lovers received their beneifalor,

with the greatest ardor of gratitude ;
but at the fame time with that delica.
cy, which proved it to be sincere..: they
weire not loud in their acknowledg-
ments, nor officious in their compli-
ments ; but yet their attetion to their
guest, shewed how much they were de-
lighted with this oppertunity of express-
ing their refpet for Solyman. Th.¢

travellers, in the mean time, were n6t.
less pleased to behold the peculiar hap-
piness of the lovers, who seemed to
have but one heart, and one inclination.
Solyman and Almena beheld, in them,
a picture of themselves; and felt more
sensibly their own felicity, when they
had before them so pleasing an image
of it.

TH E merchant too was delighted
with this scene of conjugal happiness.

S' Such,' said he to Solytnan, ". are
the genuine fruits of those alliances,
which are made by love. When I be-
hold them, I blull for myself and for
my countrymen ; for love, genuine
love, as if it were no longer a passion es-
fential to human nature, is looked upon
as an Utopian idea, existing only in the
imagination of poets and enthusiasts:
hence, every tendency to it is ridiculed
as romantic, and modern marriages are
only contra:s of convenience. A Brit-
ifh lady is exopfed to sale; and if she has
a good person, as well as an ample fortune
Ihe hopes by that addition only to fetch
a higher price, and make a better msl -

ket. This, however, it muff be own.
ed, is not the foible of the women only,
the men are equally, if not more mer.
cenary ; and have, if possible, more fel-
fi(h views in their marriages: so that, in
this cafe, cunning is only opposed to
cunning. All this proceeds fiom that
mnifchievous opinion, which measures
happiness by the poffeslions of fortune.
Hence, that mutual coldness and in.
difference, which both experience be'
fore the marriage torch is extinct: from
new acquisitions of wealth, each expects
new degrees of felicity, and both are
disappointed; when they find the m-
selves mistaken, deffitute of that assec..
tionate tenderness which endears the
married slate, they look upon each oth-
er as the cause of discontent, and dif-
gust and aversion succeed. Thus, they
sacrifice to vanity, and reap the fruits
of it !'"

FRo M the village of Abdat, Solyman

and Almena, with their friend the mer-
chant, proceeded to the valley of Ir-
wan, where they found the aged Arda-
yan fill living, and enjoying all the faa-

ulties of nature- The benevolent sage
rejoiced to receive his son, not only faTe
fiom the dangers of travel, but hs-ppy
in the enjoyment of his love ; aild with
a heart full of tenderness, he thus ccn-
ferred on both, his paternal benecic-
tion:

" CHILDREN. of the heart, and

comfort of the years of Ardavian ! So-
lyman ffiall be as the fun, when h-e com-
eth from the chambers of the eaR,
when he fpreadeth his glories over the
waves of Ganges: my f'n s{hall be as
the Euphrates, the riv- r- of plen:y,
xrhofe waves are thie del]gi-t of a thcouf-
and meadows ; he flihai be like the roe
upon the 2-mountalns, that danceth in the
vigor of his heart, and faith to the
fence of the hufbandnlan, " What art
thou ?" His head lhall be crowned with
the rays of Mithra ; because his heart
melted nwith compassion, and because
his hand was firetched forth to relieve
the children rof afficion !

" A LMENA is fairer than the wo-
men of the eall; she is more virtuout

than the daughters of men : love dcwe[-
leth in her heart, and benevolence f:t-
teth 'in her eye. She fiall be like the
tree that droppeth balm upon the flow-
ers of Irwan; as the star of the even-
ing reflected from the river. Her coun-
tenance fiall be pleasant as the calm
surface of the ocean, when the gilded
clouds of evening blaze upon it's bo-
fom : flhe shall be as the moon, \vhen
She lendeth her rays to th.e travell.r,
and fheddeth a mild light over the
groves and vallies. Her voice shall bc
as the voice of the tutile, calling to
her mate in the thickets of the fo-rcf
Like theftirs that surround tle chai ot
of the moon, fnall be the children of
Airiena ; beautiful as the plants of the
cedar, and fi3rightly as the fawns upon'
the mountains 1'

TH - s'bleied by thie voice of A rda-

van, and htappy in the!l:ive-! , the vir-
tuoasU Solyni:.l arndA Aine:-.: live in the
valley of lrwan ! Each day is e:dear-
ed by the delihllts of tender love ; and
the re.m:mbranefce of p.::Q. ;.fK i

* :

attended only with the pleasing sensa-
tions of gratitude to that Being, whose
providence is over all his works.
HYMN TO THE ETERNAL PROVI.

DENCE.

I.

L IFE of the world, immortal mind !
Father of all the human kind ;
'Whose boundless eye, that knows no refl,
Intent on, nature's ample breast,
Explores she lface of earth and skies,
And fees eternal incense rife !
To thee, ay humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praifeo

II.

Though short the life thy goodness gave,
And soon descending to the grave
'Yet 'tsYas thy bounty, lill, to give
A being that can thii!k and live;
In all thy works tly wilfdlc fee,
And flretch it's tow'ring mind to thee I
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, whie I prefunm to praise.

II.

And frill this poor contratRed span,
This life, that bears the name of man:
From thee derives it's vital ray,
Eternal source of life and day !
Thy bounty frill the fnrfhine pours,
That gilds it's mjrn and evening hours.
To thee, my humble voice I raile :
Forgive, while I prefunme to praise.

IV.

Through error's maze, through folly's night,
The lamp cf Reafln lends me light.
When flern affliction waves her rod,
My heart confiles in thee, my GoD !
WVhen nature shrinks, opprefs'd with woes;
E'en then she finds in thee repose.
To thee, my humble voice I raise :
Forgive, while I prei' une to praise.

V.

AftiCtion flies, and lHope returns ;
Her lamp with brighter splendor burns.
Gay Love, with all his smiling train,
And joy and peace are here again.
These, these, I know, 'twas thine to give:
I trufled ;- and, behold ! I live.
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I prefame to praise.

VI.

O may I skill thy favor prove '
Still grant me gratitude and love.
Let truth and virtue guide my heart ,
Nor peace, nor hope, nor joy, depart.
But yet, whate'er my life may be,
My heart [hall still repose on thee !
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while 1 presume to praise .

C " D o not read novelsr," fays the rigid

father. " It is" fays a young wise-acre,
6" a pleasing way of communicating infirn2ion ;
it is inculco.intg virtue, by the moral of an enga-
ging story." The father replies, ", those who
read novels will read notking cfe ; eompdi ev-
ery novel-reader to read a small proportion of
True History as a condition of indulging dhir
in the novel, and my opposition is at an end.'

EVERY person therefore hasit enjui;ned up-

on him or her to read the following fc:-ap of
TRUE HISTORY, which is fuller of strange
incidents and surprising events, than most nov-,
els, and conveys a firiking view of human na-
ture, as far as concerns its tendency to seNTHU-
SI ASM and FANATI C ISM. Consult all ilifio-
ries, consult your own experitnce ! and you
will fidii enthufiafin and fanal.ticirn; by fits, at
various and diflant periods of time, attaclied
to hu!naia natur-e, and the operation as uniforin

as that of fevers at such varivus an:' diftint

periods. What blefling from Heaven cal nWan
receive, that is of higher value, than a -)ind
so ioform,-d, aod so fi.ble as not to be subjec:
to the contagion and intoxication of this de-
val-tting malady ?

M 2

# Account of the Anabaptists in Germany. A. D. 1534.

Account of the Anabaptifis in

Germany. A. . 1534+

[Rob. Hist. Vol. III p. 73P-8-4,.]

T HE mofi' remarkable of their re-
ligious tenets related to tlie sacrament
of baptism, which as they contended,
ought to be.admini{tered only to per-
ifns grown up to years of underfrand-
ing, and ffiould be performed not by
sprinkling them with water but by
dipping them in it :- For this reason
they condemned the baptifin of infants,
and' rcbapl.izing all 'whom they admitted
into thelr fjuciety, the feet came to be
distinguished by the name of Anabap-
tirs. 1To this peculiar notion concern-
:ng bapti'sm, which has the appear-
aoce of being founded on the pr2c-ice
of the church in the apcftolic age, and
conltdans not!hings incoaiiiftent wir-th the
peacc and order cf h!i;1n focicty, thley

( '39 )

added other principles of a moss enthta-
fiaftic, as well as dangerous nature,--
They maintained that, among chris-
tians who had the precepts of the gof-
pel to direót, and the spir-it of Go-o to
guide them, the office of rmagiftracy
was not only unnecefilry, but an un.
lawful encroachment on their spiritual
liberty; that the diFtinions occasion-
ed by birth, or ran'k, or wealth, being
contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal,
should be entirely aboli{hed; r.hat all
ch-iflians, throwing their poCT-ffions in-
to one comrnon' flock, flould live to-
gether in that state of equality vhich
becomes membels of the fame family ;
thalt as neither the laws of nature, nor
the precepts of the New Testament
had placed any reflcaints upon men
with regard to the number of wives
they might marry, they should uie that
liberty which GoD himself had granted
so the patriarchs.,

Su c - opinions, prepagated and

mlinaiiuned with enhll iuilic zeal and
Tldri., Svc were not long of prduclig

( [40 )

the violent effecs natural to them.--
Two anabaptist prophets, John Mat-
thias, a baker of Haerlem, and John
Boccold, a journeyman taylor of Ley.
den, pofTeffed with the rage of making
proselytes, fixed their residence at
Munster, an Imperial city in Weftpha-
lia, of the first rank, under the fove-
reignty of its bishop, but governed by
its own senate and consuls. As neither
of these fanatics wanted the talents re-
quifite in desperate enterprizes, great
resolution, the appearance of sanctity,
bold pretensions to inspiration, and a
confident and plausible manner of dif.
coursing, they soon gained many con-
verts. Among these were Rotham,
who had si-rs preached the protellant
do--icne in Munster, and Cnipperdoling,
a citizen of good birth, and confidera-
able eminence. Emboldened by the
countenance of such difciplts, tliey
,oenly taught tlleir opinions ; and not
satisfied with that liberty, they made
f=-veral atteinpTs, thougl without fuc-
ce£f, rto size cte towin, in order to get
their tenets efL;b.!ti'ed by public au-
tho"ircy. At fit, bihaving fec:csely calied

( I4i )

in their affCciates from the neighboring
country, they suddenly took possession
of the arsenal and fenate-houif in the
night-time, and running through the
freets with drawn f..vords, and horrible
howlings, cried out alternately, " re-
pent, and be baptif.d," and "' depart
ye ungodly."" The senators, the ca-
nons, the nobility, together with the
more fober citizens. whether pnpi{ts
or protestants, territied at their threats
and onitcries, fled in confLiion, and left
the city unider the dormnilon of a fran-
tic mu!ticde, conlfiging chiefly of ftran.
gers. Notiing nnow remaining to
overawe or controul them, they set.
about modelling the g;:vcrninent ac-
cording to their ow.vn wild ideas ; and
though at first they ihowed so niuch
reverence for the ancient conflitution,
as to eleE senators of their own set,
and to appoint Cnippercdoling and ano-
ther proselyte consuls, this was notiing
more than form ; for all their proceed-
ings were directed by Matthias, who,
in the flyle, and with the authority of
a prophet, uttered his commands,
which it was ij.itant death to disobey.

( 42 )

Having begun with encouraging the
multitude to pillage the churches, and
deface their ornaments ; he enjoined
them to defiroy all books except the
bible, as useless or impious ; he appoint-
ed the estates of such as fled, to be con-
fifcated, and fold to the inhabitants of
the adjacent country; he ordered every
man to bring forth his gold, fiiver,
and precious effets, and to- lay them at
his feet ; the wealth aniafled by these
means, he deposited in a public treasury,
and named deacons to dispense it for
the common use of all. The mem-
bers of this commonwealth being thus
brought to a perfec equality, he com-
manded all of them to eat at tables
prepared in public, and even prescribed
the diihes which were to be served up
each day. Having finilhed his plan of
reformation, his next care was to pro-
vide for the defence of the city ; and
he took measures for that purpose
with a prudence which favored nothing
of fanaticifim. He colle ced vat mag-
azines of every kind ; herepaired and
extended the fortifications, obliging ev-
ery person without diftintioo to work

( I43 )

in his turn ; he formed such as were ca-
pable of bearing arms into regular bo-
dies, and endeavored to add the vigor
of discipline to the impetuosity of en.
thufiafmi. He sent emissaries to the
Anabaptists in the Low-Countries, in-
viting them to assemble at Munster,
which he dignified with the name of
Mount-Sion, that fiom thence they
might set out to reduce all the nations
of the earth under their dominion.-
He himself was unwearied in attending
to every thing necessary for the fecuri-
ty or increase of the fecd ; animating
his disciples by his own example to re-
fuse no labor, as well as to repine at no
hardship ; and their enthufiaflicJpaffions
being kept from subsiding by a perpet.
ual fucceflon of exhortation, revela-
tions, and prophecies, they seemed rea-
dy to undertake or to susser any thing
in maintenance of their opinions.

W\H I L E they were thus employed,

the biflhop of Muntler having afTcmblecd
a considerable army, advanced tobcfiege
the town. On his approacl, Matthias
sallied out at the head of some chosen

( 44 )

troops, attacked one quarter of his
canmp, forced it, and after great flauoh-
terreturned to the city loaded with glo-
ry and spoil. Intoxicated with this iuc-
cef-, he appeared next day brandifl.ing
a lbear, and declared, that, in imitation
of Gideon, he wauld go forth witl a
lhandful of men and ilnitc lte Lofl. of
the ungodly- ThlFirty perfi'ns, wbhin
he named, followed him wihbout lhcf-
tation in this wSild enterpize, and, :L:fih
ing on the enemy with a frantic cour-
age, were cut off to a man. The death
of their prophet occasioned at fiift
great contfernation among his dicfiples;
but Boocold, by the fame gifts and pre-.
tensions which slad gained Matthias
credit, soon revived their spirits and
hopes to such a degree, that he succeed.
ed hin in the falne abfolutc direction
of all their affairs. As he did not post
s-ss th3t enterprizing courage which
difitnu.ifhed dhis predecessor, he satis-
sied hinrfelf with carrying on a defcn-
ive war ; and, without attempting ro
annoy the enemy by sallies, he waited
or the scours he LcexpeCted from the
Low- Countries, the arrival of wlich

( Y4. )

vYas often -foretold and promised by
their prophets. But though less daring
in acion than Matthias, he was a wild-
er enthusiast, and of more unbounded
ambition. Soon afrer the death of his
predecesSor, having, by obscure visions
and prophecies, prepared the multitude
for some extraordinary event, he strip-
ped himfeif naked, and, marching
through the streets, proclaimed with a
loud voice, " That the kingdom of Si-
on was at hand ; that whatever was
highePli on earth lfhould be brought low,
and whatever was lowefl should be ex-
alted. " In order to fulfil this, he com-
manded the churches, as the nmofi lofty
buildings in the-city, to be levelled with
the ground ; he degraded the senators
chosen by Matatthias, and depriving
Cnipperdolirg of thl:e )oonfullfip, the
highest office in the commonwealth, he
appointed him to execute the lowert
and mo. f infamous, that cf common
hanglman, to which strange transition
the other agreed, not o.;ly wi'hout
murmuring, but .ithi the uimclft joy
andfuch /as the cdepotic rigour of J3oc-

( I46 )

olld,s administration, that he was call-
ed alnmof every day to perform some
duty or other of his wretched function.
In place of the deposed senators, he na-
med twelve judges, according to the
number of tribes in Iftael, to preside in
all affairs ; retaining to himself the fame
authority, which Moses anciently pof-
feiTed as legislator of that people.

1JOT satisfied however, with power

or titles vwhich were not supreme, a
prophet, whom he had gained and tu-
tored, having called the multitude to-
gether, declared it to be the will of
GOD, that John Boccold £nould be king
of Sion, and. it.;op the throne of David.
John kneeling down, accepted of the
J-Ieavenly call, which he solemnly pro-
teited had been revealed lilkewife to
himself, and was immediately acknow-
ledgoed as monarch by the deluded mul-
titude. From that moment'he assumed
all the state and pomp of royalty. He
,wrore a crow\n of gol:t, and was clad
in the richeti and most' fumptious :gar-
nments, A bible swas carried on his one.
hand, a naked swor.d on the other, A.

( 147 )

great body of guards accompanied himi
when he appeared in public. He coin.
ed money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his
household and kingdom, among whom
Cnipperdoling was nominated governor
of the ciry, as a reward for his for-mer
submission.

H.AVING now attained the height of

power, Boccold began to discover pas-
lions, which he had hitherto re'trained
or indulged only in secret. As the ex.
cesses of enthuhfafm have been observed
in every age to lead to sensual gratifi-
cations, the fame confitution that is
susceptible of the former, being re-
markably prone to the latter, he in-
ftrucled the prophets and teachers to
harangue the people for several days
concerning the lawfulness, and even
neceflity of taking more wives than
one, which they asserted to be one of
the privileges granted by GOD to
the faints. XWhen their ears were once
accustomed to this licentious dotrine,
and their passions inflamed with the
.profpe& of such unbounded indulgence,

( 48 )

he himself set them an example of
using what he called their chritlian lib-
erty, by marrying at once three wives,
among which the widow of Matthias,
a woman of singular beauty, was one.
As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to
the number of his wives, until they
amounted to fourteen, though the Yvid.
ow of Matthias was the only one dig-
nified with the title of queen, or who
4hared with hi.n the splendor aird orna-
ments of royalty. After the example
of their prophet, the multitude gave
themselves up to the mcfi licentious
and uncontroule gratification of their
desires. No man remained satisfied
with a single wife. Not to use their
christian liberty, was deemed a crime.
Perfois were appointed to search the
houses -for young women grown up to
maturity, whom they initantly com-
pelled to mnarry. Together with po-
lygamy, freedom of divorce, its insep-
arable attendant, was introduced, and
became a n¢:w fsurce of corruption.
Every -excess was committed, of whic-h
the paflions of men are capable, w-he

-49 )

reitrained neither by the authority of
laws nor the lense of decency; and
by a monfRrous and alnblmo incredible
colnj unclion, volLuptcuouiiief; was ingrar-
ted on religion, and difiblute riot ac-
companied the aufterities of fanatical
devotion,

4MEANWH ILE, the German prin-

ces were highly offended at the initit
offered to their dignity by Boccold's
usurpation of royal honors; and the
profligate manners of his followers,
which were a reproach to the chrifiian
name, filled men of all profeflions
with horror. Luther, who had tefti-
fled against this fanatical spirit on its first
appearance, nowx deeply lamented its
progress, and exposed tlle dclufion with
great strength of argument, as well:as
acrimony of ityle, called loudly on all
the ftateq of Germany to put a flop to
a phrenzy no le's pernicious to society,
than fatal to religion. The emperor,
occupied with other cares and projects,
had not leisure to attend to such a dif-
tanlt objea-; but the princes of the eln

N

( 48 )

he himself set them an exasimple of
using what he called their christian lib-
erty, by marrying at once three wives,
among which the widow of Matthias,
a woman of singular beauty, was one.
As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to
the number of his wives, until they
amounted to fourteen, though the wid.
ow of Matthias was the only one dig-
nified with the title of queen, or who
flhared with him the splendor ai;d orna-
ments of royalty. After the example
of their prophet, the multitude gave
themselves up to the mcft licentious
and uncontroule gratification of their
desires. No man remained fatihfied
with .a fngle wife. Not to use their
chrifian liberty, was decemed a crime.
Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young wvomen grown up to
maturity, whom they instantly com-
pelled to marry. Together with po-
lygamy, freedom of divorce, its ini'ep-
arable attendant, was introduced, and
became a new fburce of corruption.
Every excess was committed, of which
the paItrons of men are capable, when

49 3')

restrained neither by the authority of
laws nor the ienfe of decency ; and
by a monstrous and almost increclible
conj undion. voluptloufiief was ingrar-
ted on religion, and diflblute riot ac-
companied the aufterities of fanatical
devotion.

I .EANWHIL E, the German prin-

ces were highly offended at the insult
offered to their dignity by Boccold's
usurpation of royal honors; and the
profligate manners of his followers,
which were a reproach to the chrifiran
name, filled cmen of all p;'ofeflions
with horror. Luther, who had tefli-
sied against this fanatical spirit on its first
appearance, no., deeply lamented its
prog-res, and exposed the delusion with
great firength of argument, as well:as
acrimony of style, called loudly on all
the fates of Germany to put a flop to
a phrenzy no let's pernicious to society,
than fatal to religion. The emperor,
occupied with other cares and projects,
had not leisure to attend to such a dif-
tant objet-; but the princes of the em.

N z

( 150 )

pire, assembled by the king of the Ri-
.mans, voted a supply of men and mo-
ney to the biflop of Munster, who be-
ing unable to keep a sufficient army on
foot had converted the siege of the
town into a blockade. The forces
raised in consequence of this resolution,
were put under the command of an
officer of experience, who approach-
ing the town towards the end of spring,
in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty.five, prefled it more closely
than formerly; but found the fortifica-
tions so frong, and so diligently guard-
ed, that he durst not attempt an assault.
It was now above fifteen months since
the Anabaptists had efiab{ihed their
dominion in Muntler; they had during
that time undergone prodigious fatigue
n working on the fortifications, and
performing military duty. Notwith-
landing the prudent attention of
their king to provide for their sub-
fifenee, and his frugal as well as regu-
lar economy in their public meals, they
began to feel the approach of famine.
Several finall bodies of their brethren,
·who were advancing to their assistance

( -IS )

from the Low-Countries, had been itt-
tercepted an;cld cut to pieces . and whilte
all Germany was ready to combine a-
gainfl the they had no profpe&d of
succour. But such was the ascendant
vwhich Bcccold h-zd acqui-ed over the
multitude, and so powerfil the fafcina-
tion of enthuliafm that their hopes
Were as sanguine as ever, and they
hearkened with -implicit credulity to
the visions and predictions of their pro-
phecs, who assured them, that the Al-
-·nighty would speedily interpose, in or.
der to deliver the city. The faith, how-
ever, of foime few, shaken by the vio-
lence and length of their fuiiTerings, be-
gan to fail; but being fufpe&ed of an
inclination to surrender to the enemy,
they were punished with immediate
death, as guilty of impiety in diflruft-
ing the power of GoD. One of the
king's wives, having uttered certain
words which implied some doubt con-
cerning his divine miflion, he instantly
called the whole number together, and
commanding the blasphemer, as he call-
ed her, to kneel down, cut off her head
with his, own hands; and ib far were

,( 15 )

-hle reft from expreffing..any horror at
:this cruel deed, that they joined him in
dancing with a frantic joy around the
bleeding body of their companion.

BY this time, the beficged endured

the ucmofl rigor of famine; but they
:chorfe ratther to susser hardlhips, the re-
cital of which is shocking to humanity,
,th:-n to liften to the terms of capitult-
tion offerd them by the bishop. At
Iaft, a deserter, whom they had taken
into their i;rvice, being either leis in-
.toxicated with the fumes of enthusiasm,
or unable any longer to be:;r such dif-
trefs, made his eicape to the enemy.-
He informed their general of a weak
part in the fortifications which he had
observed, and assuring him that the
besieged, exhausted with hunger and fa-
tigue, kept watch there with little care,
he offered to lead a party thirher in the
night. The proposal was accepted,
and a chosen body of troops appointed
for the service ; who, scaling the walls
unperceived, seizerd one of the gates, and
admitted the re-it of the army. The
Anabaptisna, though fut prifcd, defiended

themselves in the market-place with vaL
or, heightened by despair ; but being
overpowered by ntumbers, and surround-
ed on every hand, mosP of them were
(lain and the remainder taken prisoners.
Amnong the lafi were the king and Cnip-
perdoling. The king loaded with chains,
was carried from city to cityas a f£pe&a--
cle to gratify the curiosity of the people,
and was exposed to all their insults.-
His Ipirit, however, wvas not broken or
humbled by this fad reverse of his con-
dition; and he adheared with unshaken
firmnlefs to the distinguishing tenets of
his set. After this he was brought
back to Munster, the scene of his royaL.
ty and crimes, and put to death with
the most exquisite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with afion-
ifnling fortitude. This extraodinary
man, who had bee-n able to acquire fucl
amazin-g -doinion over the minds of
his followers, and to excite conmmnot-ions;
fb dangerous to ocit.y, was only twe.n
ty-fix years of age,

,( !5 )

:-h'e refl fiom expreffing.any horror at
:this cruel deed, that they joined him in
dancing with. a frantic joy around the
bleeding body of their companion.

BY this time, the beficged endured

the ucmoft rigor of famine; but they
:chrof rather to susser hardlhips, the re-
cital of which is shocking to humanity,
th:-n to liften to the terms of capitula-
tion offerd them by the biihop. At
.last, a deserter, whom they had taken
into their service, being either lels in-
toxicated with the fames of enthuliafm,
or unable any longer to bear such dif-
trefs, made his eicape to the enemy,--
Hle informed their general of a weak
part in the fortificationls which he had
observed, and assuring him that the
besieged, exhausted with hunger and fa-
tigue, kept watch there with little care,
he offered to lead a party thither in the
nighc. The proposal. was accepted,
and a chosen body of troops appointed
for the service ; who, scaling the walls
unperceived, feizedr one or the gates, allnd
admiLtedi the r,.t of the army. The
Aniabaptints, thougli fu.prifed, deflended

( 53 J

themselves in the market-place with va',
or, heightened by despair ; but being
overpowered by numbers, and surround-
ed on every hand, nmol of them were
lain and the remainder taken prilonerss
Among the lalt were the king and Cnip-
perdoling. The king loaded with chains,
was carried from city to city as a fpeda-
cle to gratify the curiosity of the people,
and was exposed to all their ini'ults.-
His spirit, however, was not broken or
humbled by this fad reverse of his con-
dition ; and he adheared with unlhaken
firmlefs to the diflinguilhing tenets of
his set. After this he xvas brought
back to Munfier, the scene of his royal-
ty and crimes, and put to death with
the most exquisite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with aston-
isling fortitude. This extraodinary
man, lwho had been able to acquire such
amazlncg domrinion over the minds of
his followers, and to excite commotions:
bo dangerous to focit.y, was only twenEi
ty-fix years of age.

# RURAL FELICITY; OR THE HISTORY OF COLLIN AND CELIA.

RURAL FELICITY;

O R T H E
H I S T 0: 1 Y

0 F

COLLIN AND CELIA.

A STORY FOUNDED ON FACT'

SUCH scenes as we are going to ex-
libit, are little underfiod in the capital ;
-where rural felicity is confidered to ex-
·i- no where but in poetic fictio;, or
romance; and that the raptuies of in-
nocent and pathetic love were never to
be found but in the groves of Arcadia.

BUT the following simple narrative

may serve to prove that this is a mifta,
ken notion, and that this island still as-
fords proofs of true love and real assec-
tion.

COLL IN is the son of a wealthy
farmer in Staffordshire,; when he at-

( '55 )

tained the age of maturity, his father
allotted him a fmiall portion of land
with a cottage. Here lhe resided for
forne time completely happy, daily at-
tending his flocks, and nightly enjoying
those peaceful flutbers, frequently un-
known to the rich and great.

THE. flatefman, who either has, or

pretends to have, the good of his coun-
try at heart, and devotes all his time
and attention to the service of his coun.
try, is sure, however, to have many ca.
lumniators. He is accused, if not of
diret peculation, at least of having no-
thing in view but the loaves and fishes;
that- his avarice and ambition go hand
i: hand, and that all places in his gift
':;.di oofed of to his creatures, without
_::i ng' the least attention to merit or
atiiics. His fcnen'les are derided, and
he is confidered as the scourge of the
people, by imposing filcZh burlthenfomc
taxes upon them as they cannot bear.
Isis dl!ys are paifed in violent contel-s,
and his nights pfford him little relief, as
he dreads the morning, when he cx-

( 56 )

pe s to fee himself again abused in
print.

THe peer wnho rides -in his gilded

carriage, is fometiunes fl iipt as the cho.
colate-houfe of all his cath, and his
carriage at the door becomes his lass
tfake, in which his. antagonif rides
home triumphantly, and leaves him an
itinerant dupe,. to chew the cud of his
folly, swear his prayers all iorning
lpon his pillow, till his servant returns
from St. Mary Axe with lfaac Abra-
hams, to lend him a thousand at cent.
per cent. Collin is ignorant of all
these perturbations of the mind ; he
rolls no gilded charriot, and knows
nothing of Pharoh and the four knaves
who caniClantly accompany him.

\7V could trace the miseries of the

great world, pomip and riches, from
the iiniiter down to the merchant,
aad find an iaderman perfe&iy mifera-
ble wvirh a plumb and a handsome wife;
the fall of fRocks affeits him sorely one
m,,ay, and his doubts concerning his

( 57 )

wife's fidelity diflurb his reft and tor.
ment his thoughts in a bed of down.

BUT let us quit the contagious flat-

tery and deceit of courts, and the noise,
butle and anxiety of cities, and fly
to those retreats where innocence and
simplicity prevail, uncontaminated by
pride avarice and ambition.

Co L-L I N had now solaced himself

for upwards of a twelve-month, with
his flock and his faithful dog, which had
been his chief companions, and engrof-
fed all his attention. But he soon found
that he was not insusceptible of the
paffion-the moment he saw the tender
lovely Celia, he felt such sensations as
he was before unacquainted with: his
heart throbbed with those emoticns to
which it had been bef6re an utter firan-
ger. He viewed her with r.pture,
which was succeeded by pungent grief
at her departure, and in her abftnce,
involuntary sighs bcfpoke the a!rccnarn-
cy Celia had gained over !inm.

ON her part Ihe was not insensible

of the language of Collin's eyes, the
only language that had as yet expressed
his flame; and they had proved so clo-
quent, that she found them irreff'iible
advocates in his favor. In a word, a
mlutual passion inspired her breafi, but
she had fortitude sufficient to conceal it
till such time as she was convinced of
Collin's sincerity.

AN opportunity offered one evening,

whilst they were feated on a bank,
where t!hey viewed the sportive gam-
bols of the fleecy herds, and Coll.irn,
writh a igh, addrefed Celia, faying,
"' How hrppy werel is fiecks to him.'`
This remark brought on a declaration
of the sentiments of his heart, which
were attended with such vows of truth
r.nd sincerity, that she cc;uld no longer
li"credit them, and she yielded to the
impulse of her throbbing breast, to
avouch her fond regard for him. En-
raptured at this discovery, Collin now
prefled her to fix a day for the crrmple-
tion of his blifl, by tlle c£it br~ticn of
tleir nuptials. Celia at firfi evaded

( ss9 )

making a reply to this entreaty ; but
at length, her own wishes so immedi-
ately agreeing with those of Collin, she
yielded to his request.

THE affiflance of the gentlemen of

the robe was not necessary for making
settlements, regulating pin-money, and
the like. Not a single parchment was
used upon the occasion, nor is there like-
ly to be one in consequence of a divorce
or a separate maintenance. Their mar-
riage took place, and their relations
and friends were invited to a homely
repast, when no turtle or venison fmo-
ked upon their table; nor was Burgun-
dia's vintage called in to quench their
thirst. Their homely ale was all that
graced ther sideboard, and their viands,
though good and wholfome, did not re-
quire the aid of a French cook to spoil
them.

SEVERAL honey-moons have now

elipfed since their nuptials, and each
succeeding one seems more replete with
happiness than the former. This Rtate

( I10 )

may be juflly pronounced R U A L F -
L I C IT Y without alloy.

HERE look, ye LITTLE GREAT,

with envy and difpair at an elevated
flation you can never attain-for rank,
titles, pomp, and riches, will never
yield you one thouSandth part of the
real bliss which Collin and Celia enjoy.
You cannot hope to come in reach of it till
you forego and forger all those biubles,
those gewgaws which only dazzle and
blind, and, like an IG N s FATUUS,
misguide you from the road ro genuine
happiness, to wander in the labyrinth
of mifsnamed pleasure, constantly atiten-
ded with pungent anxiety, and excru,-
ciating pain.

-~--

TO SOLITUDE.
O SOLITUDE ! thou mild, thou Heaven.

born maid,
What tranquil hours proceed from thy con-

troul !
Pleasure and peace thy shady bowers pervade,

And sweet refletion sooths the pensive foul.
In these lone shades no anxious cares intrude;

Tumult is here for ever hush'd to ref ;
Free from the schemes by restless man purfu'd,

'Tis thine alone to lull the troubled breast.
The noisy croud, the gay tumultuous scene

May please, and for a while attract the eye;
But if no calrn reficltionsintervene,

Their pleasures sicken, and their glories die.
Far from the bafy throng tmy flight I'll take;

With thee, dear maid, each leisure hour I'll

spend:
I'll contemplate, and every scene forsake,

That robs me of so true, so kind a friend.
When cares arise that would my breast alarm,

When fortune frowns, and when my friends

neglect,
1'11 call afliftance from thy helping arm,

Nor be unhappy while I can reflet.

0

( I6z
FEMALE EXCELLENCY

TO M--

Seautles in vain their pretty eyes may roll,
Charmslfrike the fn/e but merrit wins thrJs:t.

P OPE.

U NVARNISH'D truths I would impart,
Nor please by flattery's folfome art.
The tear that glistens in the eye,
The tender sympathetic sigh,
Display the feelings of a mind,
Possess'd of fenriment refin'd.
The loveliest ornaments of youth
Are filial duty, goodners, truth:
These far outfhiiie the briliant's raya.
And-merit most exalted praise;
Let vain coquets on form depend,
Be dupes to every seeming friend,
When beauty's, tranfieit reign is o'er;
Nor fops admire nor fools adore;
But sense and temper ftil! can charm,
And wrinkled age of pow'r d'ifjrn
So shines M- , gen'rous maid,
Uponwhole cheek the roles fade ;
Wrho, if her parent feel a pain,
Aff',io.] throbs in ev'ry vein,
Si!ent becomes the favorite lyre,
Nor prose, nor song a joy inspire :
Thy virtues claim the rapt'rous lay ;
To thee, will genius homage pay,
E'en at the palii fitroke of deatb,
,Will thee applaud with fault'ring breat,'

_1*.' ! J ~ i^

# SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.

A.

JOHN ALDERMAN, Eaft-Windfor.
Arnel Allen, do.

B.

Bifsell, Tudor, & Co. 6 copies, do.
Aaron Biffell, -do.
Jonathan Biffell, di).
Lemuel BifAl1, do.
Jonathan Birge, do.
Job Beckwith, do.
John Baker, Junr. Tolland.
Levi Button, Eafl-windfor.
Azel Bower, do.
Ithemer Bliss, do.
Afa Bow, do.
Stephen Bolles, Hartfordr
George Burr, do.
George Burr, Junr. do.
Stephen Barnes, do.

( 4 )

C.

Flavel Clark, Lebanon.
James Carter, Hartford.
Hosea Chipman, Eltington.
Timothy Cowles 2nd. Eaft-Hartford.
Sihron Crosby, East- windsor.
Jesse Charlton. do.
Jason Curtiss, do.
Martin Craw, do.
James Cogfwell, do.

D.

Nathaniel Deane, do.
Noadiah Drake, Eaft-Hartford.

E.
Timothy Ellsworth, 6 copies,

Eaft-windfor.

Joseph Ellsworth, Colebrook.
Julus Elmer, Eaft-windfor.
Caleb Edfon, South-Brimfield

MafTachufetts.

F.
John Foot, 6 copies, Tolland.

( 65 )
Archelaus Flint, -Springfield,

M affach ufetts.
Eraflus Flint, Eat- windsor.

G.

Stephen Gibbs, 2 copies, Eaft-windfor.
Almerin Gillet, vWindforo
James Goodwin, Simfbury.
David Grant, Eaft-windforo
Alfred Grant, do.

H.

Elisha Holton, . Enfieldo
William Howard, Windsor
Daniel Hayden Junr. Easn-windsor.
Eli B. Haikell, do.

K.
Silas Kellogg, Hartford.

L.
Simeon Lomis, Lanfiugburgh,

Nesw-York,

Benjamin Lomis, East. wiiidfbor
Ruffel Lomis, do.
Gerfliom Loinis, do,

( i66 )

M.
John Meakins, 6 copies, Athens,

Pennsylvania.

Robert M'Henry,- Hartford.
Charles May, Eaft-Windfor.
Samuel May, do.
William Moore, do.
Timothy Morley, do.

0.

William Olmfted, Eaft-Hartfordo
Henry Osborn, Eaft-Windfor*

P.

Israel Porter, 2 copies, Wethersfield.
Jonathan Pafco, East Windsor.
Afhbel Pitkin, Eaft-Hartford.
Daniel Pitkin Junr. do.
Rufus Payne Juar. Eaft-Windfor,

R.

Elijah F. Reed, 6 copies, do.
Abner Reed, 6 copies, do.
Eber Robinson, 6 copies, Somers.
Daniel Rockwell, Eafl.Windfoi.

( i67 )

Noah Rockwell,6 copies,Eaft- Windsor.
Daniel Rockwell Junr. do.
Nathaniel Rockwell Junr, do.

S.

Ithmael Spicer, Hebron.
Richard L. Sill, Windsor,
George Spencer, Simfbury.
Fitch Skinner, Lanfingburgh, N. York,
Martin Smith, Ealt.windfor.
Timothy Stoughton, do.
Warham Strong, do,
Alpheus Shumway, do.

T.

Danicl Tillotfon, 2 copies, Norwich.
Oliver Tudor, Eafl. wincfor.
\William F. Tudor, do.
Silas Terry, do.
Levi Terry, do.

V.
William I. Verftille, do.

XW.
George Wells, 1i2z copies, Glaflenbury.

( 68 )

John Watson, 6 copies, Eaft-windfor.
X7illiam Watson, 6 copies, Enfield.
Samuel Watson, Eaft-windfor.
Robert Watson Junr. do.
Solomon Wells, do;
Silas Wells, do.
James Woodworth, do.
RBeuben Woodworth, do.

W Several Sub/firptort papers not bav;ng

ieen returned in fet/on 7inft answer 4as un apole,
gy for the emif'ion of a nutibcr of Jfrbftcbiets
:names.

.x<iU^'3^
