THE
H I $ T 0 R V

OF

ANCIENT GREECE,
FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TILL IT BECAME A

ROMAN PROVINCE.

r

^ -N D F .. . ',1

- .1
c . . M

A_ w'. 1A

-

--- ' . . .i.l. .: \

.

,..

IslV rA NOR.H-l-^s 1

_--" <:'

A.¢''-'
c U r '

:,'--, ^s

.-/ , ~'.'-^ r . )T..l.'. V--^-::

-"
-->_r' 4
"= t An. c^ > , ·v,,, ,r ,

;.. . ....,,..d'.~-xJ

1[;3 > IAA.- -

,;/'.'t~ . e, ^ .< j... X

..p L

%.

_,,t _/y~r~n _?'^).e

_ :_'
' '

~, ~,^ txJ

-,~ 7:-.~.' ;--V .% B* .'.... S.E RT
A.

A-

,!,~~~~~~
)1 ;';:~

;; ~ ~
. :

HISTORY

OF
ANCIENT GREECE,

FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES
TILL IT BECAME A ROMAN PROVINCE.

B Y
WVILLIAM ROBERTSON, Esq_

KEEPER OF THE RECORDS OF SCOTLAND.

Hail, Natture's utmojij boas, unrivalled Greece !
7VIy t fair/fl reiign ! where every povwer Le:igl
Co;jpir'd to blowi the flower of hC uman kind,
And laviJ'd all that genius can inspire!

----------H.ece a race of meni

Als Gods, b)v cofctios f itre tintes ador'd;
I: -whom each virtue wore a fJai!ing air,
.Eachfcience jhed o'er life a fricedly light !
Hadh art 'was natare ! TIIOMSON.

- 'Tis the Goddess of Liberty that speaks.

A NEWV EDITION.

ED I N B U R G H:
PRINTED FOR. WILLIAM CREECH, EDINBURGI ;

AND SOLD BY G. G. & J. J. ROBINSONS, AND

T. KAY, N° 332. STRAND, LONDON.

D C C; X 1 I.

# TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The PRINCE of WALES.

To HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
The PRINCE of WALES.

S I R,
IT is the Importance of the fubjeat of

this Book, not the Merit of the Compo-

fition, that emboldens me to lay it, with
the most refpeEtful Humility, at your ROYAL
HIGHNESS'S feet.

The Hiotory of Ancient Greece undoubtedly

deserves a princely Patronage. Of what
Prince then may it with so much Propriety
claim the Patronage as of your ROYAL
HIGHNESS, born as You are to be the fove-
reign of a People, who, by their love of the
Sciences and of the Fine Arts, but chiefly by
their generous manly independent Spirit, bear
a more striking Resemblance to the ancient
inhabitants of Greece than any other People,
so far as I know, now on Earth ?

Your ROYAL HIGHNESS, too, is now at

that Age, when the interesting -cenes dif-
played in this History are apt to make

the

the most lively Impreflion on the Mind.
When therefore you ihall contemplate the
immortal Heroes of Greece, sacrificing their
Pailions to their Reason, pursuing the Sug-
geftions of Honour in opposition to the Al-
lurements of Pleasure, and courting Dan-
ger in the Service of their Country; their
Patriotism, their Virtue, their Magnanimity,
will awaken their kindred feelings in your
ROYAL HIGI-NESS'S Breast, and inspire You
with the noblest Emulation.

THAT yoir ROYAL -IIGHNESS'S Life may

be long, glorious, and happy, is the fervent
Prayer of,

S I R,
Your ROYAL HIGHNESSrS

Most humble
Moit obedient, and

.Most devoted Servant,

WILL. ROBERTSON.

# PREFACE.

P R E FA C E.

NCIENT GREECE seems to have been pe-
culiarly chosen by Heaven as the scene on

which mankind were destined to diiplay, in the
utmost perfecion, all the superior faculties that
distinguish them so highly above the other ani-
mals on this earth. For it is an incontrovert-
ible fad, that, with the exception of a few ge-
neral notions of some particular branches of
knowledge derived to them from Egypt and
the East, the ancient inhabitants of that coun-
try not only invented, but carried to the highest
pitch of improvement, almost all the sciences
and liberal arts. The moderns, indeed, have
attained to many discoveries, which, for the
mofc part, were to those ancient Greeks un-
known. But, on an accurate investigation, we
hlall perceive, that obme of the mofl important
of those discoveries have been the result of mere
accident; that others have been produced solely
by the repeated experience of many ages; and
that the greater part of them are of such a na-
ture, that the pure force of genius alone never
could have found them out.

In all the polite Arts, however, which the

Ancient Greeks appear either to have studied or
pradifed; and in every matter of science, with-
out exception, they are universally acknowled-
ged to have excelled. Hence their works in

A z the

the more sublime parts of philosophy; in geo-
metry; in poetry, eloquence, and every other
species of composition; in sculpture; and in
architeAure; always have been, and in all pro-
babilty ever will be, the most perfect models
produced by the ingenuity of man. Of this
truth the writings of Aristotle and Plato;
of Euclid; of Homer, Sophocles, and Euri-
pides; of Demoflhenes; of Thucydides and
Xenophon, together with the remains of Gre-
cian sculpture and architeAure still to be seen,
afford full and fatisfadlory evidence: and the
most approved performances on the fame sub-
jeds in modern times, are, generally speak-
ing, valuable in proportion to the acquain-
tance of their authors with those precious relics
of antiquity.

But the merit of this wonderful people, as

philosophers, fine writers, and artills, was, per-
haps, their least praise. If we view them in the
more active and important Rations of public
life; in the characters of legiilators, ftatefilen,
generals; we lhall find greater reason Rill to ad-
mire their virtue and capacity. What other na-
tion in the world can boast of such legislators as
Lycurgus and Solon, of iuch statesmen as Ari-
ilides, Themistocles, Pericles; of such generals
as Cimon, Epaminondas, Agefilaus; not to men-
tion a multitude besides, ulftly celebrated for
the fame talents ?

The country of Greece, though of less extent
than that of England., was inhabitcd by a great

variety

variety of different flates, perfectly independ-
ent of one another, remarkably opposite in their
manners and. dispositions, but all aduated by
the most ardent tipirit of valour and liberty. As
those fiates were pretty nearly of equal force, it
became absolutely necefary for them to be at-
tentive to keep the balance of power properly
poised, and to prevent any one itate from ac-
quiring such an increase of firength as might en-
able it to enllave the reft. We Ihall fee, accor-
dingly, that this was the grand object of all their
wars and negociations; that they put in praclice,
upon every occasion, the wisest and most refined
policy, for preventing the too great aggrandi'e-
ment of each other; and that they never hesitated
to sacrifice friendlhip, resentment, and every
other secondary consideration, to what they ac-
counted the highest of all concerns, the main-
taining of the general independency of their
country.

The fame spirit of liberty enabled them to

oppose the ambitious attempts of two of the
most powerful monarchs that ever filled the Per-
fian throne, Darius and Xerxes, with a bravery
so romantically heroic, as to have no parallel
in the historical annals of any other people, and
which, were it not attested pall all poflibility of
doubt, almost exceeds the bounds of probability.
But, not satisfied with defeating in Greece the
utmost efforts of those Persians to subdue them,
the Greeks, eager for revenge, resolved to pufhi
their advantage, and to attack the invaders in

their

their own dominions. This design they carried
into execution, firlt under Cimon, and after-
wards under Agefilaus, betides several interme-
diate attempts; and that with a ifuccefs that
plainly hlowed them capable, had they proceed-
ed with unanimity and perseverance, of effec:t-
ing the grand revolution reserved to immorta-
lize the name of Alexander, that of totally sub-
verting the Persian empire. The Persians find-
ing themselves unable to vanquish the Greeks
by open force, took a more efcctual method to
overcome them, in consequence, as we are told,
of the advice of Alcibiades, one of the most ex-
traordinary men that Greece ever produced.
They tludtioufly fomented the natural jealousy
entertained by the flates of one another ; kept
them, by that means, in continual war, and,
in the mean time, artfully afiited them, as
circumstances required, with liberal supplies of
money to work out their mutual delfruaion.
But the Persians were not defined to reap the
i'ruits of their pernicious politics, which even-
tually occasioned their own ruin. For Philip
ling of Ma1cedon, one of the difLtriCs of Greece,
profited by tholic dissensions of the other Greeks,
to make them subjec to his authority ; and at
las his son, the Great Alexanider, in prosecution
of the plan laid down by his father, ranged them
*under the Macedonian banners, subdued, with
tleir aflifiance, the powerful empire of Persia,
iand marched victorious from one corner of the
v :!t continent of Asia to the cther.

But

But as, on the one hand, those Greeks prac-

tifed, in the grcateft perfed6ion, every virtue,
whether public or private; and carried to the
highest degree .of improvement of which, per-
haps, they are capable, the powers of genius
apd understanding ; Co, on the other hand, they
gave way, almost in the fame proportion, to, e-
very folly and vice, whether moral or political.
Hence we shall have an opportunity, in the per-
ufal of their history, of contemplating the admi-
rable effedts resulting fiom the former course of
life, and the miserable consequences inevitably
occasioned by the latter; a contrast which, of all
others, forms, if we mistake not, the moit cu-
rious and inftrudcive part of history.

The History of Ancient Greece likewise pre-

sents us more, perhaps, than that of any other
nation, with the most lively picture of the ad-
vantages and disadvantages arising from each of
the various systems of government that have
prevailed in the world, monarchy, aristocracy,
democracy, with all the different modifications
and combinations of there, that the policy of
mankind hath ever devised.

From all these considerations, it muif be ap-

parent, that whoever alpires at superior ditinc-
tion, either as a philosopher or as a man of
taste, in a military or in a political capacity,
can by no other means more effectually accom-
plifh his purpose than by a careful study of the
Greek authors, by an attentive perusal of their
History, and by a judicious application of the
maxims there explained and enforced.

The

The former publications on this subjea in

the English language being on a different scale,
as well as on a different plan from the present
the Author is happily freed from the very dif-
agreeable talk of attempting any comparison
Mr Stanyan's History of Ancient Greece, in
two volumes o'navo, flops at the death of Philip
king of Macedon: and that published, likewise
in two volumes oSavo, some months after the
death of Dr Goldsmith, under the name of that
ingenious gentleman, comes down only to the
death of Alexander the Great. The detail of
Grecian Affairs contained in Mr Rolln's An-
cient History is still more voluminous and more
diffuse.

Edinburgh, General Record-Office,

Yu'ne i786. S

1 N-

# INTRODUCTION.

I N T R O D U C T I O N.
T HE continent of Ancient Greece comprehended that

country which at present conlitutes the southern

part of Turkey in Europe. It was bounded on the
east by the JEgean sea, now called the Archipelago; on
the south by the Cretan sea; on the weft by the Ionian
sea, or Adriatic gulf; and on the north by Illyria and
Thrace. Its length, from north to south, was about
350 miles; and its breath, at a medium, might be
reckoned about 250 miles. It is situated nearly in the
middle of the northern temperate zone.

Greece may be properly diftinguilhed into fix princi-

pal divilions. Of these the most northern was lMace-
donia: immediately south of Macedonia lay 'Treffily:
Epirus stretched along the coast of the lonian sea, and
was the most western division: Achbaia, or Greece pro-
perly so called, occupied the middle space: and the
most southern division was Pelofonznejius, known at pre-
sent by the name of the AMorea, which, as the anctnt
name imports, formed a peninsula, communicating lith
Achaia by the isthmus of Corinth, a neck of land about
fix miles broad: the IJands made the sixth division.

The climate of Greece was peculiary excellent. E-

qually exempted from the rigorous cold which affli&s
the inhabitants nearer to the poles, and from the sultry
heat by which those within the torrid zone are op-
presTed, it abounded with every influence propitious to
the human race. The air was sweet, healthful, and uni-
formly temperate;'invigorating without chilnefs, and
soft without effeminacy.

The foil corresponded with the climate. It produced,

in extraordinary plenty, not only all the necessaries, but
likewise many of the luxuries of life.

B ThCe

The mildness, purity, and happy temperature of this

climate, mull, without all question, have had a power-
ful effet upon those who were there born and educated.
In fact no country on earth ever exhibited the human
form adorned with such exquisite beauty, nor the human
mind animated with feelings at once so jut, so delicate,
and so acute.

Geographical Description of ANTIENT GREECE.

TiHE history of no people can be diftindly understood,

unless the geography of their country be known. This
observation applies to the history now under confidera-
tion more firongly perhaps than to the history of any
other nation. For the territory of Greece having been
parcelled out among many separate fiates, their disputes
and their tranfaaions with each other, as well as their
various military expeditions, form, without a particular
knowledge of the geography of the country, amass of
unintelligible confusion.

In another view likewise an acquaintance with the

geography of ancient Greece is of singular utility. It is
if we may use the exprefflon, the key both to the Greek
and to the Roman poets, whose works abound with con-
slant allusions to the rivers, the mountains, &-c. of an-
cient Greece. For these reasons we here lay before
the reader a particular but concise description of that
country.

GREECE, as before observed, was distinguished into

fix principal divisions, viz. Macedonia, Theflaly, Epirus,
Achaia or Greece properly so called, Peloponnefus, and
the Islands.

The Romans distributed all the country into two pro-

vinces, Macedonia and Achaia; the former compre-
hending Macedonia, Epirus, Theflaly; the latter, A-

chaia

chaia, Peloponnefus, and the [flands. In our defcrip-
tion we lhall adopt the more ancient division.

MACEDONIA was bounded on the north by the

Scardian mountains, by which it was separated from lI-
lyrium and Maefia, and by the river Strymon, its boun-
dary with Thrace ;- on the east, by the JEgean sea or
Archipelago;-on the fourh, by Thessaly and Epirus;-
and on the weft, by the Ionian sea, or Adriatic gulf.
According to Pliny, it was more anciently occupied by
i50 different tribes.

The most considerable rivers in Macedonia were A-

liacmon, Erigon, Axius, Chabris, and Strymon, which
all discharge themselves into the Archipelago; Panyafus,
Apfus, Laus which washes Apollonia and Celidnus on
the confines of Epirus: there run into the Adriatic gulf.

The most noted mountain in Macedonia was Athos,

which stretches out into the Archipelago in the form of
a peninsula. Through this mountain Xerxes is said to
have ordered a passage to be dug for the fleet with
which he invaded Greece.-An instance of egregious
folly, indeed !

The towns of chief note in Macedonia were Dyrra-

chium, anciently Epidamnus, a maritime town on the
Adriatic gulf; Pella, on the river Axius, famous for
being the place where Philip, and his son Alexander
the Great, drew their first breath; Theflalonica, whither
Cicero was baniflied by the intrigues of the factious
Clodius; Stagira, on the river Strymon, in the neigh-
bourhood of Mount Athos, famous by being the birth-
place of the prince of Philosophers Aristotle, thence
called the Stagirite; Amphipolis, anciently poffefled by
an Athenian colony, and remarkable by the dispute
which it occasioned between Philip and the Athenians.

The difiria of Macedonia, called Pieria, celebrated

in ancient fable as having been the birth-place of the
Muses, thence often denominated Pierides.

B 2 TIHE-SSALY

The mildness, purity, and happy temperature of this

climate, must, without all question, have had a power-
ful effec upon those who were there born and educated.
In faat no country on earth ever exhibited the human
form adorned with such exquisite beauty, nor the human
mind animated with feelings at once so just, so delicate,
and so acute.

Geographical Description Of ANTIENT GREECE.

THE history of no people can be diftindly understood,

unless the geography of their country be known. This
observation applies to the history now under confidera-
tion more strongly perhaps than to the history of any
other nation. For the territory of Greece having been
parcelled out among many separate states, their disputes
and. their transactions with each other, as well as their
various military expeditions, form, without a particular
knowledge of the geography of the country, amass of
unintelligible confusion.

In another view likewise an acquaintance with the

geography of ancient Greece is of singular utility. It is
if we may use the expression, the key both to the Greek
and to the Roman poets, whose works abound with con-.
itant allusions to the rivers, the mountains, &c. of an-
cient Greece. For these reasons we here lay before
the reader a particular but concise description of that
country.

GREECE, as before observed, was distinguished into

fix principal divisions, viz. Macedonia, Thessaly, Epirus,
Achaia or Greece properly so called, Peloponnefus, and
the Islands.

The Romans distributed all the country into two pro-

vinces, Macedonia and Achaia; the former compre-
lAending Macedonia, Epirus, Thefialy; the latter, A-

chaia

chaia, Peloponnefus, and the flands. In our deicrip-
tion we flall adopt the more incient division.

MACEDONIA was bounded on the north by the

Scardian mountains, by which it was separated from II-
lyrium and Maefia, and by the river Strymon, its boun-
dary with Thrace ;-on the east, by the AEgean sea or
ArchipelagQ ;-on the south, by Thessaly and Epirus;
and on the weft, by the lonian sea, or Adriatic gulf.
According to Pliny, it was more anciently occupied by
150 different tribes.

The most considerable rivers in Macedonia were A-

liacmon, Erigon, Axius, Chabris, and Strymon, which
all discharge themfelvesinto the Archipelago; Panyafus,
Apfus, Laus which washes Apollonia and Celidnus on
the confines of Epirus: these run into the Adriatic gulf.

The most noted mountain in Macedonia was Athos,

which stretches out into the Archipelago in the form of
a peninsula. Through this mountain Xerxes is said to
have ordered a passage to be dug for the fleet with
which he invaded Greece.-An instance of egregious
folly, indeed'

The towns of chief note in Macedonia were Dyrra-

chium, anciently Epidamnus, a maritime town on the
Adriatic gulf; Pella, on the river Axius, famous for
being the place where Philip, and his son Alexander
the Great, drew their first breath; Theffalonica, whither
Cicero was banifled by the intrigues of the factious
Clodius; Stagira, on the river Strymon, in the neigh-
bourhood of Mount Athos, famous by being the birth-
place of the prince of Philosophers Aristotle, thence
called the Stagirite; Amphipolis, anciently possessed by
an Athenian colony, and remarkable by the dispute
which it occasioned between Philip and the Athenians.

The diftrid of Macedonia, called Pieria, celebrated

in ancient fable as having been the birth-place of the
Muses, thence often denominated Pierides.

B z TIESSALY

THESSALY lies immediately south of Macedonia, and

north of Achaia, having the Archipelago on the eart,
and Mount Pindus, which divides it from Epirus, on
the weft, It was anciently famous for its excellent ca-
valry.

Peneus was the chief river in Thessaly. It runs be-

tween the mountains Offi and Olympus; and mean-
dring along in gentle windings through a country de-
lightfully variegated by groves and meadows, it forms
the capital ornament of the delicious

Vale of Teempe, described with rapture even by poets

whose eyes were accustomed to the profpea of some of
the finest countries in the world.

The most noted mountains of Thefialy are Olympus,

Peliun, and Offa, so famous in fable by the war of the
giants.

Between Thefialy and Phoci, at the bottom of Mount

Oeta, lies the, defile of lhermopylae, a pass about 99
foot broad, which formed in a manner the portal of the
oiuthern diitrits of Greece, and is on that account fre-
quently mentioned in history. But it is chiefly renown-
ed by the heroic fland made there agaiift the Persian
army by Leonidas and his Spartans.

Thefaly was more anciently accounted a district of

Macedonia, and was called Emonia. It was likewise
successively known by the names of Pelafgicum, Hellas,
Driopis, Argis, and Theftalia, derived from the names
of different kings to whom it was fubjeEt. At length
the name of Thessaly prevailed. Homer calls the inhabi-
tants of this country Myrmidones, Hellenes, Achsei.

It was divided among the following tribes; the Thef-

falians, the Eftiote, the Pelafgi, the Magnefii, and the
Phthiota.

The diftric of the ThefFalians contained the towns of

Hypata, Soflhene, Cypera: That of the Eftiotae, those
of Gomphi, Phatlus, Tricca, and Etinium: That of

the

the Pelafgi, Pytheum and Atrax: That of the Magnefii
Iolcus, Herminium, Caftanea, Meliboca, and Methone,
at the siege of which King Philip loft one of his eyes:
That of the Phthiotae, Phthia, where Achilles was born,
Theffalian Thebes, Echinus, Lariffa, Demetrias, where
the Macedonian kings for some time kept their court,
and where in latter times the Etolians held their public
assemblies; and lastly Pegafse, where Argo, the famous
ship in which Jason and his followers failed in quest of
the golden fleece, was built.

EPIRUS was separated from Macedonia and Theflaly

by the river Celidnus and Mount Pindus, and from
Achaia by the river Achlous.

The mountains Acroceraunia and Pindus are the molt

remarkable in Epirus. The latter is composed of a
very extensive ridge of hills, which separate, as above
observed, Epirus from Macedonia and Theflaly, and
itretch from the Acroceraunian mountains to Mount
Oeta; which latter may be confidered as the termination
of Pindus.

Acheron and Cocytus were the most considerable

rivers in Epirus. From these rivers, and the adjacent
country, Homer, according to Pausanias, formed his
description of the infernal regions.

Epirus, contained the following towns, Dodona, in

the diftrid of the Moloffi, famous for the temple and
oracle of Dodonean Jove, where the refpinfes were said
to be delivered from the adjacent grove by black pi-
geons. What ridiculous imposition on the preposterous
curiosity of mankind! This oracle was known in thd
days of Homer and Hesiod; and, according to Strabo,
ceased in his time.- Buthrotum, in the district of
the Thefprotians, where King Pyrrhus kept his court.
In the neighbourhood of this city Cicero had a large
estate, on which he Sometimes refided.--Ambracia,
near the bay of the fame name, the royal residence of

B 3 the

the iEacidee -- Adium, off the promontory of which
now called Cape Figalo happened ,the important naval
engagement between Otavius Caesar and Mark An-
thony, which decided the fate of the Roman empire in
favour of the former.-Nicopolis, opposite to Ac-
tium, on the other fide of the bay, built by Ocavius
Caesar, in memory, as the name imports, of his vicory
just mentioned.

ACHAIA, or Greece properly so called, was bounded

on the north by the mountains Oeta and Othrys, by
which is was separated from Theflaly; on the east, by
the ZEgean sea or Archipelago; on the weft, by the
river -Achelous, which divided it from Epirus; and on
the south, by the ifthums of Corinth, a neck of land
about fix miles long, terminated by the bay of Corinth,
now called Lepanto, on the welf, and by the Saronic
bay, or bay of Egina, on the east.

The most remarkable mountains of Achaia were

Callidromus, on the border towards TheITaly, over-
hanging the pass of Thermopylae. Over this mountain
the traitor Ephialtes conduced a detachment of Xer-
xes's army, while the pass was heroically defended
againIf the main body of the tyrant's forces by a
handful of brave Greeks, commanded by the gallant
Leonidas.- Oeta, where Hercules burnt himself.-
Othrys, the country of the Lapithe. - Parnassus and
Helicon, in the diftridt of Phocis: the former termina-
ted in two tops; the one called Nyffa, consecrated to
Apollo; the other Cyrrtha, consecrated to Bacchus.
This mountain overhangs Delphi. and in fable was re-
puted the residence of the Mu'es.- Helicon stood in
the neighbourhood of Parnassus, and was likwife, ac-
cording to the poets, very much frequented by the
Muses. On this mountain, and within the grove of
the Muses, were the celebrated fountains Hypocrene
and Aganippe. Here stood the tomb of Orpheus,

about

about which, according to the ancient fabuliits, the
nightingale delighted to build her nest.-- On the de-
clivity of Helicon were the towns of Thefpia, NyfIa,
and Afcra, where Hesiod was born.- Cithaeron in
Boeotia, consecrated to Bacchus. Certain Bacchanalian
revels were celebrated there.--- ymettus in Attica,
famed for its delicious honey, and beautiful marble,
which was peculiarly adapted for ltatuary.

The only river of note in Achaia was Cephiffus,

divided into two branches; the one called A4fopus,
which separated the territory of Boeotian Thebes from
that of Megara; the other, Ifmenus, which runs near to
Thebes.

Achaia contained eight diftrids; JEtolia, Doris, Lo-
cris, Ozoloea, Phocis, Megaris, Attica, and Boeotia.

Chalcis, Olenus, and Calydon, were the chief towns

of iEtolia. Inthe neighbourhood of the latter was the
Calydonian forest; famous for the chace of the Calydo-
mian boar, which was killed by Meleager.

Doris contained the towns of Boium, Citinium, and
Pindus.

In Ozolian Locris flood the town of Naupaatus, now

called Lepanto, famous in modern times by the import-
ant naval engagement between the Spaniards, Venetians,
&c. commanded by Don John of Aufitria, and the Turks,
in which the latter were defeated with great slaughter.
--- In Epienemidian Locris were the towns Cnemides,
Opus, and Thronium.

The most remarkable towns in Phocis were Anticyra

Cyrrha, Pythia, and Delphi at the bottom of Mount
Parnassus, where the council of the Amphictyons held.
their deliberations, but chiefly celebrated for the temple
and oracle of Apollo.

In Megaris were the towns of Megara and Eleusis.

The former gave its name to the country, and was the
birth-place of Euclid the philosopher, who was so pas-

B 4 fionate

fionate an admirer of the conversation of Socrates, that,
at the hazard of his life, on account of the war then
subsisting between the Athenians and his countrymen,
he flole into Athens dressed like a woman, to liften to
that wisest of philosophers. Eleusis was consecrated to
Ceres, and was famous by the celebration of certain
religious rites in honour of that goddess, the most secret
and solemn of the multitude of religious ceremonies
observed among the Pagan idolaters,

In Attica flood Athens and Marathon. Athens was

the most distinguished city of all antiquity;-a name
that in every breast animated with the love of literature,
and of the fine arts, kindles the warmest sensations of
gratitude, admiration, and refped-. The brigheft ema-
nations of genius, the most profound and ingenious
exertions of the human mind, displayed themselves in
this propitious spot. It was situated in the middle of a
beautiful and extensive plain, about forty miles south of
Thebes, and at the fame distance to the north of the
isthmus of Corinth. It consisted of two great divisions
Cecropia and Atbelnc. The former derived its name from
Cecrops its founder; and was built on a hill, upon the
loftieft part of which flood the Citadel. The latter ex-
tended into the plain, and was called by the Greek
name of its tutelary deity Minerva. One common wall
fhrrounded both; and Athens became the general name
of the united city. The rivers llyffus and Cephyfus
meandered through the plain on the east and weft fides
of the city; and mingling their flreams, formed but one
river before they reached the sea. The temples, theatres,
and other public edifices at Athens, displayed all that
was admirable in statuary and architecture. Beyond
and adjoining to the suburbs were two celebrated walks,
which to remotest posterity will be remembered with
-veneration by every admirer of ancient philosophy. One
of them was in an ornamented garden, called Academus

from

from the name of the man to whom it had originally
belonged; and was frequented by Plato and his follow-
ers. In the other, named the Lyceum, Ariflotle and
those of his school walked and reasoned under the cover
of a shady wood; and were thence denominated Peripa-
tetics, or the Walking Philosophers.- Within the ter-
ritory of Athens flood the sea-port towns; Phalera,
Munichia, and Pyreus, all on the Saronick bay, now
called the gulph of Egina. Pyreus was the most con-
venient; and on that account was improved, enlarged
and fortified, first by Themiflocles, and afterwards by
Pericles. Though nearly five miles distant from Athens
it was joined to that city by the means of two pro-
digous walls about sixty feet high, and thick in propor-
tion, which effetualy protected the commuication.

Marathon was famous for the victory obtained by the

Greeks, commanded by the Athenian Miltiades, over
the numerous army of Darius.

Bceotia contained several famous towns. Thebes, si-

tuated between the rivers Afopus and Ifmenus. The
honour of founding this city is by some ascribed to Am-
phion; by others, to Phenician Cadmus, at the head of
a colony of his countrymen. Its citadel, called Cad-
miea, was reckoned very strong. 'Hercules and Bac-
chus,-the poets Linus and Pindar,-the philosopher
Cebes, a difiinguiflied disciple of Socrates,-and the ac-
complifhed Epaminondas, were all natives of Thebes.
---Thefpia, consecrated to the Muses, situated on the
declivity of Mount Helicon. PHRYNE, so infamous by
her morals, but so celebrated for her beauty, was a na-
tive of Thefpia*. She testified her attachment to her

native

* This lady was so dead to the modesty of her sex, and at the

fame time so vain of her personal charms, that at the seas of Nep-
tune she, in presence of all the people of Eleusis, went naked into
the sea to bathe. From this public exhibition of so beautiful a wo-
man, Apelles is said to have made an admirable picture of Ve-
nus Anadyomene.

native city, by setting up there an ineflimable ltatue of
Cupid, the masterpiece of the famous itatuary Praxi-
tiles, her passionate admirer, from whom ihe obtained
it as a present Thither multitudes thronged to gaze
on it with inexpressible delight and admiration.-
Platea stood at the bottom of Mount Citheron, on the
river Afopus, betwen Thefpia and Thebes. Here the
Greeks commanded by the Spartan Pausanias, gained
a decisive victory over the Persians, whose general, Mar-
donius, and the best troops of their army, were there
cut off.- Cheronaa, the native city of Plutarch, the
excellent biographer.---Aulis, where the Grecian
forces assembled before their expedition against Troy,
and from whence they set fail.- Leu tra, situated at
the bottom of Mount Cithaeron, on the confines of Me-
gara, between Thefpia and Platea, where the Thebans,
commanded by Epaminondas and Pelopidas, beat the
Spartans, though much superior to the Thebans in point
of numbers.

PELOPONNESUS, a peninsula, as its name imports,

now called the Morea, separated on the north from the
continent of Achaia by the isthmus of Corinth, and fur-
rounded on all its other fides by the sea; the Archipe-
lago or JEgean sea on the one hand, and the Adriatic
gulf or Ionian sea on the other.

The most considerable rivers in Peloponnefus were,

Peneus;- Aipheus, which flowing through Arcadia
and Elis, pases by Olympia;-Panyfus, the largefl.
river within the isthmus, which falls into the sea on the
coast of Meffenia;-Eurotas, which runs through La-
conia, and washes Sparta;-and Inachus, which flows
through Argis, palting by its capital Argos.

Stymphalus, Pholoe, Chronicus, and raygetus, are

the principal mountains in Peloponnefus. Stymphalus
lies between Achaia and Arcadia.-Pholoe is alofty
woody mountain in Arcadia, the summit of which is

generally

generally covered with fnow.-Chronicus stands in La-
conia. Here, according to the ancient fabulists, Sa-
turn hid himself when flying from Jupiter.-Taygetus
is situated in the neighbourhood of Sparta. It abound-
ed with wild beasts, and furnished the Spartan youth
with the amusements of the chace.

Peloponnefus was divided into fix diftrids; Achaia

properly so called, Elis, Messenia, Arcadia Laconia,
and Argis.

Corinth was the chief city in Achaia, and flood in

the middle of the isthmus that bears its name. Its cita--
del was built on a steep and lofty hill, and was account-
ed impregnable by open force. The city had two har-.
bours; Cenclrea, towards the Archipelago, whence
the Asiatic commerce was carried on; and Lechuia
towards the Adriatic, frequented by the vessels em-
ployed in the trade of Italy and Sicily. Corinth was the
most commercial town in all Greece, was very powerful
in naval strength, and acquired vast wealth by trade.
Next to Athens and Sparta it was the most considerable
ltate in ancient Greece. Lais, so celebrated for her
beauty, was a native of Corinth. Ladies of her pro-
session found there uncommon encouragement and
protedioin.-Sicyon was likewise situated in Achaia,
and was supposed to be the most ancient city in Greece.
Aratus, who distinguished himself so highly as general
of the Achaean league, was a native of Sicyon.

Elis lies on the western coaif of Peloponnefus, having

Achaia to the north, and Arcadia and Messenia to the
fouth.---Olympia, likewise called Pisa, situated on
the river Alpheus, was the chief town in Elis. Here
the Olympic games were celebrated. In its neighbour-
¢ hood' food a rich temple of Olympian Jove, of which
i the finest ornament was an ivory ilatue of the god, ex-

ecuted with exquisite art by the celebrated Phidias.

U1 *~
:"':· - Cyllene,

3 . 33
iL

-Cyllene, another city of Elis, was reputed to be the
birth-place of Mercury, thence called Cyllenius.

Messenia lay on the south-west coast of Peloponne-

sus. It was accounted the most fruitful country of all
Greece.---Maffene, Pylus, and Corone, were the
chief towns of Messenia. Pylus was the country of
Nestor, so distinguished in the Trojan war. This town
having gone to decay, was, during the Peloponnesian
war, rebuilt by the Athenians; who, about the lame
time, took possession of the Island Sphaaeria, on the
fame coast. The Athenian garrisons placed in Pylus
and Sphaaeria, harraffed the Lacedemonias extremely
during that deftruaive war.

Arcadia is a mountainous country, and forms the

centre of the Peloponnefus.--The towns of note in
this diftria were, Tegea, Stymphalus, Mantinea, and
Megalopolis. In the neighbourhood of Mantinea was
fought the bloody battle between the Thebans and their
allies on one fide, commanded by Epaminondas, and
the Lacedemonians and Athenians on the other. The
latter were defeated; but Epaminondas expired in the
arms of vicory. Megalopolis was the birth-place of
Polybius the historian.

Laconia lay on the south-east coast of Peloponnefus,

and bordered on Messenia and Arcadia.-lts chief
city was Sparta; whose inhabitants were equally dif-
tinguifhed by their bravery, and by the austerity of their
manners. It was built on the western bank of the ri-
ver Eurotas; which, being seldom fordable, protected
the town on that fide. Though situated in a plain, it
contained several eminences within its circuit. It had
no walls. Gytheum stood at the mouth of the Eurotas
on the coast of the Archipelago, and was the chief sea
port of Laconia.-In Laconia were likewise the towns
of Leuarum aud Amyclae.

Argis, also named Argolis, and Argia, lay on the

eastern

eaitern coast of Peloponnefus; and was bounded by Ar-
cadia on the weft, and by Laconia on the south.- It
contained the towns of Argos, Nemaea, Mycenae,Nau-
plia, Trsezene, and Epidaurus. Argos, the capital,
flood on the banks of the river Inachus: In this city
Pyrrhus King of Epirus loft his life. Nemwea was si-
tuated between Argos and Corinth: Here the Nemae-
an games were celebrated in honour of Hercules. My-
cenae was the chief town of Agamemnon's kingdom,
and that king's royal residence. Epidaurus was a ma-
ritime town, where there was a famous temple of iE-
fculapius.

The seas which surround Greece are every where in-
terfperfed with numberless ISLANDS.

In the Egean sea, we observe 1uboea, Salamis, E-

gina, Sciro, Tenedos, Lemnos, Samothrace, Lesbos,
and Chios.

Euboea is separated from the Continent of Boeotia by

a very narrow branch of the sea called Euripus. This
island is about 90 miles long and 20 broad; and is fruit-
ful in corn and wine. A remarkable irregularity of
the tides happens in the Euripus; from the 9th to the
25th days of the moon, the sea ebbs.and flows there
twelve, thirteen, or fourteen times in the twenty four
hours, with a molf rapid current. Anciently Eubcea
contained two wealthy towns, Caryftus and Chalcis.
Near the former were quarries of fine marble. Here
was found the asbestos, a species of sone that may be
separated into thin pliable threads, which the ancients
wove into cloth. This cloth, when dirty, was put into
the fire, which purified it as water purifies linen, with-
out consuming it. Chalcis flands at the Euripus, op-
pofite to Aulis in Bceotia. It was a very populus city,
and sent out many colonies. Here Aristotle breathed his
]hft.

Sciros contained the tomb of Theseus. Here too,

according-

according to the poets, Achilles was concealed among'
the women of Lycomedes, prince of the iland, to a-
void going to the siege of Troy, where it was foretold
he should be killed.

Tenedos wag a little island, not far from Troy.
Lemn'os is of a square from, each fide being about

seven leagues long. Here, according to the ancient
fabulists, Vulcan fell when kicked out of heaven by Ju-
piter. Hence Vulcan is denominated Lemnius. Terra
Lemnia, a production of this island, is a mineral fa-
mous for its medicinal' virtues.--From Lemrios Ho-
mer speaks of wine being sent to the Greeks when be-
sieging Troy.

Lesbos, about seventeen leagues in length and seven

in breadth, was celebrated for its beautiful women, its
excellent wine, and its fertility. Its natives were ac-
counted fine fingers. Mytilene was its chief town.-
Sappho the poetess; and Pittacusthe sage, were natives
of Lesbos.

The wine of Chios was likewise highly efleemed. It

was the necar of the ancients. This island is about
fourteen leagues in circumference. The women of

IChios were uncmmonly beautiful.
jEgina-, also called lEnone, lay in the Saronick bay

between Attica and Megaris. Being a powerful naval
slate in the neighbourhood of Pireus, the harbour of
Athens, it excited the jealousy of the Athenians; who
having quarrelled with the .IEginete. passed a law, one
of the most barbarous that occurs in liftory, ordaining
the thumbs of such of them as fell into their hands to
be cut off, to disable them from working at the oar.

Salamis, the kingdom of Telamon, father to Ajax and

Teucer, was famous by the important viaory obtained
in its neighbourhood by the Grecian fleet over'that of
Xerxes.-The Athenians suffered so severely by a long
Itruggle with the Megarenfians about this island, that,

at

at length, they entirely relinquished the attempt, and
declared it capital for any person to propose a renewal
of the enterprise. But Solon, sensible of the great ad-
vantage which the Athenians might derive from having
the command of the island, compoied verses to incite
them to recommence the attempt. To avoid the pu-
niflment enaaed by the law juit mentioned, he affeEt-
ed to be mad; and, in that character, ran through the
streets declaiming his verses with great vehemence.
The stratagem succeeded, and his countrymen recover-
ed the island.

The Cyclades, a cluster of twelve little islands, lying

in a circular form, as the name imports, round Delos;
and the Sporades, another collecion of small islands,
more distant from one another, and scattered round the
Cyclades, lie more' near to the entry of the 2Egean sea,
towards Crete.---Of the Cyclades, the most confi-
derable was Andros, in the neighbourhood of Euboea;
iDelos, and Paros famous for its beautiful marble. -
Delos, from what the ancients have written of it,
should seem to have been suddenly produced by some
violent convulsion in the earth occasioned by an earth-
quake*. According to poetical -fable, Delos was
;the birth-place of Apollo and Diana, the children of
|Latona. It contained a river called Cynthus, whence
[Apollo is sometimes called CyntbiJu, and Diana Cyn-
tthia. Many Corinthian merchants, after the deitruc-
|tion of their native city by the Romans, were induced
|to fettle at Delos on account of its convenient harbour.
--- Of the Sporades, the most considerable islands
were Icaria, Patmos, Samos, Cos, and Carpathus.
1Samos is situated opposite to Ephesus, at the distance

of

' In the year 1707, three or four islands were, by a similar convul-

sion, produced in the most southerly part of the Archipelago. The
largest of these is called Santorin, and is about ten leagues in circumfe-
Irence. It is a rock of pumice stone, covered to the depth of nine or
twelve inches with earth.

of about fix miles from the continent of Asia Minor.
It is about ten leagues long, and five broad. Pytha-
goras was born here. Juno too was accounted a na-
tive of Samos. Cos was the birth-place of the painter
Apelles, and of the Prince of Physicians Hippocrates.

In the Ionian sea, the chief islands were Corcyra, Ce-

phalenia. 'acynthus and Ithaca. Homer places the
Phaace, and the gardens of King Alcinous, in Corcyra.
Here the Corinthians eflablifhed a colony about half a
century before Solon's time.- Anthony, Cicero's
colleague in the consulate, was banished to Cephalenia
where he laid the foundations of a new town. The
inhabitants of Zacynthus were an effeminate race, e-
nervated by luxury, the consequence of their wealth.
--Ithaca, situated to the east of Cephalenia, is chiefly
distinguished by being the kingdom and the residence
of Ulyfles.

Crete, the largest of all the islands which surround

Greece, lies beyond the entry into the Aigean sea. It
is reckoned to be about 2oo00 miles long and 60 broad.
It produced corn and fruit in great plenty, and was fa-
mous for its excellent wine. Its inhabitants, reputed,
with much probability, to have been originally a Phe-
nician colony, were anciently a warlike people. They
had good cavalry; and were expert at the bow, and in
naval engagements.-Their laws were much admi-
red by the Greeks ; and the memory of their legislator
Minos was highly venerated.- The Cretans after-
wards degenerated extremely, and became infamous
for their piracy and voluptuoufnefs. - Gortyna, Cy-
don, and Gnoffus, were the chief cities of Crete: and
Ida and Diicte were its most remarkable mountains. It
had no rivers of any note.

The large islands of Cyprus and Rhodes are situated

in the eastern extremity of the Mediterranean sea; but
anciently were not numbered among the Grecian islands

The

The former lies about 30 miles weft of the coast of Syria,
and is about 150 miles, long and 70 broad. Rhodes is
only about 20 miles distant from the coast of Caria in
Asia Minor. It is about 50 miles long and 20 broad.

The ancient Greeks sent out many colonies, parti-

cularly to Italy, to Sicily, and to Asia Minor. In the
last mentioned country, these colonies poflefled a large
trat of country along the fea-coait, diitinguithed into
three provinces, Eolia, lonia, and Doris.

Eolia lay on the coast of the IEgean sea, having the

province of Troas or Little Phrygia to the north, and
lonia to the south. More anciently, and before the Eo-
lians fettled there, it was called ljlyfia.-- 1he cities
of chief note in this province were Cuma, Phocea, and
Elea. Cuma was reported to have been founded by
Pelops, and was a maritime town. Phocea flood at the
mouth of the river Thermus, between Cuma and Smyr-
na, and was built by an Athenian colony. Marseilles,
in the south of France, is, by some authors, supposed
to have been founded by a colony from Phocea.-
Elea was a sea-port town at the mouth of the river Cia-
cus. Here Zeno, the founder of the fed of Stoics,
was born.

lonia lay to the south of Eolia. Its inhabitants, the

lonians, who gave their name to the country, had, ac-
cording to their own traditious, emigrated thither from
Attica. Its principal cities were Smyrna, Clazomene,
Teos, Lebedus, Colophon, and Ephesus. Smyrna was
a rich commercial city, remarkable for.the beauty of
its Situation. Clazomenas flood upon the coall; and
was the birth-place of the philosopher Anaxagoras, the
instructor of the illustrious Pericles. Teos was situated
on a bay of the sea opposite to Clazomenwe: Here A-
nacreon, the celebrated Lyric poet, was born. Lebe-
dus flood likewise on the coast: Here annual games
were performed in honour of Bacchus. Colophon was
f£mous for an oracle of Apollo in its neighbourhood;

-C but

but more famous still by having the most plausible claim
to the honour of being the birth-place of Homer, the
Prince of Epic Poets. But of all the cities of lonia, E-
phefus was the most diitinguifhed. It was situated on
the coait between the rivers Cayfter and Maeander.
Its principal ornament was the renowned temple of
Diana, one of the most magnificent edifices that ever
the world saw.

Doris lay to the south of Ionia. Halicarnassus and

Cnidus were its two principal:cities. Herodotus, the
Father of -History, was a native of the former; but
removed, with a colony of his countrymen, to Thu-
rium in Italy. Here too Dionysius, surnamed the
HalicarnfiaSn n, was born. At Cnidus there was a fta-
tue of Venus of inestimable value, executed by the fa-
mous Praxitiles. Cnidus too was the birth-place of
Ctefias the physician; who having accompained Cyrus
the younger in his unnatural expedition againit his bro-
ther Artaxerxes, was made prisoner at the battle of
Cunaxa, ard remained at the Perflan court seventeen
years. In this period he is said to have- written a vo-
luminous history of the Persians and Assyrians *

The Pelafgi, who, by their own account, derived

their descent from Pelafgus, are, on probable grounds,
supposed to have been the most ancient inhabitants of
Greece mentioned in tradition.

The Greeks, in their more early times, were, like e-

very other people, a savage race, utterly ignorant of agri-
culture; and they paid divine honours to Pelafgus, who

had

* Ctefias, in his history, seems to have differed in various particulars

from Herodotus, whose accuracy he affcEed to queftioi. Ctefias too
was hlmfelf fufpeted by the posterior Greek writers, and by Plutarch
among the reft, both of credulity in historical rclearches, and of va-
nity as to what related to himself. But as Herodotus, as well as Cte-
fias, wrote principally from tradition, they may have been both mifin-
formed: and from their disagreement, as well as from the nature of
things, we may perceive how little credit-is due to the history of retri;le
nations and ages not otherwise futpported than by tradition.

had taught' them-to fed'on'acorns, as affording-a morefo-
lid and substantial nourishment than:herbs and: roots.

It appears, that they bore: originally the name of

Greeksr: which; however they foon:loft ; for: Hellen, the
£on' of Deucalion king' of Lycia, having subdued2 the
Peloponnese, called the- people after his, own. name,
Hellenes, and the country, itself Hellas.

Acheus and Ion, grandsons of Hellen, became- the

chiefs of two tribes-; the former; of the Acheans, who
inhabited Achaia; and'the other, of- the: lonians, who
possessed the territory called-afterwards Lacedemon.

Eolus and Dorus; likewise- two descendents. of Hel-

len, were in the fame manner chiefs of two other tribes
called after their names; Eolus of the Eolians, who,
under Pelops-fon of Tantalus, fettled in Laconia; and
Dorus of the Dorians., who occupied the country of
Doris, in the' neighbourhood of Mount Partnaffus; As-
terwards the Ieraclide, or descendents of Hercules, inva-
ded the Peloponnese, and drove out the Acheans and Io-
nians; who thereupon retired to the coast of Asia Minor.

IN order to treat this history in a more diftint and

methodical manner, we flall divide it into four ages or
periods, including, altogether, a space of 1938 years.

The firit age extends from the foundation of the

finall kingdom of Sicyon, accounted the molt ancient
in Greece, about the year before Christ, according to
our computation, 2084, to the beginning of the war
between the Greeks and Persians, about the year 494,
a space of 159o years.

The second age extends from the commencement of

the war between the Greeks and Persians, to the con-
clufion of the Peloponnesian war in the year 404, a
space of go years.

The third age extends from the conclusion of the

Peloponnesian war to the death of Alexander the Great
in the year 323, a space of 8i years.

C 2 The

but more famous still by having the most plau/sible claim
to the honour of being the birth-place of Homer, the
Prince of Epic Poets. But of allthe citiesof Inia, E-
phefus was the most diflinguifhed. It was situated on
the coast between the rivers Cayfler and Ma'ander.
Its principal ornament was the renowned temple of
Diana, one of the most magnificent edifices that ever
the world saw.

Doris lay to the south of lonia. Halicarnassus and

Cnidus were its two principal cities. Herodotus, the
Father of "History, was a native of the former; but
removed, with'a colony of his countrymen, to Thu-
rium in Italy. Here too Dionysius, surnamed the
HalicarnOzaJian, was born. At Cnidus there was a fta-
tue of Venus of inefrimable value, executed by the fa-
mous Praxitiles. Cnidus too was the birth-place of
Ctefias the physician; who having accompained Cyrus
the younger in his unnatural expedition against his bro-
ther Artaxerxes, was made prifoncr at the battle of
Cunaxa, arid remained at the Persian court seventeen
years. In this period he is said to have- written a vo-
luminous history of the' Persians and Assyrians *.

The Pelafgi, who, by their own account, derived

their descent from Pelafgus, are, on probable grounds,
supposed to have been the most ancient inhabitants ol
Greece mentioned in tradition.

The Greeks, in their more early times, were, like e-

very other people, a savage race, utterly ignorant of agri-
culture; and they paid divine honours to Pelafgus, who

had

* Ctefias, in his history, seems to have differed in various particulars

from Herodotus, whose accuracy he affcted to queftiori. Ctefias too
was hlmfelf fiufpeEted by the posterior Greek writers, and by Plutarch
among the reft, both of credulity in historical researches, and of va-
nity as to what related to hlimfelf. But as Herodotus, as well as Cte-
fias, wrote principally from tradition, they may have been both mifin-
formed: and from their disagreement, as well as from' the nature of
things, we may perceive how little credit is due to the history of remfile
nations and ages not otherwise supported than by tradition.

had taught them to fed'on'acorns, as affording a more-fo-
lid and substantial nouriihment than-herbs and: roots..

It appears, that they bore: originally the name of

Greeks':- which; however they. soon loft ; for: Hellen, the
£on, of Deucalion liing' of. Lycia, having subdued the
Peloponnese,. called the- people after his. own. name,
Hellenes, and the countr-y itself Hellar..

Acheus and: Ion; grandsons of Hellen; became- the

chiefs of two tribes-; the former; of the Acheans, who
inhabited Achaia; and the other, of the: lonians,. who
possessed the territory called- afterwards Lacedemon.

Eolus and Dorus; likewise- two defcenderts: of Hel-

len, were in the fame manner chiefs of two other tribes
called' after their names; Eolus of the Eo'ians,, who,
under Pelops-fon, of Tantalus, fettled in Laconia; and
Dorus of the -Dorians, who occupied the country of
Doris, in the- neighbourhood of Mount P;arnassus. As-
terwards the Iteraclidz,, or descendents of Hercules, inva-
ded the Peloponnese, and drove out the Acheans and Io-
nians; who thereupon retired to the coast of Asia Minor.

IN order to treat this history in a more diftind and

methodical manner, we shall divide it into four ages or-
periods, including, altogether, a space of 1938 years.

The first age extends from the foundation of the

finall kingdom of Sicyon, accounted the most ancient
in Greece, about the year before Christ, according to
our computation, 2084, to the beginning of the war
between the Greeks and Persians, about the year 494,
a space of s59o years.

The second age extends from the commencement of

the war between the Greeks and Persians, to the con.
clufion of the Peloponnelian war in the year 404, a
space of 90 years.

The third age extends from the conclusion of the

Peloponnesian war to the death of Alexander the Great
in the year 323, a space of 8i years.

C2 The
i

The fourth and last age extends from the death of

Alexander the Great to the time when Greece became
a Roman province, soon after the deftrucion of Co-
rinth, about the year 146, a space of about x77 years.

The end of the history of Greece is, by other writers,

extended to the period of the extinction of the govern-
ment of the Seleucidae in Asia,.. by Pompey the Great,
in the year before Christ 65: And, by some authors, it
is even extended to the time that the race of the Lagidae
failed in Egypt, in the person of the famous Cleopatra,
when that country was reduced into the form of a Ro-
man province by Augustus Cwefar, in the year after
Christ 30.

To the whole ihall be Subjoined an account of the

mot- memorable tranfaaions in Greater Greece, which
comprehended, as we have already observed, the island
of Sicily, and a considerable part of the present king-
dom of Naples on the continent of Italy.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing the History of the FIRST AGE of GREECE.

T II E
H I S T O R Y

O F
ANCIENT GREECE.

B 0 0 K I.

Containing the HiJiory of the FIRST AGE of GREECE.

T1 HIS first age may be called the infancy of Greece.
It presents at first to our view a country divided into
several small principalities, such as the kingdoms of
Sicyon, of Athens, of Sparta, of Thebes, &c. which are
thought to have been refpedively founded by different
colonies of Egyptians and Phenicians. In the next
place, it comprehends the heroic times, under which
are placed the expedition of the Argonauts, the cruelty
of the Danaides, the labours of Ilercules, the siege of
Thebes, the siege of Troy, and other ancient events,
which have been greatly disguised by the fables of the
poets. For the whole mythology, and the various me-
tamorphofes with which their works abound, are nothing
else than the events of the ancient Greek history, dif-
figured and transformed by the licentious marvellous of
those first poets.

The colonies just now mentioned contributed to hu-

manize and soften the savage manners of the original
Greeks. Of the Phenicians they learned navigation
and commerce; and of the Egyptians, law, religion,
the rudiments of the fine arts, and bodily exercises.

C 3 The

# CHAP. I. A general account of the ancient principalities of Greece, from their earliest times till the abolition of the kingly government in all but Sparta.

The Greeks, gradually emerging from barbarism, ac-

quired by degrees juster notions of every thing Each
individual began to regard his family as a member of the
itate, and his native country as a common mother.
Hence they soon became sensible of the necessity and
nature of government. At first the regal power gene-
rally prevailed. But in process of time most of the states
assumed the republican form of government; which, as
it opens a way for every the lowest member to arrive at
honours and offices, begets in the breasts of the citi-
zens a more than ordinary love of their country. The
offices of trust, too, in such a government, being com-
monly confined in their duration to a year, or some such
short space, could hardly be converted to any bad pur-
pose by those who pofieffed them, sensible how soon they
miaft resign them and return to a level with their fel-
low-citizens, and that they were obliged to render a
stria account of their administration. Besides, their
laborious course of life, chiefly spent in the cultivation
of the ground, preserved them, in a great measure,
from the more hurtful and vicious passions, and main-
tained a certain degree of equality among all the mem-
bers of the state. Hence simplicity and sobriety, with
their concomitant virtues, were holden in honour and
esteem. Such were the Greeks during this first age,
and the greater part of the second.

CH AP. I.
A general account of the ancient principalities .of Greece,

from their earlieJl times till the abolition of the kingly
government in all but Sparta.

T HEh-hiftory of the-fiirt ages of Greece is, -liie that
of the beginnings of all other nations, involved in al-
mast - impenetrable obfcr'ity. This obscurity - gives

'ro 0IM

room for fiscion; which, while it fills up the total blank
of remote antiquity with imagiary events and revolu-
tions, disguises at the fame time, and embellishes, the
few real occurrences of later times of which some re-
membrance was itill preserved, in such a manner that
they become marvellous, unnatural, and incredible.

Some learned men have laboured to diftinguiih fa&

from fable in this indigested chaos; and their invefti-
gations furnish evidence of their extensive reading, and
frequently, though not always, discover much discern-
ment and ingenuity. But this is all the praise that can
be given them. For a sagacious and attentive reader
generally perceives their theories to be directed by some
particular bias, and finds their deduations inconclusive
and unfatisfadory.

But the unavoidable ignorance of the more ancient

history of nations, though it may be matter of regret
to philosophers, is no material loss to other readers.
For what useful information could have been thence de-
rived, even if their tranfadions had been faithfully re-
corded by writers who had lived in those times? We
ihould peruse but the annals of various tribes of sava-
ges, roaming about from place to place as accidents di-
rec them, struggling with the seasons, and with their
brotber-beajts, and governed in their pursuits by imme-
diate neceility rather than by rational design. To the
philosopher, who desires to trace man from the brute
state to that of society, such a history might be useful;
but to other readers it would afford little infiruftion,
and less entertainment. Mankind in this state should
seem to be a fitter subjet for natural philosophy than for
history.

The ancient poets of Greece were likewise its first

historians. The fame has been the cafe with most other
nations. The objec of those poets having been to
please and to surprise rather than to confine themselves
to the plain narration of matters of fad, their defcrip-

C 4 tion

tions are wonderful past all bounds of credibility, and
exhibit a motely medley of miracles, monfiers, demi-
gods, and heroes.

We flould therefore very willingly have omitted to

take any notice of the absurd fables of the more ancient
history of Greece, were not the knowledge of them ne-
ceffary to those who peruse the writings of the ancients,
which otherwise must in many places prove totally un-
intelligible. For this reason alone we proceed to this
disagreeable and disgusting talk; which, however, we
shall discuss with all possible brevity.

Greece in its more ancient times, was divided into

these seven finall kingdoms or principalities; Sicyon,
Argos, Mycene, Thebes, Corinth, Sparta, and Athens.
Of each of these in its order.

S I C Y 0 N.

THE kingdom of Sicyon took its name
2Ilo * from Sicyon, a town of the Peloponnese, si-

tuated near the isthmus of Corinth, and by

some accounted the most ancient city of Greece. Egi-
aleus is mentioned as its first king; but historians are
not agreed about the number of his fucceflfrs. Indeed
this kingdom never poffefred much power, nor made
any considerable figure.

We cannot speak with any tolerable certainty of the

other small kingdoms effablifled about the fame time
with that of Sicyon.

A R G S.

THE principality of Argos furpafied both in
I856. power and wealth that of Sicyon. The names

of its kings that occur in history are there: Ina-
chus, Phoroneus, Apis, Argus, Criafus, Phorbas, Tri-

opas,

* This and all the other dates are expressive of the year before
CH IST.

opas, Erotopus, Sthenelus, Gelanor, Danaus, Lynceus,
Abas, Praetus, Acrifius.

Phoroneus endeavoured to humanize his subje&s, in-

fluencing their minds by the terrors of religion, and
their ations by the restraint of laws. He gained feve-
ral advantages over the Arcadians in war, and reduced
the Pcloponnefe under his power. Argus, from whom
the chief city of the kingdom derived its name, is rec-
koned the first who yoked oxen in the plough. Criafus
was the firif who dedicated altars to the goddess Juno.
Inachus is famous for being the father of Io, who has
afforded so much matter for poetical fiction.

Here occurs the fable of the Danaides, told in sub-

stance thus.: Egyptus King of Egypt having fifty sons,
resolved to marry them to the like number of daughters
of his brother Danaus; who, to avoid the alliance, fled
to Argos. The Ihip in. which he transported himself
was the first of any corifiderable size that had appeared
on the coasts of Greece. Upon arriving at Argos, he
claimed the crown, as being a descendant of Epaphus;
and was on that footing preferred to Gelanor, who was.
then in possession of it. Egyptus, in the mean time,
apprehensive left Danaus fliould become too powerful
by the alliances he might procure from the marriages of
his fifty daughters, dispatched his fifty sons at the head
of an army, to insist on the daughters receiving them'
for husbands. Their uncle Danaus, finding himself
solicited in so forcible a manner, was obliged to con-
sent; but he privately persuaded his daughters to mur-
der their refpedtive husbands the first night of their
marriage; a most ihocking cruelty, which these daugh-
ters, however, were not afraid to perpetrate. Linceus,
the husband of the daughter named HlypermneJfra, a-
lone escaped this horrible massacre. This ltory is absurd
and incredible.

Acrifius and Praetus, two twin-brothers, and sons of
Linceus, disputed the kingdom with each other; but

came

tions are wonderful past all bounds of credibility, and
exhibit a motely medley of miracles, monsters, demi-
gods, and heroes.

We lhould therefore very willingly have omitted to

take any notice of the absurd fables of the more ancient
history of Greece, were not the knowledge of them ne-
ceffary to those who peruse the writings of the ancients,
which otherwise must in many places prove totally un-
intelligible. For this reason alone we proceed to this
disagreeable and disgusting talk; which, however, we
mhall discuss with all possible brevity.

Greece in its more ancient times, was divided into

these seven finall kingdoms or principalities; Sicyon,
Argos, Mycene, Thebes, Corinth, Sparta, and Athens.
Of each of these in its order.

S I CYO N.

THE kingdom of Sicyon took its name
2101 * from Sicyon, a town of the Peloponnese, si-

tuated near the isthmus of Corinth, and by

some accounted the molt ancient city of Greece. Egi-
aleus is mentioned as its first king; but historians are
not agreed about the number of his successors. Indeed
this kingdom never possessed much power, nor made
any considerable figure.

We cannot speak with any tolerable certainty of the

other small kingdoms established about the fame time
with that of Sicyon.

AR G S.

THE principality of Argos surpassed both in
1856. power and wealth that of Sicyon. The names

of its kings that occur in history are there: Ina-
chus, Phoroneus, Apis, Argus, Criafus, Phorbas, Tri-

opas,

X This and all the other dates are expressive of the year before
CHRIST.

opas, Erotopus, Sthenelus, Gelanor, Danaus, Lynceus,
Abas, Praetus, Acrifius.

Phbroneus endeavoured to humanize his fubjeds, in-

fluencing their minds by the terrors of religion, and
their ations by the restraint of laws. He gained feve-
ral advantages over the Arcadians in war, and reduced
the Pcloponnefe under his power. Argus, from whom
the chief city of the kingdom derived its name, is rec-
koned the first who yoked oxen in the plough. Criafus
was the first who dedicated altars to the goddess Juno.
Inachus is famous for being the father of Io, who -has
afforded so much matter for poetical fiction.

Here occurs the fable of the Danaides, told in sub -

stance thus.: Egyptus King of Egypt having fifty sons,
resolved to marry them to the like number of daughters
of his brother Danaus; who, to avoid the alliance, fled
to Argos. The Ihip in. which he transported himself
was the first of any considerable size that had appeared
on the coasts of Greece. Upon arriving at Argos, he
claimed the crown, as being a descendant ofEpaphus;
and was on that footing preferred to Gelanor, who was.
then in possession of it. Egyptus, in the mean time,
apprehensive left Danaus fliould become too powerful
by the alliances he might procure from the marriages of
his fifty daughters, dispatched his fifty sons at the head
of an army, to insist on the daughters receiving them-
for husbands. Their uncle Danaus, finding himself
solicited in so forcible a manner, was obliged to con-
sent; but he privately persuaded his daughters to mur-
der their refpeaive husbands the first night of their
marriage; a most ihocking cruelty, which there daugh-
ters, however, were not afraid to perpetrate. Linceus,
the husband of the daughter named HypermzneJra, a-
lone cfcaped this horrible massacre. This story is absurd
and incredible.

Acrifius and Praetus, two twin-brothers, and sons of
Linceus, disputed the kingdom with each other; but

came

came to an agreement at last; whereby the crown of
Argos was reserved to Acrifius; and Tirinthus, with
some other places,were yielded to Pratus. This Acrifius
was the father of the beautiful Danae, so celebrated by
the poets. Acrifius having been warned by an oracle,
that his grandson ihould occasion his death, placed his
daughter in close confinment. But a prince, named
Jupiter, bribed her guard, gained admittance into the

tower wherein she was confined, and married
1361. her. Perseus was the fruit of this clandestine

marriage.

Many wonderful acions are ascribed to this Perseus.
ie is said to have destroyed monsters ;-to have.killed
Medusa, who is believed to have been a queen in A-
frica, whose kingdom he conquered ;-and to have re-
fcued Andromeda from a fea-monfter; that is to fay,
from some person who was to have carried her away in
a ihip. Perseus coming at last into Thessaly, to be pre-
sent at certain public games, killed Acrilius by acci-
dent.

About the fame time Pelops, the son of Tantalus king

of Phrygia, having married Hippodamia, the daughter
of Oenomaos king of Pisa, succeeded his father-in-law
in his kingdom and reigned very long. He made
himself master of the Peloponnese, and had a vast
number of descendents, famous in the history of
Greece, where they are distinguished by the name of
Pelopidca.

MY c E N E.

Perseus transferred the throne of Argos to
1344. Mycene, and give the city of Argos to his son

Anaxagoras, who was the father of a pretty

long race, by whom he was succeeded in that principa-
lity. The reign of Perseus was of fifty-eight years du-
ration, and afforded him sufficient time for eftablilhing

I on

on a firm.foundation his new kingdom of Mycene. The
names of his successors were, Sthenelus, Eurystheus,
Aterus, Thyestes, Agamemnon, Egifteus, Orestes, Ti-
famenes.

It was :Eurystheus who imposed on Hercules the

twelve labours so much exaggerated by fable. It
seems to be admitted by historians, that several heroes
existed, in different nations, under this name of Her-
cules, which appears to have been a general.appella-
tion beflowed on those who difiinguiflhed themselves
by extraordinary feats of valour. But in the end, the
exploits of all the reft were, by the Grecian fabulists,
appropriated to their own countryman, who was the
son of Alcmena by Amphytrion, or, as the poets will
have it, by Jupiter, the chief of the gods; but who
truly has been some neighbouring prince of that name.
Eurystheus, from a jealousy of the bravery of Hercules,
engaged him in several dangerous enterprises, wherein
he hoped he might perish. These enterprises have in
fable obtained the name of the twelve labours; and are
there rendered romantic, past all bounds of probability.
The Nemean lion, and the seven headed hydra, must
certainly have been robbers or murderers extripated by
Hercules: For in those early ages, persons of extraor-
dinary courage travelled about in search of great ad-
ventures, something in the manner of our modern
knight-errants.

The expedition of the Argonaunts mulf be

placed about this time. Jason, a young prince I263.
of Thessaly, was instigated to this undertaking
by his uncle Pelias; who having usurped his throne, ho-
ped that his nephew might fall in the expedition. The
enterprise was deemed so bold and hazardous, that the
bravest men in Greece thought themselves bound in
honour to participate in the glory of it. Hercules there-
fore, with Castor and Pollux, Theseus, Peleus, Laertes,
and Telamon, accompained Jason in the expedition; to-

gether

gether with Argus, by whose direction the ship that tranf-
ported them to Colchos was conftruded, and which on
that account was named 4Argo. These intrepid adven-
terers pased through the Hellespont, the Propontis, and
the Thracian Bosphorus into the Euxine sea, which they
traversed to the mouth of the river Phafus in the terri-
tory of Colchos at the most easterly extremity of that
sea. Though too few to proceed by open force, and
too diftinguifhied, according to the ideas of modern
times, to at basely; yet it seems to be certain, that
wealth was on this occasion the object of those Grecian
heroes; and that the vast treasures of Etes, a prince of
that country, was the prize at which they aimed. The
adventurers accordingly succeeded in their enterprise,
and that too without any blood being spilt; for Medea,
the daughter of Etes, having fallen in love with Jason,
put him in pofleffion of all her father's wealth, to induce
him to marry her. This Medea became afterwards fa-
mous by her Ikill in sorcery, and infamous by her
wickednefs.-The poets have been pleased to assign a
golden fleece, which was guarded by a dragon, for the
object of this expedition, and to deck the story in showy
fables: and the voyage was at that time judged to be fb
dangerous and wonderful, that one of the brightest
constellations in the heavens was called Argo, after the
name of the ihip.

To return to Hercules. That hero, after having ac-

quired immortal glory, burnt himself on Mount Oeta,
in an excess of pain, occasioned, as we are told, by the
poisoned shirt given him by his wife Dejanira, by the
persuasion of his rival Nessus. This fabulous story fig-
nifies, perhaps, that Dejanira, in a fit of jealousy, may
have given him a potion which rendered him furious,
and killed him.

Eurystheus, actuated by the fame hatred and cruelty

against the children of Hercules that he had entertained
against their father, expelled them the Peloponnese.

They

They were known by the name of Heraclide, and took
refuge in Attica; where Eurystheus having again at-
tacked them, was defeated and slain. Upon this they
returned into the Peloponnese; but three years after,
Hellen, the eldest of them, having been defeated by a
king of Tegea, the reft of his kindred were obliged to
disperse through different countries.

After the death of Eurystheus, his nephew Atreus,

the son of Pelops, took possession of the Peloponnese,
where his posterity reigned after him under the appella-
tion of Pelopida. This Atreus rendered himself re-
markable by his cruelty. Having discovered that his
brother Thyestes carried on a criminal correspondence
with his wife Europa, he first banished him; but after-
wards having recalled him, he killed Thyestes's son Pe-
lops, and served up the flesh of his body as a dish to his
father. This fad, however, depends on no better'au-
thority than that of the poets, and may therefore be just-
ly enough called in quefti6n. But it has nevertheless
furnished subjed for the Tragic Muse, both in ancient
and modern times. Agamemnon, son of Plifthenes,
and grandson of Atreus, is supposed to have been the
successor of Atreus in the kingdom of Argos an'd My-
cene. Agamemnon was a very powerful prince, and
on that account was chosen commander in chief of the
Grecian forces in the war, against Troy.

ET H.E B E S.

CADMUS, a native of Egypt, and the son of

Agenor, is reckoned'the first king of Thebes. 1493.
Under pretence of seeking for his fliter, who had
been carried off by a prince called Juzpiter, he led a co-
lony of Phenicians into Greece, and founded that city.
Cadmus is said to have introduced into Greece the Phe-
nician alphabet. The invention of letters, which is
generally attributed to the Phenicians, is the most won-

l ' derful,

d'erfil, arid the most' useful, of all the' inventions' of
man.-The successors of Cadmus were, Polydore, Lab-
dacus, arid Lycus.

In the time of the last of these, Amphion and Zethus

miade tliemfelves masters of Thebes, and assumed' the
sovereign power. Amphion being a man of a mild dif-
position, and very eloquent, persuaded' the- Thebans vo-
luntarily to confirm him and his colleague-in the royality,
and likewise to take more effe&ual measures for the de-
fence of their city. This no doubt, has given occasion
to the poetical fable, of Amphion having built the'walls
of Thebes by the music of his lyre. His reign, however,
was but of fliort duration; for Laius, the son of Labda.-
cus, soon recovered the kingdom.

Laius having. married a lady called ybciata, was

told' by the oracle, that the son she brought him
would occasion his death. As soon therefore as the
boy was born, he ordered him to be exposed. But
some fiepherds found the child, saved him from perifli-
ing, and called him Oedipus. Happening, when grown
up, to meet with his father in the country of Phocis, he
quarrelled with the- old man, and flew him, without
knowing him to be his father. Creon, thereupon; the
brother of Jocasta, usurped the crown.

Here the truth of the- Theban' history is disfigured

and disguised by the fables of the poets. They tell us,
that a sphinx appeared on the sea-shore, proposed a
riddle to all passengers, and dievoured those that could
not solve it. Creon ordered proclamation to be made
through all Greece, that he would b'ftow- the-kingdom
of Thebes, together with i'ts queen Jocasta, on the man
that would solve the fphiix's riddle. Oedipus ander-
tookl the businesss; and orn being aflked by the sphinx,;
Whatr was'thbe animal that 'salked i-' the m7orinirngonfour
feet, at noon on two, and at night On three ? he' answered,
Thrd it' was mnan;- alluding to his being able only to
crawl about. in early infancy, to walk' in manhood:,

and

and' to support himself in old age with' a faff. The
fphirix, enraged at finding her riddle- understood, threw
herfeIf into the sea. Oedipus, as the reward of his in-
genuity, received' Jocasta- in marriage, and the king-
dom of Thebes for her dowry. A violent' plague im-
mediately desolates Bceotia; and the oracle being ap-
plied to on the occasion, gives for answer, that it would
continue to rage till the murderer of Laius were banish-
ed. After much inquiry, the mystery is discovered.
Oedipus perceiving that he is not only the murderer of
his father, but the hufland of his own mother, is firuck
with the utmost horror, and in despair plucks out his
eyes, or, more truly, perhaps, banishes himself from
the fight of his fubjeas by a voluntary retirement; and
Jocaffa; in an excess of grief, firangles herself. The
tragic poets, in all ages; have found this a proper sub-
jedc on which to exercise their muse.

Eteocles and Polinices, the unhappy fruits of

the inceffuous marriage of Oedipus and his mo- 1225.
ther, loon became famous for their mutual ani-
mofity and- hatred to each other. In this difpofi-
tion they both aspired' to the throne; and could find no
other mean of reconcilement, that by agreeing to reign
alternately; each a year at a- time. But Eteocles having
been first preferred to the regal dignity, on account of
his being the elder brother, refused, upon the expiry
of his year, to resign the throne to Polinices. The lat-
ter, upon this, implored the afliftance of Adrastus king
of Argos ;- who not only joined him hinfelf, but soon
formed a powerful confederacy in- his favour, and im-
mediately declared war against Eteocles. Thebes, ac-
cordiiigly, is beiieged under t-he conduct of seven fa-
mous commanders, Adraitus, Polinices, Tydeus, Am-
phiaraus; Capaneus, Hypomedon, and Parthenopeus.
Of these commanders the greater part periflied in the
course of the siege; which, after occasioning the effu-
sion of much-blood, was at last relinquifihed, Eteocles

and

and Polinices having terminated the contest by a single
combat; wherein they fought with such desperate fury,
that they both fell. This siege of Thebes is reckoned
to have preceeded that of Troy about thirty years.

After the death of the two brothers, the sons of the

seven commanders who had conducted the siege re-
I`olved to revenge the deaths of such of their fathers as
had been killed in it. With this view they laid waste
Bceotia, and came to an engagement with the Thebans;
who having loft their king in the battle, abandoned
their city; of which the Epigonoi, the name given to
these seven chiefs, immediately took poffeflion.

The sequel of this period of the Theban history is no

less uncertain and obscure than its beginning. Xanthus
is thought to have been their last king, the govern-
ment on his death having become republican.

C OR I N T H.

THE origin of Corinth is involved in great
I393. obscurity. It is supposed to have been firit e-

reted into a kingdom by Syfiphus. Glaucus

the son of Syfiphus instituted the isthmic games, and
was father to the famous Bellerophon; who, according
to the poets, mounted the horse Pegasus, to encounter a
monster. The truth of the matter seems to be, that
Bellerophon behaved himself heroically in the many en-
terprifes which he undertook. As there is great confu-
sion in history with refpet to the kings of Corinth, we
shall only mention, that one of those kings, Bacchis,
left a numerous posterity, known by the name of Bac-
chides; who, after a considerable interval, during which
several revolutions happened in the kingdom, engrossed
the whole power of the state, and rendered the govern-
ment ariftocratical.

In this interval Corinth had arrived at a considerable
degree of naval strength, and had founded the colonies

of

of Corcyra and Syracuse. The latter of which, by the
advantage of its situation. and the goodness of its climate,
became the finest city of Greater Greece.

Cypfelus, at last, in spite of numberless obstacles that

lay in his way, rose to the supreme power at Corinthl;
and having completely gotten the better of all oppofi-
tion, ruled his fubjecls with great mildness and mode-
ration for the space of thirty years His son Periander
succeeded him; but proved a downright tyrant: for he
not only put to death the principal citizens of Corinth,
but even his own wife. His great intercourse, how-
ever, with the philosophers of those times, and the phi-
lofophical spirit which, notwithfianding the cruelty of
his nature, he himself poffcfied procured him a place
among the seven fages of Greece; all honour from
which his crimes ought to have excluded him. Upon
his death the Corinthians, weary of being ruled by an
absolute prince, resolved to alter the form of govern-
ment from monarchy to democracy; and having, with
that view, freed themselves of the remaining branches
of the royal falmily, they aficrted their natural liberty,
and eftablihed the popular government.

The advantageous lituation of Corinth upon the nar-

row neck of land that joins the Peloponnese to tile con-
tinent, procured her the appellation of the ce of Greece,
and seemed peculiarly adapted for giving her a fuperio-
rity over all the neighbouring fRates. But the genius of
the Corinthians was entirely commercial. They aipired
rather at wealth than power.

S I' AR T A.

Lelex is the firif king of Laconia mention-

el in history. His successors vere, MIyles, 15 ,3.
t urotas, Lacedemon, Amycles, Argalus, Cy-
nortas, Oebalus, Hypocoon, and Tyndarus.

Eurotas was the founder of the city of Sparta, si

D called

called after his daughter Sparta, the wife of Lacedemon,
who gave his name to the country, as his wife had
given hers to the city.

Tyndarus married Leda, who became mother of the

two famous heroes Castor and Pollux, and the no less
famous daughters, Clytemnestra the wife of Agamem-
non, and Helen, whose rape gave occasion to the Trojan
war.

It is believed, and with a great deal of probability,

that the Trojans were originally a Greek colony; Dar-
danus, their first king, having come from Arcadia;
and their religion, their language, and the greater part
of their names, being apparently of Greek extraution.
These are the kings of Troy whose names have reached
us: Dardanus, Erichonius, Tros, Ilus, Laomedon,
and Priam. The name 'of Ilium, by which their chief
city was known to the Greeks, is thought to have been
derived from Ilus, and Its other name of Troy from
Tros. Priam, its last king, had arrived at a very high
pitch of wealth and power. He was the father of fifty
tons; the walls of Troy were rebuilt by him; he
changed the name of the town to Pergamus; and reign-
ed for many years with great prosperity.

In the mean time Queen Hecuba, Priam's second

wife, having dreamt that Ihe should bring forth a fire-
brand, by which the city Ihould be reduced to ashes,
priam was so much alarmed, that he ordered the child
of whom the queen was big, and who happened to be
a boy, to be exposed as soon as born. The child was
named Paris ; and, notwith Landing the order of his fa-
ther, was, by the care of Hecuba, preserved, and pri-
vately educated. When grown up, he appeared at
court, where his beautiful person attraced general ad-
miration. Upon this he ventured to discover himself to
Priam; who was so delighted with his figure and accom-
plifliments, that he thought no more of the dream. Pa-
ris soon after undertook an expedition into Greece, on

pre :ence

pretence of recovering his aunt Hesione, who, when
very young, had been carried away by Hercules, and
by himi had been given in marriage to Telamon. It may
riot be improper to mention the occasion of this rape.

Laomedon, the father of Hesione, had applied the

treasures of the temples of Neptune and Apollo to build
the walls of Troy, under a promise of repaying the
tumns so abstracted. But being either unable or unwil-
ling to discharge his promise, the oracle declared that he
could no otherwile expiate the sacrilege, than by expo-
sing a Trojan virgin to a, fea-monller. Hesione was
condemned by lot to undergo this punishment. Her-
cules, however, flew the monster, and rescued Hesione.
It is well known how much this event has been dif-
guised by the fictions of the poets.

Paris, upon his arrival at Sparta, was received in the

most kind and hospitable manner by Menelaus, who
had succeeded to that kingdom in the right of his wife
Helen, the daughter of Tyndaras. But Paris falling
in love with Helen, prevailed with her to run away with
him, and thereby plunged his country into an abyss of
misfortunes.

We may, however, trace the cauife of the Trojan

war to a higher source still, and attribute it to an here-
ditary animosity that had long subsisted between the fa-
milies of Agamemnon and Priam. For Tantalus king
of Phrygia, and great-grandfather of Agamemon, ha-
ving violently carried offGanymede, the brother of llus
the grandfather of Priam, Ilus had taken vengeance for
this injury, by flripping Tantalus of his dominions,
and had obliged hiri to take refuge in Greece, where
his son Pelops and his descendants established them-
selves under the name of Pelopidcl. Be this as it may,
Menelaus fired with indignation at the insult com-
mitted against him by Paris, persuaded his brother A-
gamemnon to espouse his quarrel; and by their joint
efforts, the two brothers brought all the other powers

D 2, of:

of Greece to unite in the fame cause, and to bind
themselves by oath, either to recover Helen, or to ruin
Troy. Agamemnon was chosen commander in chief
of this grand confederacy.

Aulis was the general rendezvous of the Grecian

forces; who, when assembled there, composed all toge-
ther an army of ioo,o0o men. The fleet deflined to
carry them to Troy, consisted of about. i I50 veirels.
The galleys of Bceotia carried each I20 men, and those
of Philodetes 5o. Thcfe vessels had no deck, but were
made like open boats. Of the chiefs who accompanied
this army, the most famous were Agamemnon, Mene-
laus, Diomedes, Nestor, Ajax son of Telamon, Ajax son
of Oileus, Achilles, his friend Patroclus, Ulysses, &-c.

The Greeks having landed on the plains of
1193. Troy, soon perceived that the Trojans were as

brave a people as themselves. UlyfTes and

Menelaus were sent to Priam to demand the restitution
of Helen. But that prince, in opposition to the opinion
of his council, having refused to comply with their re-
quest, both parties made vigorous preparations for war.

The Greeks, after defeating the Trojans in two dif-

ferent engagements, found themselves under the necef-
fity of dividing their forces, the more easily to procure
proviions, of which they began to be in great want.
This gave leisure to the Trojans to negociate with the
neighbouring fiates for affitance. Achilles,inthe mean
time, who commanded the detachment of the army sent
out in search o-f provisions, performed many signal ex-
ploits; took several towns, and made a valt booty,
But the cruelty of the Greeks to Palamedes, one of
their bravefl oflicers, whom they put to death upon a
false accusation of trealon brought against him by U-
ly1es, so provoked Achilles, that he refused to give
them further afliftance in the war, and separated his
troops from the reft of the army.

The nine sirs: years of the war were consumed in va-

riouts

rious engagements of no great importance; the Greeks
having in that time employed thenfelves chiefly in
ravaging the territories of Priam and his allies. It is
therefore true, that the wtar of Troy continued ten
years: but it is not true, as is commonly believed, that
the city of Troy was besieged all that space; for it was
nor till the spring of the tenth year that the Greeks form-
ed the liege. They at firfi experienced'the most vigo-
rous resistance on the part of the besieged, who were
commanded by Hetor, Deiphobus, .Eneas, &c. and
by several princes that had come to their afliftance,
such as Sarpedon, Glaucus, Rhaefus, Memnon. The
Trojans had even the advantage in several engagements,
and made a great slaughter of the Greeks ; but none of
these acions was decilive. At lall, however, Hetor,
at the head of the Trojans,, beat the enemy fairly from
the field, pursued them to their camp, forced the en-
trenchments, and set fire to their ihips; and victory
seemed at lait on the point of declaring for the Trojans.

But Patroclus, the friend of Achilles, perceiving the

extreme distress of the Greeks, advanced in this critical
moment to their relief with the troops of Achilles, rec-
koned the bravest of the Grecian army, rallied the
Greeks, and repulsed the Trojans. Several of the beif
officers on both fides fell on this occalion; amongfi the
reft Sarpedon slain by Patroclus, and Patroclus iim-
self ilain by the hand of Hecdtor. Affairs now affime
a different appearance. Achilles, furious for the loss
of his friend, and forgetting the former cause of his re-
fintment, joins his forces to the reft of the Grecianl
army, beats the Trojans, and sacrifices on the tomb of
Patroclus twelve of the noblest prisoners taken by
him in the engagement. He is now solely intent on
fighting personally with Iector; vwhom he engages, and
kills at last., But not satisfied with the death of his
gilllant enemy, he sullies the glory of his victory by in-
*llnting, in the lmlct ungenerou:s and 'avagoe manner,

)D J over

over his dead body, which he drags at his chariot wheels
around the city. Achilles himself is slain soon after by
Paris; who in like manner falls in a short time by the
hand of Philoctetes.

The Trojans having now loft their best commanders,

reposed their last hope on the famous Palladium, a fta-
tue of Minerva, said to have dropt into their city direaly
from heaven; it being a received opinion, that while
this statue remained within the walls of Troy, the city
could never be taken. At length, however, Antenor
and ZEneas are reported to have treacherously delivered
it to the Greeks, and at the fame time to have betrayed
the city by throwing the gates open to the enemy in
the night. But some authors fay, that the Greeks
took Troy by surprise. As for the wooden horse, by
means of which the Greeks, according to the poets,
made themselves mailers of the city, it should seem to
be a mere chimera of poetical fancy; or, perhaps, some
machine resembling a horse, which the Greeks may
have used in the siege, to make a breach in the wall, by
which they gained admittance into the town. It is,
however, an agreed point, that the Greeks took the city
in the night; put Priam and all his family to death; and

after plundering the town, set it on fire. The
8 !S4. taking of Troy is the most celebrated epoch in

the history of the Greeks; and indeed this war

may be said to have afforded the first public display of
Grecian valour. It is likewise worth remarking, that
hle misfortunes of Troy have furnified the subjet of
the twAo most perfect epic poems in the world, the Iliad
and the _IEneid.

Menelaus.alone, by recovering Helen, reaped an ap-

parent advantage from the success of this enterprise.
To the other Greeks it proved a source of the bitterest
misfortunes. The fields of Troy were drenched with the
blood of their best commanders and soldiers, of whom
trle far greater part were buried there; and the remains

of

of their army, after being further considerably diminish-
ed by the disasters of a tempestuous voyage, found, on
their arrival at home, nothing but mortifications and
disappointments of the most cruel kinds. Their chief,
Agamemnon, had been but a short while in his own
kingdom, when he was murdered by Egyptus the son
of Thyestes, who usurped his throne as the reward of
his villany.

Hermione, the daughter of Menelaus and Helen, had

been first married to Orestes, the son of Agamemnon;
but was afterwards taken from him, and given to Pyr-
rhus the son of Achilles. Orestes having flaiu Pyrrhus,
succeeded Menelaus in the kingdom of Sparta; and seven
years after, having likewise killed the usurper Egyptus,
together with Clytemnestra his own mother, who had
been accessory to the murder of her husband Agamem-
non, he united the kingdom of Sparta with that of Ar-
gos and Mycene. Orestes, in the mean time, felt the
most bitter remorse for his cruelty to his mother.
Hence the poets have taken occasion to fay, that he
was haunted by the furies. Tifamenes succeeded his
father Orestes; but was dethroned, and expelled his
kingdom by the Heraclidme, after reigning three years.

The Heraciidte were at this time headed by three bro-

thers, Temanes, Ctefiphontes, and Ariftodemus, sons
of Ariftomachus, great-grandfon of Hercules. They
laid claim to the Peloponnese, as belonging to them by
hereditary right, and recovered it accordingly. Tema-
nes got the city of Argos, Ariftodemus that of Sparta,
and Ctefiphontes Mycene. The return of the Heracli-
dse produced a great revolution among the states of
Greece, and annihilated the power of the Pelopida.
The Acheans, who had formerly inhabited a part of
Laconia, were by that event obliged to remove to Asia
Minor, where they occupied that part of the continent
formerly known by the name of Eolia; and there found-
ed Smyrna, and several other cities. The lonians too,

D 4 who

who possesed another difria of the Peloponnese, were
expelled that country by the Heraclidae and obliged,
in like manner, to retire to Asia Minor; where they
took poifeflion of the country called after them lonia,
and there built Ephesus, Clazomene, Samos, &c.

As the four principal tribes of Greeks, distinguished

by the names of Eoolians, Acbeanls, lonians, and Dorians,
were perfectly independent of one another, and con-
fined themselves each to its particular territory, every
one of them preserved its peculiar manner of speaking.
Hence arose four principal dialects of the Greek lan-
guage; the Attic, used by the Athenians; the Ionic,
by the people of lonia; the Doric, by the Lacedemo-
nians and Argives; and the Eolic, by the Bceotians and
the inhabitants of Eolia.

The Heraclidac and Pelopidcl furnilhed kings to Spar-

ta for the space of 90oo years, reckoning down to the
time of the tyrant Machanidas.

Ariftodemus, at his death, left behind him two tons,

Euryfthenus and Procles; who being twins, and so ex-
aQly like each other, that it x!as.hardly possible to dif-
tinguimi them, were therefore made joint kings. From
their time Sparta was always governed by two kings.
Euryfthenus was succeeded by his son Agis, and Procles
by his son called Ous. It was in their time that the
slaves called Helots were first known at Sparta. The
inhabitants of Helos, a city in the neighbourhood of
Sparta, having re;fued to pay a certain tribute imposed
by Agis upon all the territories of Lacedemon, that
king, desirous to confirm his authority by an example
of severity, laid siege to their city, took it, and made
all the inhabitants saves. They were condemned to the
most disgraceful and painful employments, and treated
with much rigour and cruelty. In process of time, the
Spartans. obliged them to labour their grounds, and
kept them in a state of perpetual servitude.

The Spartans took advantage o[ the wveaknefs and

cxtrelme

extreme good-nature of one of their kings, Eurytion,
'to encroach on the royal prerogative. This produced
confusion in the government. Eunomus, another of
their kings, left two sons of different marriages, Poly-
dedus and Lycurgils. Polydecus succeeded to Eu-
nomus; but died without leaving any child, though his
wife was pregnant at the time of his death. Lycurgus,
therefore, who afterwards became so famous, next
mounted the throne, as colleague to Archelaus; but
he declared to the people, that he assumed this dignity
merely as guardian for the child whom his brother's
wife ihould bring forth, to whom the crown of right
belonged. The queen, in the mean time, signified to
Lycurgus, that, on condition of his marrying her, she
would destroy the child in her womb. Lycurgus was
hocked at this horrid propofhl; but judged it prudent
to difshmble, and to avoid, under various pretences, to
come to a final explanation with the queen, giving in
the mean time private orders to bring him the child the
moment it fllould be born. The queen, at lait, brought
forth a boy; who was immediately carried by iycurgus
into the public assembly, and presented to the chief men
of Sparta as their king. The name of this king was
Charilaus. We flall resume the sequel of the Lacede-
monian history in the beginning of next chapter.

A T H E N S.

CEC ROPS, a native of Egypt, led a colony of

his countrymen into Greece, fettled in Attica, 1556.
and founded the kingdom of Athens. He di-
vided the country into twelve diflricds, and aflumed the
name of king. He pitched on a hill in the midst of a
large plain for the foundation of his city, and built the
citadel'don the rock in which the hill terminated. He
efiablifhed religion among his fubjeds, and infiituted
a particular form of worship to Jupiter and Minerva.

3 As

As the foil of the country of Attica was barren, his sub-
jeds were laid under the necessity of making use of na-
vigation to bring corn from Africa and Sicily. The
Areopagus, a kind of senate, which assembled and held
its deliberations upon a hill near the citadel, consecrated
to Mars, was likewise inifituted by Cecrops. This tri-
bunal was afterwards rendered by Solon the most fa-
mous in the world.

The names of the successors of Cecrops were, Cra-

naus, Amphidyon, Eriahonius, Pandion, Erectheus,
Cecrops II. Pandion II. Egeus, Theseus, Mneftheus,
D)emophoon, Oxintes, Oephidas, Timethes, Melantus.
and Codrus.

Cranaus was expelled Athens by Amphityon and

'Hellen, sons of Deucalion king of Thessaly. It is
thought that the Greeks derived their name from this
Hellen.

Amphidyon instituted the famois assembly
1497. called after his name. It was composed of de-

putes from twelve, or, according to some, from

one and thirty neighbouring states, among whom this
king brought about a fort of confedercy. Two depu-
ties from each of these states met twice a-year at Ther-
mopylae, to deliberate on the affairs of Greece in gene-
ral. The Amphidyons had a power of determining in
the last resort all controversies that subsisted between
those fiates, and of imposing high fines on the party
found in the wrong. The members of this court, be-
fore their admiflion, bound themselves by the most so-
lemn oaths and imprecations, to the ftrids performance
of the duty of their office. They particularly engaged
themnfelves to execute vengeance against those who
should presume to abftraat any gift from the temple of
Apollo. The authority of this tribunal prevailed in all
its vigour till the time of Philip king of Macedon; who
having procured himself to be eleted president of it, a-

3 bused

bused the power reposed in him, and by that means
brought the court into contempt.

Bacchus, known likewise by the name of DionyJzus,

having in the time of Amphiayon come into Greece,
accompanied by other natives of the east, inftruaed the
Greeks in many useful arts, particularly in the culture
of the vine. In return, the Greeks accounted him a
god, and raised altars to his memory. The birth and
conquests of this god have furnished an ample field for
the imaginations of the poets to embellish.

Under the reign of Eridhonius, is placed the rape of

Proserpine, the daughter of Ceres queen of Sicily; the
journey of Ceres into Greece to seek her daughter; her
tfay at Eleusis with Triptolemus, whom she inftruded
in tillage; and the establishment of her worfllip at E-
leufis. The ceremonies attending this worship were
known by the name of the EleuJinian izyfieries, and be-
came extremely famous on account of the impenetrable
secrecy with which they were concealed.

Ericthonius instituted, in honour of Minerva, the

festival called Panathenea, on account of the great con-
course of people from every part of Greece that flocked
to Athens on that occasion. Eriahonius too taught the
Athenians the use of money.

Pandion II. had four sons: one of-thefe was Egeus

his successor; Pallas, another of them, had fifty sons,
called after him Pallantidea Egeus had but one child;
and him by a concubine called Ethra, the daughter of
Pitheus. This child was Theseus, one of the most fa-
mous heroes of antiquity.

Theseus, while yet very young, and before

his accession to the throne, having heard of the I264.
exploits of Hercules, was seized with a violent
desire to imitate him. After his example, therefore, he
'employed himself in clearing the highways of robbers,
of whom he deltroyed a great number. On returning

to

to Athens, his father received him with much joy, and
named him his fucccffor in the kingdom.

On coming to the throne, he was involved in a war

against his cousins, the sons of Pallas, who were pro-
voked that an illegitimate son fllould be preferred to them
in the kingdom. But being unable to refill the valour
of l hefeus, they were vanquished and dispersed. As
Theseus could not bear to be idle, he employed himself
in destroying the monsters that infefied the country. He
killed the bull of Marathon ; and freed the Athenians
from a tribute of seven boys and as many girls, imposed
upon then by Minos king of Crete; who, to revenge
the death of his brother Androgeus, whom the Athe-
nians had slain, invaded their country, and forced them
to submit to that severe condition. But Theseus ha-
ving accompained the children to Crete, attracted the
affections of Ariadne the daughter of Minos, married
her, and got the tribute discharged. This seems to be
the simple truth of the matter; but the poets, in their
usual manner, have given the affair a more marvellous
turn. They tell us, that Theseus received from Ariadne
a clue to conduct him through the labyrinth, wherein
was kept the Minotaur, a monfler, half man half bull,
to which, by the command of an oracle, the Athenian
children were given to be devoured; and that Theseus
having, accordingly, by the help of this clue, made his
way through the labyrinth, and reached the monster,
attacked and killed it, and so relieved his countrymen
from the tribute.

Theseus, after effecting the object of his journey, set

out in triumph on his return for Athens. But having
on his way loft Ariadne, who was run away with by a
priest of Bacchus, he was so grieved, that he omitted to
hang out white colours, the lignal of vicdory agreed on
with his father. Egeus, from this, believing his son to
be dead, jumped into the sea that rnow bears his name
and drowned hihfelf.

Theseus

'rhefeus having procured peace to his country, ap-

plied himself to govern it with wisdom. Ile is said to
have induced all the inhabitants of Attica, partly by his
authority, partly by persuasion, to remove from their
villages to Athens, there to live in one great commu-
nity ; and to have invited, by a public proclamation,
people of all other naticns to come and fettle at Athens,
where they were to be in every respect on an equal foot
with the natives of Attica. This produced a large in-
crease in the number of inhabitants, and in the extent
of the city.

After accomplishing this undertaking, he converted

the system of government into a fort of republic, refer-
ving only to himself the command of the army, and the
support of the laws. He divided the people into three
clafies; the nobility, the farmers or husbandmen, and
the mechanics. All public offices were to be occupied
by the nobility alone, but the reft of the people had the
power of choofing the particular person on whom each
office wvas to be conferred. He eftablilhed the tribunal
of the Prytaneum, composed of fifty members; who,
among other business. were to provide for the fubfifr-
ence of such poor citizens as had done eminent service
to the slate.

After having properly fettled the adminifiration, he

spent the remainder of his life in travelling about in
quaeR of adventures, in which to signalize his valour.
He had a fhiare in the victory over the Centaurs; in the
conquest of the golden fleece; in the chace of the Ca-
lydonian boar; and in both the wars of Thebes. The-
ieus and Pirithous having met with an intention to
fight, were so Itruck with admiration at the fighlt of
each other, that they laid aside all hostile intentions,
and from that time forward lived in the moil perse&
fiiendfliip. They of concert forcibly carried off the
famous H-elen daughter of Tindarus; and afterwards
w.ent to the court of Aidoneus, surnamed Pluto, king

of

of the Moloffi, to carry off his daughter likewise. But
Pluto flew Pirithous, ard threw Theseus into prison,
whence he was released by Hercules. The poets have
involved these events in abundance of fables. Theseus,
on returning to Athens, found great cause of disquiet
from his family-affairs, which ended in the tragical
deaths of his wife Phedra, and of his son Hippolitus.
Meneftheus too had taken the opportunity of his ab-
fence to prejudice the public againit him. Theseus,
thinking it beneath him to punish the ungrateful Athe-
nians, satisfied himself with abandoning their country,
and retired to the island of Scyros. Some time after,
Lycomedes, chief of that island, growing jealous of his
merit, laid an ambush for him, and caused him to be
thrown from the top of a precipice.

Theseus was the greatest king the Athenians ever

had. His tomb, in after times, became famous by be-
ing made a refuge for slaves.

Meneftheus diftinguilhed himself by his military ikill
in the war againit Troy.

In the reign of Codrus, the Heraclidae being at war

with the Athenians, were told by the oracle, that they
would be vidorious if they did not kill Codrus. That
prince, hearing of the response, disguised himself in a
peasant's habit, and, entering the enemy's camp, pro-
voked them to kill him. When the Heraclida were in-
formed of their having slain Codrus, they immediatly
fled.

Codrus was the last king of Athens. For, on his

death, the government became republican, by the efta-
blifliment of Archons; an office which was at first he-
reditary, and little inferior, in point of power, to
royalty itself.- We ihall in the next chapter resume
the history of this republic.

C H A P.

# CHAP. II. Affairs of Greece, from the abolition of the kingly government in the principal states, till the time that Hippias took refuge in Persia.

C H A P. II.
Affairs of Greece, from the abolition of the kingly govern-

ment in the principalflates, till the time that Hippias
took refuge in PerJia.

FROM what has been said in the preceding chapter,
it appears that the government in all the different states
of Greece was originally monarchical. But the ty-
ranny of their princes soon produced a total alteration
in the system; awakened in the minds of the Greeks
that ardent desire of liberty which ever after so strongly
marked the character of this wonderful people, and
threw them into so many separate republics. For some
time, indeed, we Ihall fee private persons now and then
appear, who, prompted by their ambition, attempt to
become sovereigns of their country, some by policy and
address, some by open violence and the force of arms.

But of all there fiates, Sparta and Athens distinguish-

ed themfelvcs far above the reft; and by their extraor-
dinary merit, and the wifdorm of their laws, acquired so
great a superiority over the others, that they became
the main springs of the political machine of Greece.
Between these two republics a spirit of rivalihip very na-
turally arose, which at last broke out into long contests
and dissensions; in the course of which we shall fee the
other states sometimes fiding with Sparta, sometimes
with Athens, as their different interest incline them.
The principal events, therefore, of this hlftory, more
immediately refped those two republics, which con-
ftantly occupy the foremost place, and appear, on all
occasions, to sustain the fate of Greece. We proceed,
therefore, to resume the history of Sparta and Athens,
from the period at which we flopped in the last chapter.

LYCURGUS, by his equitable and disinterested con-
dus; in defeating the barbarous intentions of the queen,

and

rand procuring Charilaus, yet a child in the cradle, to
be declared king, had highly offended that princess;
who, in revenge, employed all her intereit to form a
faition against him, and got him accused of a conspiracy
against the state. But Lycurgus soon withdrew himself
from the danger of these machinations. Perceiving that
the laws were entirely disregarded, he meditated an ex-
traordinary reformation in the government. For that
purpose he resolved to travel into foreign countries, that
he might have an opportunity of observing with his own
eyes the various customs and inflitutions of different
nations the most renowned for the wisdom of their le-
gifiation.

With this view he first went to the island of Crete,

where the celebrated Minos had eftablihed a fyitem of
laws ; the rigid spirit of which was much to the liking
of Lycurgus. This Minos was a powerful prince, who
had fiourifled ioo years b'clbre the Trojan war, and
whose virtues had procured him the highest esteem.
Having subdued the island of Crete, he resolved to fe-
cure his conquefi by the wisdom of his laws. The go-
vernment there, at the time of his conquest, was mo-
narchical. But to bring that form of government to its
utmost perfection, Minos judged it necessary to make
the prince as subjed to the power of the laws as the
nation was subject to the power of the prince; who by
that means might have an unlimited power of doing
good, while at the fame time he thould be totally re-
itrained from doing mischief; the laws committing to
him the moll precious of all trusts, the care of a whole
people, on condition of his ruling them as a father and
protector, not as an oppreifor and tyrant. From Crete
Lycurgus went into Alia; where he colleaed into one
body the works of Homer, which before were dispersed
about in detached fragments. From Asia he travelled
iito Egypt, where he acquired a vast fund of knowr
ledgee.

Afte:

After having maturely confidered the various forms

ofgovernment that had fallen under his obfervarion,
and deliberately weighed the advantages and difadva-.
tages of each, he adopted into his owvn fyflem what njp-
peared to him the moil eligible. The result of all ihetb
painful researches, wras the famous Spartan iegislt.tion,
which has been the wonder of succeeding ages; and
which to us, in these latter times, would appea:r to be
entirely chimerical and impracdicable, were it. not at-
tested past all poflibility ofdoubtby every ancient authn;r
who speaks of it; many of whom, such as Plato, Ari-
flotle, Xenophon, and Plutarch, were eye-witne o-' of
what they mention. It is, besides, an undoubted faci,
that this iyflem Iubiifted during a i.iace of more than
700 years. We cannot, however, fuliiciently admire
how it was possible for one man to succeed in efilblif':-
ing a form of government, so violently repugnant in
several particulars to the mofr powerful paflions of the
human foul.

During the absence of Lycurgus, the Lacedemonians

became extremely turbulent, and Sparta was on the
brink of falling into downright anarchy. Perceiving
how much they flood in need of a man of fupsrior ,parts
and underflanding, they dispatched meIlengers to in-
treat Lycurgus to return. He immediately obeyed the
invitation. But before proceeding to promulgate Ii
laws, he chose to fortify himfelfwith the authority of tllm
gods; and for that -urpofe he went to consult the oracle
of Delphos, w hleree fl ound means to obtain a fhvour-
able response.

Upon his arrival at Sparta, he fiift communi-

cated his scheme in private to the leading men 8S4.
of the city. Having procured their approbation,
lie proceeded to the market-place, escorted by a num-
her of armed men ; and there explained to the people
the alterations he intended to bring about in the ,n-
Rvrnmclnt, and the new inflitutions lhe proposed to efta

J3 l-. ifl
,

blifih. WVe forbear at present to enter on a detail of
those institutions, because the course of the narrative
should thereby be too much interrupted; but we shall
speak of them at length in the sequel.

Lycurgus was almost entirely employed, during the

remainder of his life, in bringing his laws to perfec-
tion, and in enforcing the observance of them. In this
he met with much opposition; and displayed, perhaps,
no l]es fortitude and prudence in prevailing with his
fellow-citizens to submit to his regulations, than he had
fliown wisdom in devising them.

After having put the finishing hand to his work, and

tailed of the pleaflre of feeing his institutions firmly
eilablifihed, and his countrymen accustomed to the ex-
crcife of them, he declared his intention of consulting
the oracle, whether any further improvement were ne-
ceni'ry; and obtained their solemn promise to observe
thelcn till his return. On arriving at Delphos, he was
alulred by the prieilefs, that while Sparta kept his laws
in obiervance, ihe ihould be the most illuitrious and
happy city in the world. Lycurgus tranfrmitted this re-
ifonfe to Sparta; andcconfidering his plan to be now
entirely completed, he died a voluntary death, by ab-
laiining irorm all nouriflhment.

The reformation of the Spartan government by Ly-

curgus is reckoned a second revolution there. For the
future, therefore, we are to confider that Hate as a re-
public, in which the kings wvere no more than the prin-
cipal magiFirates.

Hiiloritns place the birth of Homer not many years
prior to that of Lycurgus.

Soon after the death of Lycurgus, a war having bro-

ken out between the Lacedemonians and Argives about
a finall territory called i;Thyrea, both parties, to spare
the lives of their citizens, agreed to terminate the dif-
pute by 300o chosen men of each fide. 'ihefe 6co com-
'.tan1ts engaging accordingly, fought with such fury

auJi

and obstinacy, that they were all killed on the spot ex-
cept three; two of whom were Argives, and the third.
a Lacedemonion named Orthrades*. As both parties
claimed the vietory, a general battle ensued; in which
the Lacedemonians remained the conquerors. Orthra-
des, disdaining to survive the reft of his fellow-foldiers,
killed himnfelf on the field of battle t.

This year Theopompus, one of the Lacede-

monian kings, eftabliihed the Ephori in Sparta; 76o,
or rather, the common people, provoked by the
oppreflion under which they groaned, prevaildL with
that king to give them thole magistrates as a check on
the power of the kings on the one hand, and of the fe-
nate on the other.

The Lacedemonians about the fame time declared.

war against the Mefifenians, for having vilated
iomc Lacedemonian youngl women, who had 743.
gone, according to custom, to pay their devo-
tions at a temple on the confines of both states. To
revenge this insult, the Lacedemonians, under the
command of Alcmenus, surprised the town of Amphea
by night, and put all the inhabitants to the sword. The
MerTenians were not at that time in a -situation to make
reprisals But about four years after, they marched into
Lacnnia under the command of their king Euphaes, and
came to an engagement with tle Lacedemonians. to
which the night alone put an end.

Next year the Lacedemonians took the field, after

binding themselves by oath, not to return to Sparta till
they should reduce every place in the pofliOrion of the
MeFlenians. A battle ensued; in which both parties
fought with such obtilnacy, that fatigue obliged them to

E 2 separate

* The reader will be (truckl with the similarity between this combat

and that of the Horatii and CuriatI; in the P-omun hillory, and a mucls
later one still rccorded in the hiltory of Scotland, which tool place in
1396, to terminate a feud between two iIighland clans.

t Rome was fimind(le in the year before Chriil 753;-and three years
after, the i-ape of the Sabine women is fi;d to have harpcaed,

feparate'by mutual content. The Meffenians, exhaust-
ed by the double calamity of a war and of a plague, as-
fembled at Ithone, a strong place situated on the fum-
mit of a hill, and sent to consult the oracle at Delphos
about the means of relief in this desperate extremity.
The oracle returned for answer, That they must sacrifice
to the gods a virgin of royal blood: and Ariftodemus,
a Meilenian of royal extraction, in obedience to the di-
vine command, offered up his own daughter. About
the fame time, a bloody battle happened in the neigh-
bourhood of Ithome, where the MeTfenians performed
prodigies of valour to rescue the body of their king Eu-
phaes, who had fallen covered with wounds in the fight ;
and they were at last successful. Here Ariftodemus ob-
tained the prize of valour, as.the person that had fought
wVith the greatest bravery; and he was likewise chosen
king in place of Euphacs, who died of his wounds.

Ariftodemus having led his countrymen to another

engagement with the Lacedemonians, defeated them,
and took their king Thcopompus, whom, together with
300 Spartans more, he put to death in cold blood.
The Lacedemonians, apprehensive left their families
ihould fail in the mean time, by their long absence from
home, in consequence of the oath they had taken, sent
back to Sparta all the soldiers who had joined the army
after the taking of that oath, to cohabit with the wives
of those that remained. The iiue of this extraordinary
connc.ion were diftinguifled by the name of Parthe-
iina7ls; who, as soon as they were able to carry arms,
banifled themselves of their own accord from Sparta,
and formed a settlement at Tarentum in Italy.

Four years after a general action ensued between

the Lacedemonians and Meflenians; in which a party
of the latter attacked the Lacedemonians from an ambu-.
Icade, put them to flight, and procured their country-
men the victory. But though the Spartans had loft in
this engagement the flower of their troops, they ne-

verthelefs

verthelefs laidfiege to Ithome. Ariftodemus, feeing his
countrymen reduced to the last extremity, killed hin-
self in despair on the tomb of his daughter. The reft
of the Meflenians, after enduring the utmoll miserics
of famine, were obliged at last to capitulate. The La-
cedemonians made the greatest part of them slaves, and
forced them to cultivate their grounds; but many of
them escaped and took refuge among dliferent nations.
This first war was of twenty years continuance.

The Melltenians, after enctdring the Lacede-

monian yoke for thirty years, resolved at last to 685.
attempt the recovery of their liberty. For this
pur'pose they put themselves under the command of A-
riftomenes, a young man of extraordinary bravery, and
great skill in the art of war; and under his conduct
vanquished their enemies in several engagements. The
Lacedernonians being hard preled, consulted the oracle.
The refponfc bore, That they muLr request a generl'
from the Athenians; who in deriiion ient them one
Tyrteus a poet. The Lacedemonians found their as-
fairs not at all mended by this expedient; and after be-
ing beaten in three successive batlles, they rcfolved to
return to Sparta. But this resolution was opposed by
Tyrteus; who, to rouse their courage, recited to them
Ibme verses that he had conpofed with great care.
Tlhee verses were so well calculated to infire bravery,
and a contempt of danger, that they animated the La-
cedemonians to the higheit pitch of martial rage.
They required with one voice to be instantly led
against the enemy; and after a mot: bloody battle, ob-
tained a complete viclory. The remains of the Mleie-
nian army retreated to I.ount Eira, where they defend-
ed themielves a long time againit all the efforts of the
Lacedemonians. But their general, Ariftomenes, ha-
ing fallen amidst a croud of Spartans, upon whom he
had made a most desperate attack, his countrymen were
so diifouraged by his death, and so weakened by their

E 3 repeated

repeated engagements with the Lacedemonians, that
they were at lait overpowered. Such of them as fell
into the hands of the enemy, were reduced to the con-
dition of -Ielots. The reft feeing their country ruined
past all hopes of recovery, retired to Sicily, and there
founded a city, called at first Vlfljene, and afterwards
Itftlna. Their latl brave general, Ariftomenes, was
the l(vorn enemy of the Spartans, and, while he lived,
their conflant terror *.

We have already observed, that monarchy was abo-

lifhcd at ,thens under the children of Codrus, and go-
vernors called IArclhons set up in place of the King.
Thoic were the principal magifirates of the republic,
and were bound to govern the ilate according to the
eftablithed laws. In the beginning they enjoyed their
office for lile, and Medon was the firit who was inverted
with that dignity. Afteruwards, upon the death of
Alcmeor, the people created nine Archons, and con-
lined their authority to the Ipace of ten years. The
chief of them was called Eponyiznus Archon, and the
year was diilinguifhied by his name: the second was
called King; the third Polemarchljs ; and the remaining
tix bore the general name of I'hefinothetw.

Such a limited authority as that vested in the Archons,

was iniiuficient to curb men of so turbulent a difpofi-
tion. The Athenians, accordingly, were for several
years diitracted by controverlies and factions. For
having as yet no written laws, they disagreed about al-
notot every point both of religion and government.
Cylon took advantage of these troubles, and seized
the citadel ; but the Athenians ibund means to quell his
inlurrccLion.

Having learned, by experience, that real liberty con-

sifts in a due dependence on laws and government, the
Athenians resolved to tak ie
tle loi efltectual meaifures

for

-* The combat between the Horatii and Curiatii is placed in the yea.r
Atfcrc Christ fóC7,

for putting an end to their difientions. Withl this view
they cast their eyes on one of their Archons
named Draco, a citizen of examplary virtue, and 623.
the most rigid severity of manners; but whose
extreme rigour, in point of government, bordered on
inhumanity. Chosen by the Athenians to be their law-
giver, Draco, from a zeal to stop the licentiouficfs of
their manners, fell into the opposite extrcee, and made
death the punifliment of the most trivial offences, even
of idleness and indolence. On this account the laws of
Draco were said to have been written, not with ink,
but with blood : and their exccllive severity procured
them the fate of all violent intlitutions ; they quickly
fell into difule.

At length arose a man worthy to prescribe

laws to the Athenians. 'I is was the fiamous 643.
Solon, a native of Salamis. I-laving lately retlo-
red the Athenians to tle goverlneint of that iliancd by
a itratagem, he had, by that exploit, acquired -great re-
putation: and his integrity, his wifomrn, his knowledge
in the science of government, but, above all, the mlild-
ness of his disposition, soon procured him the elieci of
his fellow-citizens. The Athenians, therefore, pitched
on him to restore tranquillity in their'city ; created lhim
Archon-extraordinary ; and invelled him with full au-
thority to make such reformation in the government as
he flould judge neceffairy. The unlimited povwer witl
which he was intrufled mieht have conduced him to
the throne; but his virtue and moderation v;would not
permit him to give way to the temptation.

Solon applied himfrelf with great care and diligence

to discharge the trull reposed in him by his countrymnen.
HIe fettled the public government on a more itcad
foundation, and devised for the Athenians a bocdy of
excellent laws' Of his inflitutions, so i-r as they. re-
garlded the public adminiffration, we ihall aterwards

E 4 speak

speak at some length. His private laws fall not within
our design.

After having published his laws, and bound the citi-

zens by oath to obey them, Solon left Athens for the
space of ten years, both with a view that his institutions
might, in the mean time, take deep root, and that he
might avoid the daily complaints and difficulties flarted
to him about their execution and interpretation. In
this interval he travelled into Egypt, and viiited Crcefus
lking of Lydia. That prince having made an oflenta-
tious display of his vast wealth and magnificence, to .ex~
cite the admiration of Solon, had the mortification to
lee them regarded by the philosopher with the most
Stoical indificrence, and could not draw from him the
imallef coimliment ,

on that account. Solon only took

that opportunity to remark, that no man could with
certainty boafl of his happiness till the inilant of his
death.

During the absence of Solon, great disorders were

cccafioned at Athens by three fa¢tions formed under
thlree dilcerent heads; Megacles, Pifiltratus, and Ly-
c.-rgus. Mlegacles was extremely powerful by his
-\ *.irh, being the fun of Alcmenus, whom King Crce-
i:l. had loaded with riches, and having married the
.'; ighter of Clillenus, one of the moit opulent princes
of Greece. Pilifiratus, by the mildness of his beha-
viour, his afiability, and his liberality to the poorer
citizens, had acquirdl the hiihccit popularity. But his
insinuating addrel wv.as no nore tlhan an artiful cover to
his ambitious designs. So.lon aund things in this fitua-
tion on his return to Athens.

Pifillratus, the better to eiTclc his purpose, employed

one of the molt finglular anld bafift i'Lratagems. Having
-oundecd himelfiln iveral parts of his budy, h: ordered
his friends to carry him all covered with blood to the
marklet-place, where he told the people, that he had
iufst"rcd this cruel treatment from the enemies he had

create--

created to himself by his zeal for the good of the re-
public. The populace, moved by his story and ap-
pearance, rose in his favour, overpowered the opposite
factions, and appointed a guard of fifty men for his
person. With the aififtance of these, and of a greater
number of his own creatures whom he armed, Piifitra-
tus first seized the citadel, and soon after made himself
mailer of the whole city.

Solon, after upbraiding Pififlratus in vain with

the injustice of his usurpation, and the people 560.
with their cowardice and folly, retired from A-
thens, overwhelmed with grief, and went to pass the
remaining part of his life in the island of Cyprus. But
sorrow at feeing the opprefion of his country ccon put
a period to his days; and he died the first year after his
retirement, at the age of 80. Solon certainly polifl'cl
a philosophical ipirit, and was animated with an extra-
ordinary zeal for the republican form of government.
But his system was fundamentally fitulty, in Io far as it
threw all the power into the hands of the multitude,
who, as the event of Pisistratus's intrigues evinced, are
extremely apt to be led aflray by an artful designing
nan. It must, however, be allowed, that he gave the
Athenians, who had been bred up in the greatell licen-
tioufnefs, the bell notions of order, law, and jullice,
o'f which at that time they were perhaps capable.

Solon was cotemporary with the seven wife men of

Greece, and was himself accounted one of their nun-
ber. The names of the other fix were, Thales, Bias,
Pittacus, Clcobulus, Periander, and Chilo. They were
honoured with the tide of ewife' men on account of their
having been all legislators, in some degree or other, and
of their having delivered many general maxims of mo-
r:lity in short Laconic fentenccs.

Pififtr-ttus enjoyed his ill-gotten tyranny for no

loinger a space than three years, Megaclcs and Ly-
c:'r-us having united the r fai-ions and procured his

c-pulilon.

expulsion. But Megacles soon becoming jealous of his
rival's power, offered his daugJlter in marriage to
Pisistratus, and the sovereign authority along with her.
Pisistratus accepted the offer, and Lycurgus was expelled.
But Pilifiratus, the more e.fectually to secure the popular
approbation, resolved to make his rleftoration appear as
the immediate effiec of divine interposition; and for
that purpose prevailed on a woman of a fine majefric
figure to play the part of Minerva on the occasion, and
in that character to announce his arrival. The wo-
man, accordingly, assuming the dress in which that
goddess was usually represented, and appearing fud-
denly in the city, mounted on a magnificent chariot,
a&ed her part to perfeeion, and proclaimed aloud,
that tie, Minerva, was jutr about to bring back Pififtra-
tus. Tihe people regarding this piece of roguery as a
divine mandate, received the tyrant with the utmo!t
joy.

-Ilipparchus and H-ippias, the sons of Pififlratus by a

former mai riage, apprehensive left their brothers by
his present wife might supplant them in the fucceflion to
the tyranny, artfully infkilled into the mind of their fa-
ther injurious suspicions of their itep-mother. MCea-
cles, to support his daughter, bribed the greater part o'
the Athenians, induced them to revolt, and forced PiGi-

firatus to fly a fccond time, and to take refuge
z: 6. in the ifiand of Eubcca, where he lived with his

family eleven years. In the mean time his fin

.Hippias, a man of a a adive intriguing difipoition, la-
ving prevailed on several maritime towns to declare in
his father's favour, Pisistratus soon saw himself at tl!)
head of a confidcrable body of troops, by whose afeis-
ance he surprised the city of Athens, at a time when lie
was not expec'led, and entered it as its conqueror.

To cflabliffi his authority, he thought it necessary to

accompliflf the' defrudion of those who 'supported the
party of Megacles. But after having removed out o£

the

the way all who had power and inclination to oppote
him, he applied himself to efface the remembrance of
his cruelties: and it must be acknowledged, that the
miildnefs and justice of his subsequent adminifiration
made amends, in a great meafiire, for his former
crimes; for from that time he applied his power to
the belt of purposes. His eloquence was of great ser-
vice to him in regaining the public afiedion, and lu]ling
the Athenians into a forgetfulness of their former liber-
ty. I-e studied by every method to acquire popularity,
particularly by throwing his gardens open to all the ci-
tizens; and, upon the whole, he jultified the faying of
Solon, that he would have been the bell citizen of A-
thens, if he had not been the moi'ambitious. He end-
ed his days in peace, and tranfinitted to his children his
uturped sovereignty, which he had enjoyed altogether
for the space of thirty-three years; during the lai leven-
teen years of which lie had reigned in the utmost peace
and tranquillity.

Hipparchus and Hippias his sons lhared the kingdom
between them, and lived in perfetl harmony with each
other; Hipparchus, as eldest brother, enjoying the
chief honours. This man inherited his father's ex-
traordinary love for the sciences. To inspire the A-
thenians by the charms of poetry, with a tatle for let-
ters, and the polished manners which are a natural con-
sequence of knowledge, he invited to his court Anacreon
and Simonides, and patronized all men of diitinguifhed
genius. According to Plato, the tranquillity and hap-
piness that prevailed during his reign revived the idea
of the golden .age.

About the fame time Polycrates usurped the fove-
reign power at Samos, and sacrificed his own brotler
to his desire of occupying the regal dignity alone.
IHavinlg procured a fleet of ioo vessels, he rendered him-
fclF formidable to both Europe and Alia, and wantonly
Ppprefltd both his fubjeds and his neighbours. Sparta,

by

by its warlike exploits, was hfow regarded as the prin-
cipal republic of Greece. Its protection therefore was
implored againit the tyranny of Polycrates; and as the
Spartans profel'ed themselves the enemies of every fpe-
cies of despotism and opprellion, they thought themselves
bound in honour to check the progress of the tyrant.
W'ith this view they fitted out a fleet, made a descent
upon the illand of Samos, and laid siege to the town.
But their enterprise miscarried and, after being re-
pulsed in repeated assaults, they Were at lait obliged to
relinquilh the undertaking, and to return home. Poly-
crates, oion after, fell into the hands of the Persians,
and was by them crucifled. Eaces iucceeded him in the
tyranny; but the people found means to throw off tile
yoke, and to recover their liberty.

Hiippias, after reigning eighteen years at Athens, be-

came at ait cruel and dcipcttic. The Athenians there-
fore ge'\v wreary of his tyranny,, and formed a confpi-
racy against him and his brother. The fadtion of the
Alcmeonides, so called fromn their leader Megacles the
son of Alcmenus, were the fonentors and principal ac-
tors in this conspiracy. -larmodius and Ariliogiton,
both citizens of Athens, and mutually conneced by
friendihip, reiolved to revenge an affront offered to thl
daughter of the former by Hipparchus, who had obliged
her to retire 'from a public procefrion at which fle was
intitled to have affiited, carrying a basilet of flowers.
Nothing less would iatisfy ihe refentncnt of these two
men than the depcifitionl of the tyrants. Having con-
certed the proper measures for their enterprise, they 'e-
cretly imparted their plan to a imall number of the
citizens, and fixed the day of execution to be the feait
of Panathenea, when all the citizens wore arms. They
accordingly attacked and flewv Hipparchus; but were
themselves inflantly apprehended and put to death.

ilippias having eicaped the fate of hisbrother, fludied
the bell means of securing his life for the future. Ic

put

put to the torture the accomplices of the murderers of
his brother, to force them to clifcuver the other circum-
rlances of the plot. On this occasion a woman called
Lionna, who had been very intimately connected with
Harmodius, behaved with the utmoit helroifm. She
supported, with a courage infinitely superior to what
might have been expe :ed from her sex, the most cruel
torments; and left the violence of the torture niould at
last make her utter what nle chose to conceal, she cut
out her own tongue. The Athenians afterwards ereted
to her memory a statue without a tongue. Several
citizens were sacrificed to the suspicions of Hippias, who
obliged all tile partisans of the faltion of Alcmconi-
des to fly from Athens.

The Alcmeonides, in the mean time, were very ac-
tive in contriving means of bringing themselves back.
With this view they were so lucky as to engage in their
interests, by very liberal presents, the prieflefs of Del-
phos; who, as often as the Lacedemonians came to
consult her, or to implore her intercelfion with the
",ods in their behalf, constantly answered them, " i hat

they mult free Athens from the tyranny of the Pifi-
f' tratidde." This stratagem had the desired effec.

'The Lacedemonians fitted out a fleet, and made a de-
icent upon Attica; but Hippias getting notice of their
lprpofe made the neceflary preparations to receive
theml. On hearing that they were landed, he marched
to oppufe them, killed their commander, and put them
io flight. But this check only served to exasperate the

acedemonialns; who again returned into Attica with
a i'refli army, defeated the Thefialian cavalry, which
| were the chief strength of the tyrant's army, and laid
liege to Athens. Hippias, unwilling to expose his chil-
'Iren to the consequence of a siege, sent them secretly
ciut of the city, to be carried to tome place of safety.
J u t the children having fallen into the hands of the e-
iemrnt, Hippias, to save their lives, readily agreed to re-

3 ign

sign his sovereignty; and, in consequence of his agree-
ment, bade a last farewell to Athens, and retired to Si-
geum in Phrygia.

Thus the Athenians recovered their liberty
51o. after a tyranny of fifty years duration. They

ereded statues to the memory of Harmodius and

Ariftogiton, who had begun this revolution, and set
them up to public view, that the fight of them might
inspire the citizens with a more violent hatred of ty-
ranny ".

Athens, however, enjoyed this calm but a very

fiort while. Clisthenes and Ifagoras, both powerful
citizens, mutually aspired to the chief authority, and
created two new factions. But Clisthenes being richer
than his rival, easily brought over the populace to his
fide, and soon got the better of his antagonist. Clif-
thenes made several alterations in the form of govern-
ment ; and in particular, created fix new tribes. It
was he who invented the punifnhment of ostracism,
whereby the people might satisfy their jealousy againfr
any citizen whom power, wealth, or abilities, set too
far above his fellow-citizens, by banishing him the city
for the space of ten years. The name of this punili-
ment wcas derived from a Greek word, fignifiying a par-
ticular kind of shell, on which each citizen inscribed hi.
vote on such occasions.

The Lacedemonians discovering, in the mean time,

the trick of the Delphic priellefs, and being already jen-
lous of the Athenians, desired to avail themselves of ha-
ving delivered them from tyranny, by assuming over
them a fort of superiority. With this view, Cleomene-
king of Sparta efpoured the cause of Ifagoras, who had.
taken refuge in that city; and procured the baniihment
of Clifllenes from Athens. But, not satisfied with
that, he marched against Athens at the head of an ar-

my

* n the preceding year, viz. 51 , Tarquin was expelled frr-e
Rcm.-, and C'ollsula- governti ent c(l ililnicd tll:rc.-

my, expelled from thence 70o families, together with
all the partisans of Clisthenes, and took poIfTllion of the
citadel. Here, however, he was invested by the Athe-
nians, and, after enduring a three months liege, was
at lait obliged to capitulate, on condition of being al-
lowred to depart in fireedom with his Spartans. But all
the Athenians who had allifted him in this exploit were
put to death. Upon this Clifthnc s, and the reflt who
had been banished, were recalled. Cleomenes, how-
ever, of new exerted himself in favour of Ifagoras, and
for that purpoie made another incursion into Attica,
supported by the Bceotians. But the Athenians had the
advantage in several adcions that ensued on that occa-
lion.

The Lacedemonians perceiving the thriving condition

of the Athenians since they had recovered tleir liberty,
began to deliberate about refloring tyranny among
them, and setting Hippias again on the throne. For
this purpose IIippias was invited to Sparta, to aflift at an
aiTembly wherein the quelfion was to be debated. In
tlhis assembly Cleomenes made a speech in favour of
Hippias; but without any effect. For Soficles, the de-
puty from Corinth, fpole after him, and llowed the
alirmbly, with such eloquence and good sense, how un-
worthy it was in fiates who professed themielves the
cnemies of tyranny to undertake the defence and sup-
port of a tyrant, that every one present altcnted to his
opi,,ion.

Hippias thus disappointed, retired to Artaphernes,

the Perlian governor of Sardis, and implored his afliit-
ance. That satrap, delighted with so fair an opportu-
nity of reducing under the power of his master Darius
so important a city as Athens, which might open an
easy way to the conquest of the relt of Greece, gave a
,v'.ry favourable reception to Hippias, and persuaded Da-
i riis to fummlon the Atihenians to replace him on the
throne. But the thl:eats of the kingl of Perlia were in-

}|~ erier~ fleldual,
E

effeclual. The Athenians returned an absolute refual
to comply with his demand, resolving to endure every
extremity, rather than to open their gates to the tyrant.
Hippias, therefore, may be confidered as the first caule
of the quarrel between the Greeks and Persians; though
it is true, that the latter received other fubjeds of pro-
vocation, of which we fliall take notice in the fequcl.

Elninent Wlriters, Philosophers, Wc.

As the first age of Greece had its heores, so it had

likewise its poets, who devoted their talents to celebrate
the praises of their country, and of the great men it
produced; whom, by the excess of their praise, they
transformed from heroes into demigods. To the times
of peace and tranquility, therefore, in this period, it
should seem, that the commencement of poetry ought
to be fixed. Though Homer is the most ancient poet
whose works have been tranfinitted to us, it is certain
that the art of poetry had before his time arrived among
the Greeks to a considerable slate of perfection. This
is indisputably established by tradition. For the names
of Linus, Orpheus, and Mufeus, which occur so fre-
quently both in the Greek and Latin poets and hifto-
rians, are sufficient evidence of the exigence of thole
poets. But as we have no opportunity of judging of
their works, of which it is very doubtful whether any
remains have come to our hands, we must place Homer
at the head of the poets vwhofe works yet exist.

homer is generally believed, and on very probable

grounds, to have lived before the inisitution of the 0-
lympic games; for othervife it is hardly to be imagi-
ned that he would have omitted to take notice of thole
games in his works, as they would have afforded him
so excellent a field for description, an ornament of which
he appears to have been extremely fond. His birth,
however, seems to be placed, with a good deal of cer-

ta nty

tainty, both by Usher's chronology and the Arundel
tables, in the year of the world 3120, that is, about
340 years after the siege of Troy: and he is commonly
accounted a native either of Colophon or of Smyrna.

Homer is usually represented as blind; and we are

told that he employed himfelfin wandering through the
country in the character of an itinerant bard. This,
however, mufl not depreciate in our eyes his wonder-
ful merit, of which his works convey so high an idea;
where we fee him carrying at once to the summit of
perfecaion the art of Epic Poetry, of which he is ac-
counted the inventor.

The two principal poems of Homer are the Iliad and

the Odyssey. The fubjeat of the Iliad is the wrath of
Achilles, which proved so fatal to the Greeks when be-
lieging Troy: The voyages and adventures of Ulyfies,
after the sacking of that city, form the subject of the
Odyfley.

The war against Troy, lwhich furnilhes the fubjcct of

these immortal poems, has been called in question by
Tome authors, who fancy it to be altogether the produc-
tion of Homer's invention. But their labours to con-
vince the world of the truth of this opinion have been
extremely vain. For, without mentioning the other
ancient authors who record that event, it is incredible
that 1- omer would have employed his heaven-born muffe
on a subjea not heard of before. So accurate a judge
of human nature mull have felt, that a fiubjeca purely
fictitious, however harmoniouify sung, could htxe
drawn from his hearers but a momentary attention.
Had not the subjed of his poem been deeply intereffing,
much of its merit mull have been overlooked, and
much of that great fame at which he aspired mufit of
course have been loft.

We may therefore very reasonably conclude, that

the event of the war againtf Troy was not only noto-
rious, but was in Homer's time regarded as the Inoil fig--

F i:pl

nal and important tranfadion in which his countrymen
had been till then engaged. We must, however, re-
member, that the poet lived about three centuries later
than the historical event which he celebrates. Hence
it is more than probable, that he would avail himself of
this latitude to render the circumstances more subser-
vient to his fancy; and that he would even take liberties
with some of the principal faAs, as well to flatter those
for whose immediate pleasure he composed his poem,
as to give fuller scope to his poetical enthusiasm.

Cicero fays, that the works of Homer are rather

painting than poetry; so skilful is he to delineate, as it
were before the eyes of the reader, the circumstances
he desires to describe; which are generally the most
sublime and striking to be found in nature. Horace
prefers him, on account of the knowledge and inftruc-
tion with which he abounds, to the most flkilful philo-
fophers. Quintilian has given a very high eulogium of
him, and has conveyed, in few words, a just idea of
the surprising variety of style which he employs.---

When describing lofty and important circumstances,

"his expression is inimitably fublime.-In minute, it
"is r markably just and proper.-In copiousness, and
"perspicuity, in the serious, and the tender tone, we
"are at a loss which to admire most, his judgement or
"his eloquence." Homer is peculiarly happy in the
harmony of his numbers, and the judicious arrange-
ment of his words and periods. In the article of de-
scription he is, as has been just observed, rather a pain-
ter than a poet, and in that particular excels all the poets
that ever wrote. In describing the march of an army,
-the majesty of Jove,-the gods fighting -the parting
of HIector and Andromache, he lays before our eyes so
many beautiful and lively pieces of painting.-Nothing
can be mure ingenious than his machinery, nor more
properly introduced. In vain have some modern wri-
ters attempted to criticise, and to find fault with his

*woriv·

works; like the slades in a picture, their remarks have
only served to make his beauties more conspicuous. But
it must be acknowledged, that the many superficial and
petulant criticifns advanced by the censurers of this di-
vine bard, are perhaps more than counterbalanced by
the extravagant and absurd commendations laviflied up-
on him by some of his injudicious admirers.*

His fame refts on the firmest and most unequivocal

foundations. His countrymen, who thoroughly under-
stood the characters and the manners he described, and
the language in which he wrote, and who excelled all
mankind in the acuteness of their understanding, and
the exquisite delicacy of their tafle, regarded his Iliad
and his Odyssey as the most perfect work of human ge-.
nius. Great cities contended for the honour of the
poet's birth: The venerable Lycurgus collected and
transcribed the Iliad and Odyfley with his own hand,
and introduced them from Ionia into Greece: Solon
ordained them to be solemnly recited in the Athenian
republic: Alexander the Great was so pastionately fond
of their perusal, that he placed them every night under
his pillow: and the most ingenious of the ancient critics
deduced from these poems the julteft rules of criticifin.
- To crown his praise, the belt Epic Poets in fuc-
ceeding times have looked up to Homer as the most
perfelt model for their imitation. They have not only
copied him exactly in the arrangement and conduct of
their subjec&; but many patlages in their poems are little

,F 2 elfit

* Here I mufl be forgiven for quoting four lines of a Noble

English poet, which, though frequently repeated by many of the
admirers of our immortal bard, and though inserted by Mr Pope in
his preface to his translation of the Iliad, appear to me to be ex-
travagant even to abfurdity.-The lines are there:

" Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
" For all books else appear so mean, fu poor,
" Verse will seem prose but Ifill persist to read,
" And Homer will be all the books you need."

elie than paraphrases fiom his admirable works. But
the style of Homer can be truely admired in the original
alone, where he will be found to have employed to the
utmost advantage the inimitable perfections of the finest
language ever spoken by men.

Homer is, besides, highly valuable on account of the

knowledge he affords us of the manners, sacrifices,
feasts, sieges, and battles of the men of those ancient
times. The purest maxims of morality are every where
inculcated by him. Under the emblem of Jupiter, he
describes an only and Almighty Deity, whose decrees
are fate; who is the source of all goodness and happi-
ness; and whose providence directs the most minute e-
vents that occur throughout the universe.

Hesiod was nearly cotemporary with Homer. He

was born at Cumes, a city of Etolia, and educated at
Afcra in Boeotia. Three of his performances have come
down to us : ift, His Works and Days, in which he
treats of Agriculture. This piece was the model of Vir-
gil's Georgics; and abounds with excellent maxims,
both with refped to the subjed of which it treats, and
to human life in general. 2dly, His Theogony, or Ge-
nealogy of the Gods. This is the most certain account
of the ancient heathen mythology. 3dly, The Shield
of Hercules, so called from its being a description of the
Ihield of that hero. His taste in writing was extremely
different from that of Homer, whose constant aim was
the sublime, while that of Hesiod was the beautiful.
Rural objects were the favourite theme of HI-efiod's

ului e.

Archiiochus was a native of Paros. Iambic verses, a

species of poetry adapted to violent and passionate sub-
jecs, were invented by this poet. Quintilian fays,
that his style was nervous and expressive; but that his
manner was very satirical and licentious.

Alceus was a native of Mytilene. From him the Al-
crnn verses derived their name. His pieces were severe

satires

satires againlt the tyrants of Lesbos, and against Pittacus
in particular. His style, according to Quintilian, was
lofty, and bore a great resemblance to that of Homer.
Besides his merit as a poet, he was likewise a brave fol-
dier.

Sappbo was cotemporary with Alceus, and a native of

the fame place. She invented the Sapphic verses, and
was honoured with the name of the Tenth Muse. Alceus
was a lover of hers; but his addresses seem to have
been ineffec&ial. She herself was greatly enamoured of
Phaon; who, on the other hand, paid very little regard
to her paflionate and beautiful complaints. The purity
of her manners was by no means answerable to the beau-
ty of her poetry. Her poems are chiefly admired on
account of her ikilful description of the pafions.

Stefichorus, a native of Himera in Sicily,

brought Lyric poetry to perfection. None of 614.
his works have reached us; but they were much
valued by the ancients for their gravity and dignity.

Theflpis was cotemporary with Solon, and a

native of Icaria, a town in Attica. He is re- 566.
garded as the inventor of Tragedy, which be-
fore his time 'vas a fort of farce, intermixed with songs
in honour of Bacchus, and'performed in the highways
and fireets, or wherever the performers happened to
full in with the thron.eR audience. Thespis gave it a
different turn. -Ile carried about his performers in a
cart, which served them likewise for a flage ; he cau'ed
them to befinear their faces with the lees of wine; and
introduced a person in the intervals of the chorus who
l)poke a magnificent description of some extraordinary
acion.--This was, in a manner, the cradle of tragedy.

Sinmonides a native of Ceos, one of the islands called

Cyclades, distinguished himself by his elegiac verses.
His answer to Hiero's question, "W XTAT IS GOD ?"
is well known. Simonides at first desired one day to
coniider of the queltion; when that we.s elapsed, he de-

f
I ' Tnanded

manded two days more; then four; and so on for a
considerable time, always doubling the space he had last
requested. Hiero, surprised at this behaviour, aiked
him the reason of it ; " Because," answered Simonides,
"the more I meditate on the fubjedt of your question,
'the more incomprehensible I find it." His verses are
much commended by the ancients, and have acquired
him great reputation.

The origin of philosophy, as well as that of poetry,

is likewise fixed to this period; when several Greeks,
whose dispositions did not incline them to business, ap-

plied themselves to the Rtudy of nature. Thales,
6oo. a native of Miletus, and the founder of the Ionic

fed, is thought to have led the way. He learned

aitronomy of the priefis of Memphis, and was the first
Greek that treated of natural philosophy. He gave ge-
neral notions of the universe; and maintained, that an
only supreme intelligence regulated all its motions. He
ditlinguifhed the sphere into eight circles, and discover-
ed the cause of eclipses, which in those days were ac-
counted prodigies. Valerius Maximus tells of him,
that on being afkled, Whether a man could conceal his
adions from the Deity ? he answered, " How is that
"' possible, since he cannot conceal from him even his
" thoughts ?" From his strong attachment to study he
declined marriage. His great knowledge procured him
a place among the seven wife men of Greece.

Aizxi2nznler, his scholar, difcinguifled the four ele-
ments, and found out the obliquity of the ecliptic.

Although these firlf philosophers did not arrive at an

accurate knowledge of natural philosophy, they have
ncverthelefs the honour of having pointed out the way
to their followers in the fame track, to attain more ex-
-.(t dilcoveries.

Jieraclitzs was a native of Ephesus, where he became
;hc founder of a set of philosophers. We know little

.3 noru:

more of him, except that he was a profelfed mifan-
thrope; that he beheld with pity all the ations of men;
that he conflantly wept for their misery, and thence ob-
tained the name of the crying philosopher.

Deinocritus Was a native of Abdera in T'hrace, and

lived in the time of Xerxes king of Persia. As a philo-
fopher, he was in high esteem. His desire of know-
ledge induced him to travel through the greatest part of
the then known world; and in thofejournies he spent a
very considerable fortune. He lived in perfet indiffe-
rence about all the events of life, and used to laugh at
the follies of mankind. His residing for the most part
among tombs, inclined many to believe him to be dif-
ordered in his judgement; and the inhabitants of Ab-
dera intreated Hippocrates, the famous physician, to go
and fee him. Hippocrates, accordingly, paid him a
visit; but on discoursing with him, immediately disco-
vered him to be a man of extroardinary knowledge and
understanding. Diogenes Laertius aflures us, that De~
mocritus possessed a fine genius, and had acquired a
great fund of the most valuable learning.

T 4 APPE N-

# APPENDIX. PART I. Of the Spartan and Athenian Governments.

## SECT. I.

A P P E N D I X.

P A R T I.

Of the Spartan and Altheniann Govertnments.

BEFORE proceeding to the more interefling part
of our history, we have judged it proper to subjoin to
this firfL Book a separate and diftind account of the
most curious particulars of Grecian polity and manners.
This it was impoflible to interweave with propriety into
the body of the work ; and yet it is neceflary that the
reader fhlould be acquainted with the fubje&, because
otherwise he could not have an accurate comprehension
of many of the historical passages that follow. As the
particulars of which we mean at this time to treat have
a strong connection with, and serve to illustrate one
another, we thought it best to throw them altogether
in an Appendix. We have divided this Appendix into
two parts. In the firit we fall speak more particularly
of the Spartan and Athenian governments; and, in the
second, we shall treat in general of the education of the
youth ; of the games and flows ; of the principal cir-
curimfances relating to the art of war; and of the nmof
remarkable particulars of the religion of the Greeks.

S E C T. I.

T H E Spartan institutions may be confidered under
two diftind heads : iA, So far as they regarded the
public government of the state; 2dzy, So far as they re-
garded the private lives of the citizens.

The

The public government of Sparta was managed by

two kings, a senate, the people, and the ephori.-
Hence it partook of the nature of each of the three prin-
cipal forms of government, monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy.

The civil power of the two kings of Sparta was very

limited. In time of peace they enjoyed little else than
the name of kings, and were truly no more than the
two chief men of the senate. They were not at liberty
by themselves alone to undertake any public business
whatever; all matters of that kind being determined by
a plurality of voices in the senate. In time of war, in-
deed, they were inveifed with an absolute authority, in
quality of generals. But they were accountable for
their management. Their conduat was liable to inve-
fligation, and their pcrfons subject to punifihment. We
may therefore easily conceive, that the two kings of
Sparta made but a poor figure in time of peace.

The senate was the grand institution of Lycurgus. It

was intended to counterbalance the power of the kings
on the one hand, and that of the people on the other.
It was composed of thirty members, including the two
kings. The whole legislative authority vas lodged in
their hands, and every point was determined by a plu-
rallty of voices.

The power of the people was by Lycurgus very much

confined. Their principal privilege was that of choo-
sing the members of the senate. Their afient indeed
was necefiary to give fanltion to the laws. But they
were not permitted to reason or to deliberate upon such
matters as were laid before them; being obliged simply
to approve or to rejec the opinion proposed to them by
the senate. Their assemblies too were in a great mea.
sure dependent on the senate, which might call them
together or dismiss them at its pleasure.

This was the footing upon which Lycurgus eltablifh-
ed the public government at Sparta; and in this fitua-

*3.~~~~~~2 ~tion

tion it remained for about 130 years after his death.
About that period it was thought necessary to devise
some curb to the power of the senate, which appeared
to be too absolute and great. For this purpose, there-
fore, the Ephori were created in the time of King
Theopompus. These magistrates were five in number;
were chosen by the people, and out of their own num-
ber; and continued only one year in office. They bore
a great resemblance to the tribunes of the people among
the Romans. Their authority was very great. They
could oblige the inferior magifirates, and even the
kings themselves, to render an account of their ad-
ministration; and they could arrest and imprison the
persons both of the senators and of the kings. A re-
markable instance of this power happened in the cafe of
Pausanias.

The most important article respecting the private po-

licy of the Spartans, was the equal distribution of the
lands. Lycurgus, when he began his reformation,
finding the whole territory of the state in the hands of
a few wealthy citizens, used his utmost endeavours to
prevail with those citizens to relinquish their possessions,
and to content to an equal division of the lands among
the whole members of the commonwealth. In this ar-
duous work, he was lucky enough at last to succeed.
The whole territory of Laconia was difiributed into
30,000 shares, and assigned to the inhabitants of the
country; and the liberties of Sparta were in like man-
ner, divided into 9ooo shares, and allotted to the inha-
bitants of the city. Each share contained as much
ground as was judged fuflicient for the subsistence of one
family; which was computed to require about seventy
bushels of grain, and a proportionable quantity of wine
and oil.

To remove likewise, as far as possible, all pretensions

to diftintion that might arise from an inequality in
point of moveable effects, Lycurgus prohibited the use

of

of gold and silver, and obliged the Spartans to confine
themselves to iron money alone, of which the weight
and small intrinsic value must render its use extremely
difficult. By these means he banished luxury and mag-
nificence, brought riches into contempt, and made mo-
defly and simplicity to be honoured and efleemed. It is
vain to pretend to reason about the rationality of there
eftablilhments of Lycurgus,fince it is certain, that while
Sparta retained her contempt for riches, she continued
powerful and glorious.

Still farther to prevent the desire of riches, and all in-

citements to luxury, Lycurgus prohibited the pracice
of all superfluous and unnecefTary arts at Sparta, and
all public shows, that his citizens might not be accu-
ftomed to fights condemned by the laws, nor liften even
to an indirect justification of crimes and irregular pas-
sions. In place of such occupations and amusements,
hunting, and bodily exercises, were encouraged, and
constituted the ordinary diversion of the Spartans.

To complete this system of equality that Lycurgus

desired to establish among his countrymen, his last
and most effeaual institution was that of the public
tables, at which all the citizens, rich and poor promif-
cuoufly, were obliged to eat of the fame diet. Every
table contained fifteen persons, each of whom furnished
a certain quantity of the requisite provisions. A bushel
of flour, eight gallons of wine, five pounds of cheese
two pounds and a half of figs, together with a fiall fum
of money to purchase a little flelh and fish, and to cook
the victuals, was the monthly contribution of every
member. No new member could be admitted to any
of those tables without the consent of the whole com-
pany. From their entertainments all delicate luxurious
dilhes were banished; their ordinary and most esteemed
fare being a fort of black broth*.

This

* Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, being informed of the extra-
ordinary fondness of the Spartans for this black broth, is said to

have

This last regulation met with much opposition, and

occasioned an infurredtion, in which Lycurgus had one
of his eyes knocked out. But the gentleness with
which he treated the author of that misfortune, very
much increased the public esteem for him; and the re-
gulation at last took place. The public tables soon be-
came so many schools of temperance and instruction to
the youth.

But of all the institutions of Lycurgus, the most ex-

traordinary, perhaps, and the most wife, were those
that regulated the education of the children, which he
justly regarded as the ground-work and basis of his
whole system of government. His care in that refpea
may be said to have preceded not only the birth, but e-
ven the conception of the children, by the itrict atten-
tion he belfowed on procuring them healthy and vigo--
rous mothers. For this purpose, the Spartan young
women were from their earlietl years accutfomed to a
course of hardy and laborious exercises, proper for in-
vigorating the body, such as wrestling, running, and
throwing the javelin. These exercises, too, inspired
them with a spirit of emulation and heroism, and im-
proved their minds no less than their bodies. Hence
the softer sex, which, in the modern nations inhabiting
our hemisphere seems to be naturally actuated with a
desire of outward ornament and dress, to attract the ad-
miration of the other sex, at Sparta aspired at the moit
manly accomplifliments. Their education there ren-
dered them susceptible of the most heroic virtues; and
that to such a degree, that the love of their country of-
ten extinguished the powerful ties of natural affection.

The

have procured a Spartan cook for the single purpose of preparing it
for him. But the tyrant on tailing it, having ihown great dislike
to it, the cook, with the firong sense of his native laconicifn, told
l)ionyfius, that one must bathe in the Eurotas before he could ac-
quire the proper taste for this broth.-Iniinnating, by his obfelvation,
tir:t one muli fare as abftemioufy, and use as violent exercise, as a
Spartan did, before he could relish their favourite broth.

The mother, who heard that her son had fallen in the
service of his country, anxiously examined the body, to
fee whether he had received his wounds before or be-
hind: in the former cafe she rejoiced, in the latter she
wept.

Nor were the Spartan maidens premitted to receive

husbands till they arrived at the flower of their age :-
An instance of singular wisdom in their excellent law-
giver. His sagacity was no less conspicuous in contri-
ving things so, that their marriages were all clandestine,
and rather a rape than a formal con jundion. By these
means the interviews between the new-married couple
were few, difficult, and Ihort. Hence temperance in
their pleasures.

Every child, when born, was examined by the oldelf

men of its tribe; who, if they thought it too delicate
and weak, condemned it to die. It is observable, that
the Spartan children, though never wrapped in swaddlin;g/
cloaths, were all remarkably straight, well proportioned,
and beautiful. Their nurses were reckoned very care-
ful and skilful; and, on that account, were eagerly
fought after by the principal people in the other fiates
of Greece. It is reported, that Alcibiades was suckled
by a Spartan.

As the education of the children was accounted too

important a concern to be intrufled to the parents, who,
by an absurd and ill judged fondness, often ruin them,
the state took that matter entirely into its owrn hands.
A citizen of diflinguiflled integrity and ability was an-
pointed principal fuperintendant of the education of the
yuuth. At the age of seven years, the children were
taken from their parents, and diftributec into different
clafes, where they were inured to a hardy life, exposcd
to the extremities of cold and heat, obliged to walk
barefoot, with their heads shaved and uncovered, and
accustomed to the greatef fimiplicity and temperance in
'teir diet.

At

At the age of twelve they were removed into another

class, where they underwent a more revere discipline
still. There they learned obedience to the laws and
magistrates, and reverence for the old men. To in-
spire them with bravery, and to render them expert at
the exerciies of war, they were obliged to fight with one
another. In these contests they used to contend with
such fury and obstinacy, as often to have some of their
members disabled, and Sometimes even to be killed. To
make them adventurous and cunning, they were allow-
ed to steal whatever they pleased, either from the gar-
dens or public halls of entertainment, provided they ac-
complifhed the theft without being deteced; but when
caught in the fat, they were punished. It was likewise
accounted a worthy accomplishment in the Spartan chil-
dren to be able to bear, without complaining, at a cer-
tain feat in honour of Diana, the most severe whipping,
even till the blood followed the stroke. Their under-
standings were cultivated more by the conversation of
the wisest citizens, than by study and reading. They
were particularly taught to give their answers in the few-
elt words possible. Hence conciseness either in style
or conversation, has obtained the name of Laconicinfm.
By these means a single syllable sometimes served among
the Lacedemonians for an answer.

The love of their country was the chief sentiment

with which the Spartanslaboured to inspire their youth;
and the science of war was almost their only fRudy. For
it appears to have been the intention of Lycurgus to
form a nation of soldiers ; not indeed that they might
indulge themselves in a spirit of conqueRt, and by that
means give way to ambition and injustice, which he e-
vidently meant to prevent, by prohibiting their making
use of any naval force; but that they might be able to
maintain the peace and liberties of their native country
againit turbulent and ambitious neighbours. Their
;:cft and principal lesson in the art of war was, Never

to

tofly, let the enemy outnumber them ever so much;
but eitheir to die or to conquer. Those who fled in any
engagement, were rendered infamous for ever, and
might be insulted by any person with impunity. An-
other singular, but very political maxim observed by the
Spartans in war was, Never to pursue a vanquished enemy
beyond the field of battle. For this reason their ad-
verfaries being sure of finding safety in flight, were in-
duced to fight with less obstinacy. War, intfead of a
hardflip, was by the Spartans considered as a recrea-
tion; for then, and at no other time, the extreme ri-
gour and severity of their usual course of life was in a
good measure relaxed.

We cannot conclude this article, without observing,

that to several eminent writers some of the Spartan cu-
ftoms and institutions have appeared reprehenlible.
Certain public exhibitions of their young women are
censured as indelicate :-And an article of freedom in
an essential point allowed to their married women, is
condemned as immoral, and as being subversive of one
of the most powerful bonds of paternal and of filial as:-
section.

We know, that to the first it may be answered by a

certain class ofphilofophers, That this apparent indeli-
cacy is only a consequence of the corruption of the man-
ners of those who account it such ; while, on the other
fide, it is a proof of the innocence and simplicity of the
Spartan manners- To the second the answer is more
obvious, and perhaps more solid, That at Sparta filial
affecion was intentionally diverted from the private
father, and direa edby the whole fylfem of their educa-
tion to the ifate, as the common father of all its mem-
bers: A circumstance which difcinguiflles Spartan polity
from that of every other nation, so far as we know,
which ever appeared on earth.

Their cruelty, both as individuals and as a communi-
ty, is made another subjec' of reproach againfl the

ancienti

ancient Spartans : And indeed it seems to be altogether
without excuse. To deitroy such of their children as
the infpeators judged to be too puny and weak, was
both cruel, and, we will venture to add, absurd. Dai-
ly experience might have convinced them, that an en-
feebled appearance in the first days of life is far from
being an unequivocal sign even of bodily strength. Innu-
merable instances to the contrary occur daily in all coun-
tries. But even in a nation of Spartan warriors, an a-
thletic make could hardly be put in competition with
bravery, which depends more on the mind than on the
body, and, like understanding, fancy, memory, and
other mental endowments, is most rarely communicated
to an Herculean frame. Of this the illustrious Spartan
Agefilaus furnishes a convincing proof.

But their more than savage barbarity to the Helots,

who tilled their fields, and on whom ofcourfe they de-
pended for the means of life, shocks humanity, and al-
most exceeds belief. They not only obliged them to
wear, on all occasions, both in their dress and deport-
ment, the most disgraceful marks ofabject servility, but
daily insulted, struck, and nmaimed them, without a flia-
dow of provocation ; and, often in pure wantonness,
flabbed them to death.

The horrid amusement of the Cryptia or ambufcadc,

not only permitted, but even authoritatively impofedon
the youth, is an instance of unprecedented, of incon-
ceivable barbarity. Parties of the hardieft young Spar-
tans, armed with daggers concealed under their cloaths,
were dispatched to tirverfe the fields, evidently with a
view to mark out such of the Helots as appeared to pof-
fess molf firength and courage, and the moitmanly ap-
pearance in face or gesture. Having made their obfcr-
vations, they concealed themselves in the most unfie-
quented places, till night gave them an opportunity to
perpetrate the meditated imaficre. Then tallying forth

from

## SECT. II.

from their lurking places, they stabbed with their dag-
gers the devoted unfufpeding wretches.

On the whole, the Spartan conllitution seems to have

been devised to render them a nation of hardy, unfeel-
ing warriors. Every circumstance deemed conducive to
this end, was fludied and pradtifed, though frequently
repugnant to the softer and most amiable feelings of the
human mind. But what cannot habit effect among
mankind ? The manners not only of diltant nations,
but even of the fame nations in different ages, differ as
much as the motions of a tumbler differ from those of a
labourious peasant.

So extraordinary a people soon attracted the admira-

tion of their neighbours, as well as of itrangers; and
Sparta acquired a pre-eminence over all Greece. The
other states, when at war, reckoned it a singular ad-
vantage to obtain a Spartan for their general, and paid
him the motl perfect obedience.

Most of the ancient philosophers were of opinion, that

the government of Sparta approached the nearest of any
to perfedtion, as comprehending all the advantages, and
excluding all the disadvantages, of the other forms of
government. It is indeed certain, that while the infti-
tutions of Lycurgus were maintained in their full vigour
in Sparta, no sedition ever broke out there; no private
man possessed himself by violence of the supreme power;
and no king assumed more authority than the laws per^
mitted.

S E C T. II.

T O form an accurate notion of the form of govern-
ment in the Athenian republic, it is necefiiry to know
cdifinaly the different members whereofi t was composed.

The inhabitants of Athens were diftinguiflled into

three different ranks ; the citizens, the fitangers, the
laves.

G Those

Those only were naturally citizens, who were born !

of Athenian parents, both free. Foreigners indeed
might become citizens by the indulgence of the people,
who had the power of conferring that honour on such
as had rendered signal service to the tiate. All the citi-
zens were by Cecrops distinguished into four tribes:
each of those tribes consisted of three divisions; and
each division was subdivided into thirty families. About
leo years after Solon, this distribution of the citizens
was altered by Clisthenes, who increased the number
of tribes to ten ; in which situation they continued till
the time of Demetrius Poliorcetes, when they were
further increased to twelve. The young men were not
admitted to the rank, nor intitled to any of the privileges
of citizens, till the age of twenty years. Then after
swearing in the mnft solemn manner never to fly from
battle, to defend their country to their last breath, and
to advance its honour and glory with all their might,
they were inscribed in the lift of citizens. The whole
power of government was exclusively confined to the
citizens alone.

Such strangers as fettled at Athens, either for the

fake of commerce, or from any other motive, always
put themselves under the proteetion of some citizens.
They were obliged to pay a tax to the slate, and were
subjei to its laws; but had no ihare in the govern-
ment.

The third class consisted of two divisions : if, The

servants, who, though free by birth, were constrained
through poverty to gain a livelihood by serving the o-
ther citizens: And, 2dly, Theflaves, properly so call-
ed, who were either prisoners taken in war, or were
purchased with money. The last lived in a state of ab-
solute dependence on their masters, and were account-
ed part of their property. When treated with cruelty,
they had a right to complain to the proper magiitratc;
and on proving what they alleged, their mafiers were

2 *obliged

obliged to difpofe'of them. A certain proportion of
their gains was appropriated to their own use. They
might purchase their liberty, though contrary to the
pleasure of their masters; and their masters might vo-
luntarily set them at liberty whenever they thought
proper.

We have seen in the preceding part of this history,

that the Athenians were at firit ruled by kings. We
have seen them upon the death ofCodrus asserting their
liberty, taking the whole power of government into
their own hands, and setting up principal magiitrates of
their own creation, called Arcbons. We have seen them
limiting still more and more the power of those Ar-
chons; firlR reducing the duration of their office to ten
years, intead of conferring it for life, as at first; and
afterwards confining it to the space of one year.

Sensible at last of the numberless inconveniences at-

tending this unsettled state of government, they unani-
moufly empowered Solon to make such alterations in it
as he flould judge proper, and to bring the manner of
proceeding in their public deliberations to a regular and
permanent form.

Aware of the turbulent and licentious disposition of

the people with whom he had to deal, Solon accepted
of the office with relucance. Naturally averse himself
to despotic sway, and inclined to the free and equal rule
of a well regulated democracy, knowing perfetly at the
fame time the impossibility of reconciling the Athenians
to any other mode of fubjedion, he devised for them a
form of government purely popular. But as he was
well acquainted with the many dangers and. imperfec-
tions incident to that system, he endeavoured, by every
possible precaution, to obviate them as far as he could.

Solon would willingly have begun his adminintration,

by eflablifhing at Athens the fame equality in point of
fortune that prevailed at Sparta. But foreseeing the
danger of such an attempt in his circumstances, he re-

G c solved

solved to take a middle course, and to procure an ac-
quittal of all debts then subsisting among the citizens,
By that means he delivered from slavery a great number
of citizens, whose excessive debts had obliged them to
part with their freedom; and at the fame time he struck
at the root of molt of the commotions that had of late
disturbed the state, which were produced by the rigour
of the richer citizens in exacing their debts, and by the
refraicory disposition and the inability of the poorer fort
to pay them.

Solon next proceeded to rank all the citizens into

four classes, in proportion to the wealth of each. The
first three claifes comprehended the richer citizens, who
alone were to be promoted to all the offices of trust or
dignity in the state. The fourth class contained the
poorer citizens, who, though excluded on account of
their poverty from polls and employments, had never-
thelefs the privilege of voting in the public aflemblies;
which, as we shall by and by fee, eventually threw into
their hands the whole power of the state : for as this
class comprehended a greater number of persons than
the other three together, they possessed a preponderancy
of voices on all occasions. Afterwards, too, this ex-
clufion of the poorer fort from public offices- was abo-
lilhed by the interposition of Aristides, and full liberty
was granted to the meaneRf citizen, of arriving at any
office whatever.

Solon next laid down rules about the form of pro-

ceeding in the public al'emblies. These assemblies were
composed, as we have already observed, of the whole
collective body of the citizens ; each of whom not only
might, but was obliged to aiift at them. Their meet-
ings were of two kinds, ordinary and extraordinary.
The ordinary meetings were appointed tobe holden on
certain fixed days; and the particular business that was
to come under the consideration of each meeting was
properly known and ascertained. The extraordinary

meetings

meetings were called by public proclamation, when any
matters occurred whose nature or importance required
more solemn consideration or quicker dispatch. Every
meeting was opened with sacrifices and prayer; after
which the president explained the matter about which
they were to deliberate. If the question had been pre-
vioufly agitated in the senate, in the manner that we
shall afterwards describe, the opinion there given was
read; and the people were aiked, Whether they thought
proper to confirm it? If they demurred, those who
chose to deliver their sentiments about the affair were
desired to ascend the tribunal. The oldest members ge-
nerally spoke first. When the pleadings were conclu-
ded, the people gave judgement by holding up their
hands, in sign of approbation of the opinion or proposal
laid before them. But if a majority gave not this sign,
the proposal was rejeced. After the pleasure of the
assembly was thus known, their sentence was reduced
into writing, was then read over to them, and was con-
firmed a second time.

The whole power of the commonwealth, both legis-

lative and judicative, was vested in-thefe popular assem-
blies. For not only were all matters of public concern,
fiich as the enacting and abrogating of laws, religious
affairs, the creation of magistrates, and inquiries into
their administration, peace, war, treaties, and the re-
wards of signal services done to the state, discussed in
them; but every quefsion of private right might be
tried before them, by appeals from all the judicatories
in the republic.

As some fort of restraint, or rather as a directory to

the popular aifemblies, Solon inffituted the senate;
which he formed of Ioo men chosen out of each tribe;
and the tribes in his time being four, the whole mem-
bers of the senate amounted, by consequence, to 400.
Their number, however, was afterwards ;lcreafed to
5oo, upon the increase of the number of t 'jbes to ten,

G 3 about

solved to take a middle course, and to procure an ac-
quittal of all debts then subsisting among the citizens.
By that means he delivered from slavery a great number
of citizens, whose excessive debts had obliged them to
part with their freedom; and at the fame time he struck
at the root of most of the commotions that had of late
disturbed the slate, which were produced by the rigour
of the richer citizens in exacting their debts, and by the
refractory disposition and the inability of the poorer fort
to pay them.

Solon next proceeded to rank all the citizens into

four classes, in proportion to the wealth of each. The
first three clafles comprehended the richer citizens, who
alone were to be promoted to all the offices of trust or
dignity in the slate. The fourth class contained the
poorer citizens, who, though excluded on account of
their poverty from ports and employments, had never-
thelefs the privilege of voting in the public assemblies;
which, as we shall by and by fee, eventually threw into
their hands the whole power of the ifate : for as this
class comprehended a greater number of persons than
the other three together, they possessed a preponderancy
of voices on all occasions. Afterwards, too, this ex-
clufion of the poorer fort from public offices was abo-
lifhed by the interposition of Aristides, and full liberty
was granted to the meanest citizen, of arriving at any
office whatever.

Solon next laid down rules about the form of pro-

ceeding in the public aFcemblies. These aflemblies were
comnpofed, as we have already observed, of the whole
collecive body of the citizens; each of whom not only
might, but was obliged to afliit at them. Their meet-
ings were of two kinds, ordinary and extraordinary.
The ordinary meetings were appointed tobe holden on
certain fixed days; and the particular business that was
to come under the consideration of each meeting was
propcrly known and afccrtained. The extraordinary

meetings

meetings were called by public proclamation, when any
matters occurred whose nature or importance required
more solemn consideration or quicker dispatch. Every
meeting was opened with sacrifices and prayer; after
which the president explained the matter about which
they were to deliberate. If the queflion had been pre-
vioufly agitated in the senate, in the manner that we
ihall afterwards describe, the opinion there given was
read; and the people were asked, Whether they thought
proper to confirm it ? If they demurred, those who
chose to deliver their sentiments about the affair were
desired to ascend the tribunal. The oldest members ge-
nerally spoke first. When the pleadings were conclu-
ded, the people gave judgement by holding up their
hands, in sign of approbation of the opinion or proposal
laid before them. But if a majority gave not this sign,
the proposal was rejected. After the pleasure of the
assembly was thus known, their sentence was reduced
into writing, was then read over to them, and was con-
firmed a second time.

The whole power of the commonwealth, both legis-

lative and judicative, was vested in-thefe popular assem-
blies. For not only were all matters of public concern,
such as the enacting and abrogating of laws, religious
affairs, the creation of magistrates, and inquiries into
their administration, peace, war, treaties, and the re-
wards offignal services done to the state, discussed in
them; but every queflion of private right might be
tried before them, by appeals from all the judicatories
in the republic.

As some fort of restraint, or rather as a directory to

the popular assemblies, Solon instituted the senate;
which he formed of Ioo men chosen out of each tribe;
and the tribes in his time being four, the whole mem-
bers of the senate amounted, by consequence, to 400.
Their number, however, was afterwards :ncreafed to
5oo, upon the increase of the number of t jbes to ten,

G 3 about

about Ioo years after Solon, when each tribe was al-
lowed to furnish o5 members to the senate. They were
all chosen by lot. But no man could become a senator
before the age of thirty, nor till Rtrict inquiry was made
into his private character; and before his admission, he
bound himfelfby oath to give judgement in every que-
frion according to law, and to deliver at all times to the
people of Athens the best counsel that occurred to him.
Every member of the senate received a salary out of the
public treasury. The president was elected out of each
tribe in rotation.

The senators, before assembling, sacrificed to Jupiter

and Mercury. It was the president's business to lay be-
fore the senate the questions on which they were to de-
liberate. Each judge flood up in his turn, and deliver-
ed his opinion. The manner of stating the question be-
ing agreed on, it was written out and read aloud. The
judges proceeded to give their votes by throwing either
a black or a white bean into an urn. If the number of
white beans exceeded that of the black, the sentence
paired in the affirmative ; if the number of black beans
was greatest, it was rejected. But before the decree of
the senate could have the force of law, it required the
approbation of the assembly of the people, before whom
therefore it next came. If affirmed by them, it paILed
into a law; if not, it was only good for a year. This
council was, as already mentioned, intended by Solon
as a check upon the assembly of the people; which be-
ing for the greater part composed of a confuted multi-
tude, without education, capacity, or much zeal for
the public good, flood in need of such an inilitution to
inform and direc them, to fix their inconstancy, to
prevent their temerity, and to bestow on their.delibe-
rations a prudence and maturity to which the multitude
necessarily were strangers. For this reason the moit
important matters of the slate, such as those relatingto
neace, war, the army, the navy, and the public funds,

were

were firit agitated in the senate, and brought before the
popular assemblies only in the second instance.

The next considerable ac of Solon's administration

was the inflitution, or rather perhaps the reformation,
of the court of Areopagus. The power of this court
was, properly speaking, purely judicative. It was com-
posed of the Archons, who had served the stated time
in that capacity, and had discharged the duty of their
office with diflinguiflled integrity and reputation. The
number of the judges in this court was not fixed. Some-
times they amounted to two or three hundred. 'The
court of Areopagus never met but at night, and in an
open place; and those who pled before them were not
permitted to indulge themselves in declamation, but
were ftritly confined to the merits of their cause.

This court was always most highly reipeted, on ac-

count of the singular juffice and integrity of the judges,
who were intrufled with the education of the youth,
with the care of the public money, and with power to
punifll those who lived in idleness. They had likewise
jurisdiction in matters of religion, and deliberated about
the introduction of new divinities, and the building of
temples and altars. Besides the matters here enumera-
ted, they meddled with no other, unless upon particular
application of the slate, Which sometimes had recourse
to the wisdom of their deliberation on any dangerous
emergency.

It were equally tedious and unnecefafry to enter into

a particular detail of the various subordinate institutions
of Solon. We hope that what has been fai may give
the reader a diftinc notion of the public government
of this famous republic, and that is all we proposed *.
We fllall therefore conclude with a few words on the
article of the public revenues of Athens.

G 4 These

* We shall, however, by way of note, mention very briefly fomre

of the most remarkable of Solon's laws.--- -Ie who in public com-
motions remained neuter, was ldelaxred infamous.-A xich heiress,

who

These arose, ift, From the produce cf the territory

of the republic,. the sale of its woods, and the great
fums drawn from its lilver mines. 2dly, From the con-
tributions of the allies to support the expences of war.-
In the time of Aristides, the produce of this fund a-
mounted to no more than 460 talents; Pericles aug-
mented it about a third; and some time after it was
more than doubled, and rose to 1300 talents. 3dly,
From the fines, and confiscations imposed by the courts

of

who in marriage found her wishes disappointed, from some na-
tural defe& about her husband, of which he must have been fen-
fible before marriage, might associate with her husband's nearest
male relations :-No portions were allowed to be given with any
wives, except those who were heireffes.--All injurious reflections
against the dead were forbidden ;-so were public revilings against
the living.-Thofe who had no children were authorised to be-
queath their effects by will, from which before Solon's time they were
restrained.- From a desire to promote industry and manufactures,
which the barrenness of the teritories of Attica rendered more par-
ticularly necessary, he ordained that the son, who by his father had
not been educated in Come business, should not be obliged to support
that father when in want: - And he who was thrice conviced of
idleness becameinfamous.---To discourage profligacyandto promote
marriage, illegitimate children were not obliged to relieve their pa-
rents when reduced to poverty, while lawful children were, with the
exception just mentioned, compelled, under the penalty of infamy, to
maintain their indigent parents.-A:n adulterer caught in the fa&
might inltantly be put to death with impunity :-and the adulteress
was prohibited from adorning her person, and from assisting at public
sacrifices.- The exportation of any of the fruits of the ground,
except oil, was prohibited under severe penalties.--No franger
could be naturalised into the Athenian republic, unless he had been
previously exiled to perpetuity from his native country, or had fettled
with his whole family at Athens to prosecute some manufa&ure.-
The guardian was not permitted to live in the fame house with the
mother of his ward.--- The custody of the minor's person was not
intrusted to his presumptive heir.---An archon who appeared drunk
suffered death.- He who dissipated his fortune was declared in-
famous.--He who refuted to be a soldier, or betrayed cowardice in
battle, was not allowed to appear in the forum, or in the placesof pu-
blic worthip.- The husband who continued to cohabit with hia
wife, after discovering that {he dishonoured his bed, became infamous,

# PART II. Of the education of the youth, the games and shows, matters of war and religion among the Greeks.

of law. And, lastly, From extraordinary taxes levied
in cafe of urgent necessity upon all the inhabitants of
Attica.

PA R T II.
Of the education of the youth, the games and /7jows, mat-

ters of war and religion among the Greeks.

OF all the branches of Grecian polity, that which
regarded the education of their youth was the moit
admirable. To the wisdom of those ancients in this
reipedt, may be chiefly attributed the vast superiority
in point of character and ability of the individuals a-
mong them over those of modern times. To treat this
subjed with the accuracy its importance requires, would
be a work equally laborious and useful. But as it is in-
compatible with our present design to enter into a mi-
nute investigation of this matter, we shall content our-
selves with giving a general view of it in as few words
as possible.

Among the Greeks, the education of the youth was

a branch of government; and for that purpose public
exercises were appointed, both for forming the body,
and for improving the mind.

Their bodily exercises were principally calculated to

inure them to the fatigues of war. Proper schools were
set a part for the performance of those exercises, and
ikilful masters were appointed by the public to oversee
them. There the youth praclifed wrestling, riding, the
use of arms, and military evolutions. Hunting too,
which is an image of war, was in great repute, and
very highly encouraged by the ancients. In the course
of that diversion, the youth were accustomed to sup-
port the most violent fatigue, cold, heat, and all the
other varieties of the weather; hunger, thirst, and hard

journies.

journies. For this reason Xenophon, one of the finest
writers that Greece produced, who with the science of
a philosopher united the,fkill of an excellent commander,
a thorough knowledge of the world and the politeness
of a gentleman, thought it worth his while to compose
a treatite on the art of hunting; and in his beautiful
philosophical romance, the (yropedeia, he takes frequent
occation to launch forth into the praises of it, and to
fiow in the person of his hero, to what useful purposes
it contributes.

Dancicng, too, was reckoned an essential part in the

education of the ancient Greeks. Its principal aim with
them was to bellow on the body an unconstrained and
easy motion, and a graceful air. To excel in it, there-
fore, was accounted an accomplifllment worthy the
gravest and greatell characters. Hence even Epami-
nondas, one of the most perled& characers that Greece
ever produced, was praised for dancing gracefully, and
for playing Ikilfully on the flute.

Mlj/ ic, which holds a middle rank between the exer-

cifes of the body and the qualifications of the mind, was
iikewile carefullyv cultivated by the Greeks, and conii-
dered as a necefliiry and polite accomplishment. The
ancients indeed ascribed to this art the most wonderful
eflecls, believing it capable to tooth the passions, to sos-
ten the manners, iind even to humanize barbarous and
savage diltpolitions. On this account Socrates himielf
was not alllamcdI, when pretty far advanced in years,
to learn to play upon mulical instruments: And Themi-
ftocles, other, , itfe so well accornplithed, was thought
deficient in merit, becaute he could not touch the lyre.
Even Platoi , the :.;aveft philo;fphler of antiquity, deem-
ed thefl two a.rts of dancing and music so important,
that in his books of laws, lie takes much pains to pre-
fcrjiie rproper rule4- with rcgard to them. But the taste
of tic Greeks, i these two articles, was at length cor-
r.-iI.edl aid. deprLved by tie extreme licentiouifefsi of

their

their theatres, where both music and dancing were by
the comedians applied to the purpose of exciting the
loosest and most shameful paflions.

Greece was the nursery and the residence of every

branch of polite learning, of arts, and of sciences. E-
very study that depends on the powers of imagination,
or the faculties of the understanding, was there carried
to the Summit of perfection. Hence their youth applied,
with the utmost assiduity, to the study of mathematics,
philosophy, poetry, and eloquence, and were early in-
ftructed by the bell masters in the principles of their na-
tive language; of which the various beauties were care-
fully pointed out to them. By these means the Athe-
nians in particular imbibed that exquisite taste for the
refinements of language, which has been the wonder of
succeeding ages.

But the acquisition they valued the most, and which

was the object of their warmedt ambition, was elo-
quence. This indeed, in popular governments like
theirs, was of all qualifications the most useful, being
the path that conducted to the highest offices of the fl ate,
and raised those who excelled in it to the most diltin--
guified rank among their fellow-citizens.

Before the time of Socrates, the sciences were chiefly

taught by masters called S'ophijis, a vain presumptuous
set of men, who were eternally diiputing and boalting of
their knowledge. The excellent phiiolbpher just men-
tioned took great pains to detect their ignorance, and
to expose them to ridicule. This provoked them against
him; and we ihall by and by fee, that he owed his de-
ftrucaion in a great measure to the retenentnt of those
Sophists.

The games and combats, so much in uie among the

Greeks, were principally encouraged on account of
their being so admirably calculated for rendering the
bodies of the youth robust and vigorous, and for ena-
bling them to iupport the fatigues of war . and likewiie

on

on account of their forming a part of their religious wor-
ship. Of there exercises the famous heroes of antiquity,
such as Hercules, Theseus, Castor, and Pollux, were the
original inventors: and the greatest poets afpired-at
glory by celebrating the praises of those who conquered
and excelled in them. In process of time, public in-
ftrudors in these exercises arose, who formed a separate
profession by themselves, and often made an oftenta-
tious display of their skill, by contending with one an-
other in public,

Of these games there were four principal and more

solemn exhibitions, viz. the Olympic, the Pithian, the
Nemean, and the Isthmic.

The Olympic games were the most famous of all.

Their firfl institutor is unknown, though Pelops is with
a great deal of probability generally confidered as such.
No particular time was at first set apart for their cele-
bration. But about the year before Christ 784, Iphitus,
king of Elis, fixed it to every fourth year. These games
were consecrated to Jupiter; and were performed in the
neighbourhood of Olympia, a city in the diftri& of
Pisa. An Olympiad was a period of four years, being
the space of time that intervened between one celebra-
tion and another. Ancient authors reckon their chro-
nology altogether by Olympiads, beginning at the 0-
lympiad which happened in the year before Chrilt
776.

These more solemn games were no doubt at firfi e-

stablished by the Greeks, as well with a view to draw
together the leading men in the different flates of
Greece, that they might have an opportunity of deli-
berating on matters of general concern, as to inspire
the youth with a love of glory. The Greeks exerted
their utmost efforts to support the magnificence of theie
games, which were regularly celebrated while that
people maintained their liberty. The vast concourse of
spectators that constantly flocked thither, inspired the

com-

combatants with the highest spirit of emulation; and
to come off victorious was esteemed the greatest glory.
According to Horace, victory there raised the conquer-
ors to the rank of gods. The year was distinguished
by the name of the conqueror in the chariot races, ac-
counted the most honourable of all, and his praises
were sung by the most famous poets.-The prize was
a crown of laurel.

Running was confidered as the principal exercise at

the Olympic games; which therefore always opened
with the foot races.-The course was called the
Stadium, from the measure of that name, containing
about 6oo feet, which was originally the whole space
set apart for the performance of all the exercises, But,
in process of time, not only the particular spot within
which the disputants contended, but likewise that occu-
pied by the fpetators, was called by that appellation,
though perhaps exceeding the extent offeveral itadia.-
In the middle of the stadium, were displayed the differ-
ent prizes destined for the victors. At one extremity
of the lifts was placed the barrier or starting place,
formed by a cord extended; without which were ran-
ged the runners, and also the chariots. The drawing
of this cord was the signal for flarting. At the other
extremity of the lifts was placed the goal for those who
ran.

The runners were drawn up in a straight line, and

the moment the signal was given, they hurried towards
the goal with wonderful rapidity. In the shortest race,
he who arrived first at the goal was declared the victor:
But there was a longer race; in which, after reaching
the goal, they returned to the barrier. Besides these,
there were others of greater extent frill; and, in the
longest of all, the disputants were obliged to double
the goal no fewer than twelve times.

Horfe-races, though holden in a considerable degree
of estimation, were not so common: And, indeed, in

tho'e

thole-ancient times, when the use of stirrups was un-
known, it muff have required very great dexterity to
contend in them.

The chariot-races were the most famous of all; not

only because ancient princes and heroes generally fought
from chariots; but likewise, because those who con-
tended for the prize in that exercise, at the Olympic
games, were persons of the nobleRf birth, or diftinguifil-
ed by the greatness of their exploits. Two kings of
Syracuse, Gelo and Hiiero, and Philip of Macdeon, ac-
counted their having obtained the palm of vitory in
this dispute among their highest honours. Those cha-
riots were drawn by two or four horses yoked a-breast.
Hence the words bigae (a two-horfe carriage), and
.quadriogae, (a four-horfe carriage.) All the chariots
let off together from the fiarting-place, called carceres,
the instant the signal was given. The station of each
was fettled by lot; for some iations were much more
advantageous than others; those, for example, that
were ranged on the left, were nearer the goal, around
which they were obliged to turn, than those ranged on
the right, which had a larger circuit to perform; but
the fiations occupied by each, before fiarting, were
neceTiarily altered in the course of the race; for the
fleeteif horses, and inoft skilful charioteers, would cer-
tainly take pofleffion of the most convenient flations.
Of ail the Athenians, Alcibiades was the most ambi-
tious to distinguish himself in these games. For that
purpbofe he kept a great number of horses; and once
sent no fewer than seven chariots to contend for the
prize. On the day that he won the three first prizes,
he gave a grand entertainment to all the fpedcators,
who muff have formed a vast multitude. These vic-
tories of Alcibiades were immortalized by a famous ode
composed by the celebrated Euripides.

It was not necefiary for the disputant in the chariot-
races to condu&t his chariot in perbfn. It was sufficient

if

if he were present; or even if he sent thither his horses.
Thus Philip was at Potidea, when he received the news
ofhisviEtory in the chariot races at the Olympic games.
It may be observed too, that even women were permitted
to contend for the prize in that dispute. We learn from
history, that Cynifca, the litter of Agefilaus -king of
Sparta, was the firlt woman who set the example; and
that she gained' the victory in the race of the chariots
drawn by four horses.

The vidor, after being adorned with a crown of o-

live, received'apalm into his hand, and was conducted
through the stadium by a herald, who proclaimed him
victor by the found of a trumpet. This was accom-
panied by loud Ihouts from the fpedators. On return-
ing to his native city, he made his entry through a
breach in the wall, thrown down for that special pur-
pose, mounted on a chariot drawn by four horses, all
his fellow-citizens going out to meet him.-Vidory in
the chariot-races was, as already observed, esteemed the
mofl honourable of all; and historians diflinguiflled each
Olympiad by the name of him who had won the first
prize in that dispute.

The combats of the Athletae, or the Gymnaflic ex-

ercifes, formed the remaining part of the entertainment
at the Olympic games. The Athletae prepared them-
selves for this public exhibition of their strength and
dexterity by a regular education; and none but free
Greeks, of irreproachable moral charalters, were ad-
mitted into their number. They were obliged, pre-
vioufly to their appearing at the public games, to ipend
ten months in the Gymnafia; where, under the direc-
tion of proper mailers appointed for the purpose, they
observed the most rigid temperance, to harden their
bodies, and to adapt them to the requisite exercises.
Before engaging, the Athletae had their bodies care-
fully rubbed and anointed, that their limbs and joints
might thereby be rendered-more strong and pliable:

and(

and they fought quite naked, to give less hold to their
adversaries.

Those who presided at these games were called Ag-
nothetae.

The various exercises in which the Athletae contend-

ed, were wrefiling; -boxing;-the Pancratiun ;-
throwing the discus ;-and jumping.

Wrestling is an exercise every where so well known

that it were superfluous to spend many words in giving
a description of it.-Each contending party praftifed his
utmost strength, agility, and address, to throw down
his adversary. But if he who was thrown down carried
his opponent along with him, the dispute was not at an
end, for they still continued struggling; and he who
got uppermost at last, and obliged the other to demand
quarter, was declared conqueror.-Milon of Crotona,
and Polydamas, were the most renowned wrestlers of
all antiquity.

Boxing is an exercise pretty generally known like-

wife. In this exercise the combatants fought with their
fiffts, which were armed with ceflufes, a fort of gaunt-
let or glove, composed of leather straps lined with
plates of iron, to render the blows more violent; and
to preserve their heads from contusions, they wore a
fort of large cap. Sometimes, after contending a long
while, they were so exhausted by sweat and fatigue, as
to be obliged of concert to suspend the combat for a
little time, that they might draw breath, and refreflh
themselves. In these engagements, they were some-
times frightfully disfigured, having all their body co-
vered with miserable contusions, an eye knocked out,
or their jaw bones broken; and sometimes the combat-
ants dropped down dead on the spot.

The Pancratium required, as the word imports, the

whole strength of the body. It was a combination
both of wrestling and boxing; for the combatants em-
ployed the struggling pracftifed in the one, and the

-x . blow,

blows used in the other. They were at liberty even to
kick with their feet, and to make use of their teeth and
nails. Such combats jutfly appear to us barbarous and
horrible, nearly as much so as those of the Roman gla-
diators; and the fped-ators were certainly in a high de-
gree devoid of humanity, when they took pleasure to
fee men endeavouring in this manner to disfigure, and
even to murder one another.

The discus was an exercise in which the disputants

exerted all their flrength in throwing a piece offtone or
lead, of a round form, and generally of such a weight,
that it was with difficulty carried in both hands. This,
like most of the other exercises, was calculated to
itrengthen the body, that it might bear the more ea-
lily the burdens neceflary to be carried in war. Their
pollure, when they threw the finaller discus, was thus:
''hey advanced one leg to a convenient distance before
the other, bended their body, and holding the dilcus
poised on one arm, leaned their whole weight on the
foremost leg; then, after two or three motions in the
manner they were to throw, in order properly to ba-
lance their whole body, they discharged the discus. He
who threw it farthest won the prize. But besides
tlis, they had several other methods of throwing the
discus, generally making use of both arms at the fame
time.

Jumping and throwing the javelin were two exerciies
in which the disputants endeavoured to jump, and to
throw the javelin the farthest they poflibly could; and
lie was victor wTho threw it the fartheit of all.

Besides the exercises above described, it was utual at

the Olympic games for the poets, and finest geniuses or
the times, to contribute still further to the public enter-
tainment, by reciting before that vast assembly some of
their best compositions. There Herodotus publicly
read his'hiitory; which was to highly relifled and ap-
plauded, that each of the nine books, whereof it con-

1H fited,

filsed, was honoured with the name of one of the nine
muses. In like manner Lysias the famous Athenian o-
rator recited an oration, wherein he congratulated with
the Greeks on their having humbled the power of Di-
onyfius the tyrant. Several other orators likewise went
thither to read some favourite discourse.

The victors in those games had right of precedency

at all the public fllows. Besides this general indulgence,
they were particularly honoured at Sparta, by the pri-
vilege of being maintained at the public charge, and of
fighting nearetl to the person of the king.-The praises
of the victors were commonly the subjea of the odes
composed by the poets of those days. Pindar and Si-
monides made this the theme of all their works of that
kind.

The Pythian games were celebrated at Delphos every

fourth year, in honour of Apollo; and particularly in
memory of his victory over the serpent Python. Ths
victor in them was crowned with laurel.

The Nemaean games were celebrated every second

year at Nemnea, a city of the Peloponnese, in honour
of Hercules, who had destroyed the lion that infefled
lie forest of Nemaaa. The victor in them was crowncd
with parsley.

The Iflhmian games were celebrated every fourth

year in the isthmus of Corinth, in honour of Neptune.
They were instituted by Theseus. The victor in them
was crowned with pine leaves.

It is to be remarked, that during the celebration of

all these gaines, a general suspension of arms took place
through Greece, if at the time war happened to prevaii
between any of the itates,

One of the most famous combatants in the Gymna-

flic exercises, of which we have been just speaking,
was Milo the Crotonian, so called from his being a na-
tive of the city of Crotona. He is renowned in history
I;- lhis prodigious tllength, and Ilrs great coura"e.

WhCen

When but a very young man, he was fix times victor
at the Olympic games. The instances mentioned by
historians of his vast strength, and no less surprising
stomach, appear almost incredible. He is said to have
carried on his shoulders the whole length of a stadium
an ox four years old; to have killed it with a single
blow of his sift; and to have eaten the whole carcase in
one day. His strength, however, proved at last his
destruction; for having attempted to open entirely the
body of an oak tree, which he found a little open al-
ready, the wood closed upon his hands; and, being un-
able to disengage himself; he was devoured by the wild
beasts.

The Athenians were passionately fond of theatrical

representations. Among them judges were appointed
to examine each piece before it came to be publicly
acted: And the representations were conduted with
the highest magnificence.

Tragedy was not only invented, but carried to the

highest pitch of perfection among the Greeks. Thespis
may be said to have been the inventor of it :-Efchylus
improved upon his plan; and Sophocles and Euripides
compleated the work.

Terror and pity constituted the foul of the ancient

Greek tragedy; for that ingenious people, who in every
art and science made nature their sole model, discovered,
that these two passions were the bell adapted to affeEt
the minds of the fpedators. The principle upon which
this is founded, may perhaps be this; that as we are
lenfible of the misfortunes with which human life is
iurrounded, we are the more disposed to be affectel
with the representation of those misfortunes, from a
consciousness -of being ourselves exposed to feel the
sufferings by which we fee others diftrefied. But to
ascertain the principle appears unimportant. Terror
aind companion were the only passions whereby those
ancient poets studied to move their audience. They

H 2 seem

eem to have disdained to accompliflh that end by ex-
hibiting their heroes as the slaves of the softer passions,
and unmanned by the effeminate care of love. They
regarded weaknesses of that fort as a itain on their
characters.

Comedy kept pace with her fiter art at Athens, and

arrived at perfection much about the fame time. The
Athenians took great delight in comic representations;
being well pleated to fee the blemishes in the characters
of their superiors and cotemporaries exposed and cen-
fured by the ingenious touches of pleasantry and wit.
But we are juifly furpriled at the extreme licentioufnelI
of the Athenian comic poets for they not only made
the most illustrious characters of their age the butt of
their ridicule, but even meddled with the character of
their gods. They likewise presumed to touch on state
affairs; and introduced the faults of government as the
lubjea of their mirth and pleasantry. - This excelfive
licentiousness was one of the consequences of the po-
pular form of government.

Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophanes, were the most

famous of the Greek comic poets; but of the two firit
none of the performances have come down to us, and only
a few of those of the latter.- In the time of Lysander
and the thirty tyrants, the satirical liberty which had
till then prevailed on the stage was greatly restrained.
The poets, however, eluded the force of the injunction
given them, not to mention any person by name, by
drawing the character in so striking a manner, that the
audience had no difficulty to find out the person aimed
at. But at last, in the time of Alexander the Great, the
poets were entirely prohibited from attacking any living
character in their comedies, either directly or indirectly.
They were obliged therefore to have recourse to fiction,
and to devise adventures for their theatrical personages.
Comedy then became a copy of the living manners
o' the age in general.

FThe

The theatre of the Greeks consisted of three principal

divisions. The first, destined for the fpeEators, and
denominated the theatre, in a more ftrit and con-
fined sense, was in the form of a semicircle, and disposed
in the manner of an amphitheatre, containing three
stories of feats above one another, of which the highest
reached to the top of the building. Each story consist-
ed of seven rows of feats, separated from one another by
a landing place. The stories of feats were divided from
each other by three ranges of very large porticoes,
which composed the body of the amphitheatre. Be-
fides these, there were great square openings in proper
places, called vomitoria, by which the people entered
and retired; and flairs called cunei, because each ots
them formed a fort of corner conducing to the several
iiories of feats.

The second division was called the scenes, and con-

filred of two parts. The first of these, called in a more
limited sense the scenes, was of the form of a long
fluare, and presented a large front, along which the
itatues and decorations were dilpofed. The other part
of this division was a large space in front of the scenes,
called by the Greeks profceniium : but it might have been
in a strider sense denominated the stage; for it was
there that the actors performed the piece.

The third division, called the orchefira, was situated

between the theatre and the scenes, and was set apart
for the pantomimes, dancers, and musicians.

The whole edifice was open at top, and exposed to

the weather; but was commonly covered with fails or
large pieces of canvas, to preserve the spectators from
the heat of the fun.

The pallion of the Athenians for theatrical reprefenta-

tions rose at last to a kind of phrensy, and is accounted
one of the principal causes of the corruption of their
manners. It mull be allowed, that Pericles, from a de-
lire to conciliate the popular favour, was the first who

H 3 laid

laid the foundation of this corruption; for, by procuring
a certain salary to each citizen every day that sacrifices
were performed, or plays exhibited, he very naturally
produced in the hearts of the Athenians a strong incli-
nation for the theatre. Feasts and plays succeeded each
other almost without intermission ; and the people, as a
consequence of their taste for flows and diversions, be-
came idle and indolent.

The taste, however, was restrained within some fort

of bounds till after the death of Epaminondas. The
Athenians, finding themselves by that event delivered
from a man whose talents had raised the Thebans to
such a situation as to be able to dispute with them the
superiority in Greece; and who had, during his life,
kept them as well as the other states in constant action;
and having then no other enemy to give them diftur-
bance, consumed in lhows and feasts the whole public
money destined for the maintenance of their fleet and
army. What unaccountable delusion, to squander away
in empty amusements such immense fums; and to prefer
the love of pleasure to the safety of the fate and inte-
grity of manners! Their enemies, and particularly
Philip king of Macedon, did not fail to avail thernfelves
of this frate of indolence and dissipation into which the
Athenians had fallen.

THE Greeks were from the earliest times distinguish-

ed by their martial character; of which the Trojan war,
where so many brave chiefs gained immortal fame, fur-
nifhed the first public display. It is difficult to deter-
mine, whether this warlike temper was the cause or the
effect of that itrong spirit of liberty with which we have
seen them so universally actuated. But these two pas-
sions are certainly nearly allied, and must have greatly
cherished and heightened one another. This martial
disposition, too, must have been highly promoted by
the peculiar situation of the country, divided, as it was,

into

into a number of finall states, each governed by its own
laws, and influenced by its peculiar character and in-
terests. Accordingly, we fee, that ambition and jea-
lousy occasioned continual subjects of dispute among
those different states, and kept them almost constantly
at war with one another. Sparta and Athens were un-
questionably the chief of all the Giecian flates, and
rendered themselves no less famous by their rivallhip
and their perpetual struggles for superiority, than by the
lingularity and difference of their genius and manners.

From what has been already laid in the former part

of this Appendix, the cause of this pre-eminence ofSpar-
ta and Athens over their neighbours is sufficiently ap-
parent. The whole aim of the Spartan legislator ap-
pears to have been to render his countrymen a nation
of' oldiers. Every circumlnfance of their education was
admirably calculated for that purpose. To go barefoot,
to lie hard, to eat little, to susser every extremity of the
weather, to bear fatigue, and even wounds, to exercise
themselves continually at wreetling, running, hunting,
all contributed to that end. Their remarkable refpecl
for their magistrates and elders, and their perfect sub-
mifl.onl to the laws, prepared them adniirably for every
branch of military cdifipline. At Sparta too the mothers
wept only for fucl of their children as fled, not for
those that fell. All means, in a word, were practised
to make the Spartans invincible in battle.

The Athenians, though not educated in so hardy a

manner, were neverthelels animated with an equal spirit
of valour. The ancient glory of their nation, which
had always distinguished itself by its warlike ations,
was a powerful incentive to bravery. A generous e-
mulation, not to yield in point of merit to their rivals
the Spartans, likewise served greatly to promote the
martial temper natural to the Athenians. But above all,
the rewards and honours bellowed on those who had be-
haved with remarkable courage in battle; the monu-

H 4 . ments

ments erected to the memory offuch as had fallen in the
service of their country; and the excellent funeral ora-
tions publicly pronounced on the mofi solemn occasions,
to render their names immortal, contributed wonder-
fully to keep alive the flame of valour, and to inspire
them with extraordinary bravery. This end was like-
wife greatly advanced by the attention ihown by the re-
public to such of their citizens as had fuifered in war.
For not only those who were mainmed, but the children
and parents of those who were killed in battle, were
taken under the immediate protedtion of the common-
wealth, and educated and maintained at the public ex-
pence.

By these means Sparta and Athens enjoyed an undif-

putable superiority, in point of valour and military dif-
cipline, over all the other Rfates. Thebes alone, by an
extraordinary exertion of bravery, attempted to ihare
in their glory. But her power, as we fllall fee in the
sequel, was of very flhott continuance.

'he armies both of the Lacedemonians and Athe-

nians consisted of four classes; citizens, allies, merce-
naries, and slaves. At Athens, in the time of Deme-
trius Phalerius, were reckoned about 2o,0oo citizens,
I,coo itrangers, and 40,000 slaves.

All the Athenians, at the age of twenty years, were

inrolled, and engaged by oath to serve the republic,
which they were obliged to do till they were sixty years
old. Citizens alone were admitted on that footing.
Each of the tribes whereof the state was composed fur-
nifhed a certain number of soldiers, according as the pu-
blic exigencies required, either for the sea or land service;
for in process of time the naval power of Athens became
very conliderable, in so much, that at the beginning of
the Peloponnesian war, we flall fee them maintaining a
fleet of no fewer than 3oo gallies,

A t Sparta, in the time of Demaratus, were computed
to be 800o Spartans. These were the flower of the na-

tioll,

tion, every individual of that number possessing the
qualifications of a general; and they were all inhabi-
tants of Sparta; for those who went by the name of
Lacedemonians lived in the country. Their allies formed
the most numerous part of their troops. The mer-
cenaries were maintained by the ifate; and every Spar-
tan was attended by four or five Helots.

The age of those who bore arms among the Lacede-

monians, was from thirty to sixty years; those of a lets
or more advanced age were charged with the defence of
the city. They never put arms into the hands of their
saves, except in cafes of great necessity. Their pro-
per national forces altogether amounted only to about
Io,ooo men; for Sparta was not so populous by a great
deal as Athens.

The infantry of the Greeks, in general, confited of

two great divisions: ift, The heavy armed soldiers,
each of whom carried a large shield, a lance, a javelin,
and a sword. 2dly, The light-armed soldiers, who
bore only bows and flings, and in the beginning of the
battle were commonly potled in the front of the army.
The armies were divided into different squadrons or
regiments, commonly confiting, as at the battle of
Mantinea, of between .500 and 600 men; these again
were subdivided, like our modern regiments, into four
companies of 128 men each; and these companies were
further Subdivided into four parties, which we may call
platoons, conliting of 32 men each, and which admitted
of four men abreast, and eight deep; or eight abreast
and four deep.

The Lacedemonians had but few cavalry; and the

Athenians fill fewer, their territory being inadequate
to the support of any conliderable number of horse.

The Athenians were much superior to the Lacede-

monians in naval power. Their fleets confided of two
i'rts of flips: fl, Their fiips of war, called by them
:,./'r pips, which were rowed: 2dly, Their transports,

which

which carried the provisions and baggage, and were
managed with fails. Of their ships of war some had
but one bench of oars, without any deck; some had
two, some three, some four, and some five benches of
oars. Hence they were denominated b1iremes, triremzes,
CPc. according to their number of benches. The
trire-nes were most in use. The most common opinion
is, that the different benches of oars were disposed
above one another obliquely, like the fleps of a stair,
and not parallel to each other, along the whole
length of the vessel. The beak or roitrum of the vefell
was on a level with the water, immediately under the
prow, and was a long piece of wood, having a sharp
point covered with iron, with which they sometimes
pierced and funk their opponent at a single stroke.
The management of the vessel was committed to
the rowers and sailors; diftint from these were
the soldiers, whose bufinels was to fight. The sailors
wVere all citizens, and none of them slaves. The
chief commander of the veifel was called nauiclerzus. The
next in olfice was the pilot, who had his flation a:
the stern. It is believed that each of the larger veflils
contained about 2oo men in all, counting both soldiers
and sailors. The common pay was about three oboli,
nearly three pence ie rling. iThe pay of the land-forces
was much the fame.

The charge of arming the gallies in time of war, and

of furnishing them properly w; ith every thing necessary,
was laid iupon the richer fort of citizens, who were
thence called trierarcl'.r, a word importing commanders cJ
gall/ics cf thre benches of orars. At first the number of
thele was Inot determined ; but afterwards each tribe
was obliged to turnifi 120 men; and the tribes being
then 0.o, the whole number of men by that means
amounted to 2zoo. TheLe were divided into four classes
of' 3o men each; of whom the first 300, being the
ri:hefrr, made the requisite advances; for which recourse

' yas

was reserved to them against the reft. Those 1200 men
were again divided into parties of 16 men each; of
whom each party was obliged to equip one galley.

As this law was extremely arbitrary, and by that

means gave occasion to much injustice and oppression,
Demosthenes persuaded the Athenians to eftablifih a dif-
ferent rule, whereby every citizen whole estate amount-
ed to ten talents, was obliged to fit out one galley upon
his own proper expence; if his estate was worth twenty
talents, he was obliged to fit out two; and so of the
reil. Those who were not worth ten talents, were to
join with others, till the estates of the whole reached to
that fum, and to find one galley among them.

It was the slate that furnified the pay of the sailors

and soldiers. The trierarch had the command of the
vessel; and when there were two trierarchs, they com-
manded by turns, at the rate of fix months each. VWhen
their office ended, they were obliged to give an account
of their management, and to deliver up the ihip, with
every thing belonging to her, into the hands of the re-
public.

THE Greeks had a singular tafle for every species of

religion. Being for the greater part originally composed
of small colonies from different nations, each frate had
its peculiar form of worship. They had, besides,
the folly to adopt not only the various deities of one
another, but likewise those of the different nations with
whom they had any intercourse. Still not satisfied with
the multitude of gods, by these means introduced a-
mong them, they inflituted a general festival in honour
of all other gods wherewith they were unacquainted;
and from the Ads of the Apostles, it appears, that the
Athenians had erected an altar to the unlkown God.
The most remarkable particulars relating to religion a-
Imong the Greeks were their temples, their sacrifices,
their fellivals, their oracles, and their augury.

The

The four principal temples belonging to the Greeks

were, IJ/, That of Diana at Ephesus, accounted one
of the seven wonders of the world. It was about 440
feet long, and 230 wide; and was supported by I27
pillars, about 62 feet high, the whole executed by the
molt kPlilful artists. 2d, That of Apollo in the city of
Miletus. 3d, That of Ceres and Proserpine at Eleusis.
4tb, That of Olympian Jove at Athens. All there
temples were built of marble, and decorated with the
finest ornaments. Their architecture furnished the most
perse( models in the three principal orders; namely,
the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian.

But of all the temples in Greece, the most famous

by far was that of Apollo at Delphos, on account of
thle great credit and reverence paid by all nations to
the responses of his oracle. This temple was filled with
immense riches, made up of presents from the most o-
pulent princes and states. Those, particularly, of Croi-
irs king of Lydia, were extraordinarily magnificent,
tcontiiling of vast quantities of gold and silver, and tome
flaturs of iblid gold, of inefcimable value. But the
great wealth of this temple allured the avarice of feverel
princes who were not over scrupulous about the crime
of sacrilege. Xerxes, in his return from Greece, took
poTfeffion of the greatest part of its treasures; the Pho-
ceans plundered it several times; Sylla carried off much
of its wealth; and the Emperor Nero, long after,
ordered 500 of its most valuable statues to be brought
to Rome.

To give a ditinc idea of the sacrifices of the Greeks,

it will suffice to set down an account of that offered up
on the arrival of Telemachus at Ithaca, as we find it
minutely described in the third book of Homer's 0-
dyfiey. Neitor performed on that occasion the part of
the prie.s or .ltcrificer: Two men brought forward the
heifer: 1 wo other men approached at the fame time;
the one bearing a baton of water, the other a balket

containiin

containing the consecrated barley: Two men more
fiood by; the one holding an ax, the other a vessel
to receive the blood. Nestor began the ceremony, by
pouring out the water, by way of libation, and scatter-
ing the barley; after that, he cut off from the fore-
head of the victim some hair, which he threw into the
fire, and addressed a prayer to Minerva. Then he who
held the ax, cut with one blow the sinews of the neck
of the hiefer, which was then thrown down; the wo-
men present pouring forth, in the mean time, their
prayers, accompained with loud exclamations: The
vitim being lifted up again was blooded. As soon as
fie was dead, they skinned and opened her: The
haunches were separated from the reft of the carcase,
were overlaid with a double coat of fat, covered with
finall pieces cut off fiom the other parts, and then burnt
on the altar, Nestor sprinkling them with wine. When
the haunches were consumed by the fire, and the in-
trails tailed by all present, the remaining parts were
cut into convenient pieces, and roafled on spits; and
then those present fat down to the entertaiunent.

The Athenians observed many festivals. The princi-
pal were,

ift, The Panathenea, celebrated in honour of Mi-

nerva, the tutelar deity of the city, which fiom her
derived its name. These were fubilituted by Theseus,
in place of the Atbewena, when he prevailed with all
the people of Attica to remove to Athens. They were
solemnised every year; and, on that occasion, victory was
publicly contended for in four different difpurcs; namely.
running, wrestling, mulic, and poetry. Judges were
appointed for regulating the form of the trial, and di-
ftributing the prizes. These disputes were followedL by
a solemn procession, in which a magnificent standard
was carried, exhibiting the feats of Pallas against the
Titans and giants. The old men walked foremost in
this procefiion ; next the oldest women; after them came

all

all the men in the flower of their age, armed With
shields and lances;, they were followed by the young
men of the principal families; girls carrying baskets,
wherein were the consecrated things, succeeded next;
and the proceflion was closed by young children of both
'sexes. In this festival, the people of Athens implored
the protection of Minerva.

2d11', The festivals of Bacchus, consisting of the

greater, called Dionifia, which were celebrated in spring
within the city ; and the lesser, called Lenea, celebrated
in the autumn, and in the country. Both were attend-
ed with magnificent flows, and dramatic reprefenta-
tions, as well of the tragic as comic kind. The initi-
ated dressed themselves at these festivals in fiins, and
carried in their hands thyrsuses, with drums or horns;
having their heads adorned with leaves of the vine or
ivy; and personating Silenus, Pan, or the Satyrs.
They were either actually drunk, the most common
cafe, or else counterfeited drunkenness, and ran about
all over the country. The women joined in the cele-
bration of these feitivals as well as the men; disguised
themifelves in the fame manner; and seemed actuated
by a fort of religious phrenzy. The vilest and moll
excefive debauchery and licentiousness prevailed on
those occasions.

3dlv, T1he feflival of Eleusis, or Ceres. This was

one of the most famous, and was called, by way of
supereminence, the mysteries. Tradition bore, that it was
initituted by Ceres; who having come to Eleuiis in
Attica, taught the inhabitants the use of corn ; and, at
the fame time, softened and humanized their savage
dispositions. These myfseries were divided into the
greater and the lesser: The lefter were celebrated in
the month of November, and the greater in the month
of tAuguiL. Strangers were totally excluded from both.
Bdfo3'e inititiaion, it was necessary to wash, to pray, to
iL;;,cce, and to observe a ftric contilencl for a cer-

t ,
V

tain space. The ceremony of their admission was per-
formed in the night. On that occasion certain mytte-
rious books were read; extraordinary voices, with
claps of thunder, were heard; fpehlres appeared; the
earth shook; and the initiated were congealed with
fear. It was alledged, that very abominable things
were tranfaled at these ceremonies; but if so, they
w-ere buried in silence; for it was highly criminal to
divulge the myfleries of this feflival. An Archon,
then honoured with the title of king, presided at the
celebration of the ceremonies, having under him feve-
ral officers to assist him in the difchaige of his duty.
All the Athenians, both men and women, were early
initiated in these mylleries.

It was comnionly believed, that this ceremony en-

joined the practice of virtue; and procured the celebra-
tors the peculiar protection of the goddess, and a higher
degree of happine's in the next life.--- Whiat frange
notions have been entertained in all ages, about the
manner of paying honour to the beings supposed to
preside over the universe, and of reconciling their fa-
your ' It was capital for any person not initiated to en-.
ter the temple of Ceres. Thills festival continued nine
dnays. The firsl three days were consumed in the per-
formance of certain previous ceremonies. On the
fourth wras exhibited the procefion of the baJqet, lb
called from its being compoted of women carrying
baflets, filled with certain things most carefully con-
ccaled. The fifth was the proceJionz of the torcles,
when they imitated Ceres searching for Proserpine. On
the sixth the statue of Bacchus, called Iacchus, was
carried along. This proceflion set off from the Cerami-
cus, a suburb of Athens, and ended at Eleusis. While
marching along, they sung hymns in praise of the god-
defs; founded trumpets; danced, and exhibited the
ihigheft marks of joy. On the seventh day, games and
combats were celebrated. The two last days were set

apart

all the men in the flower of their age, armed With
flhields and lances; they were followed by the young
men of the principal families; girls carrying baskets,
wherein were the consecrated things, succeeded next;
and the proceflion was closed by young children of both
iecxes. In this festival, the people of Athens implored
the protecion of Minerva.

2dlI,, The festivals of Bacchus, consisting of the

greater, called Dionysia, which were celebrated in spring
within the city ; and the lesser, called Lenea, celebrated
in the autumn, and in the country. Both were attend-
cd with magnificent fiows, and dramatic reprefenta-
tions, as well ot the tragic as comic kind. The initi-
ated drfced themselves at these festivals in skins, and
carried in their hlands thyrsuses, with drums or horns
having their heads adorned with leaves of the vine or
ivy; and personating Silenus, Pan, or the Satyrs.
'They were either actually drunk, the most common
cafe, or else counterfeited drunkenness, and ran about
all over the country. The wvomen joined in the cele-
bration of these feilivals as well as the men; disguised
themselves in the fame manner; and teemed actuated
by a fort of religious phrenzy. The vilest and moll
excefliv c debauchery and licentiousness prevailed on
tlofe occalions.

3dly, hle fefrival of Eleusis, or Ceres. This was

one of the most famous, and was called, by way of
supereminence, the :i/lcries. Tradition bore, that it was
inttitutcd by Ceres ; who having come to Eleuiis ill
Attica, taught the inhabitants the use of corn ; and, at
the fame time, ufotened and humanized their iavage
difpolitions. These mysteries were divided'into the
greater and the lefier: The letier were celebrated in
the mi onth of November, and the greater in the month
or' A uui}. Strangers were totally excluded from both.
Btfc!:: i nhliti:on, i was necefiary to walli, to pray, to
.Lrisice-, and ro observe a ftricd contitneice for a cer-

tain

tain space. The ceremony of their admifllon was per-
formed in the night. On that occasion certain mytte-
rious books were read; extraordinary voices, with
claps of thunder, were heard; fpedtres appeared; the
earth shook; and the initiated were congealed with
fear. It was alledged, that very abominable things
w\ere tralfadled at these ceremonies; but if fr, they
were buried in silence; for it was highly criminal to
divulge the mysteries of this feflival. An Archon,
then honoured with the title of kin', presided at the
celebration of the ceremonies, having under him feve-
ral officers to assist him in the discharge of his duty.
,ll the Athenians, both men and women, were early
initiated in these mylteries.

It was commonly believed, that this ceremony en-

joined the practice of virtue; and procured the celebra-
tors the peculiar protection of the goddess, and a higher
degree of happinels in the next lite.--- iWhat frange
notions have been entertained in all ages, about the
manner of paying honour to the beings supposed to
preside over the universe, and of reconciling their fa-
vour ! It was capital for any person not initiated to en-
ter the temple of Ceres. Tllis festival continued nine
ldnys. The firlt three days were consumed in the per-
formance of certain previous ceremonies. On the
fourth was exhibited the procejfion of the basket, -o
called from its being compoted of women carrying
baskets, tilled with certain things most carefully con-
cealed. 'I he fifth was the procession of the torches,
\-lhen they imitated Ceres searching for Proserpine. On
the sixth the statue of Bacchus, called Iacchus, was
carried along. This proceflion set off from the Cerami-
cus, a fLuburb of Athens, and ended at Eleusis. While
marching along, they sung hymns in praise of the god-
defs; founded trumpets; danced, and exhibited the
highet r marks of joy. On the seventh day, games and
combats were celebrated. The two last days were set

apart

apart for certain particular ceremonies. This festival
was observed only once every four years; and while
it continued, it was unlawful to arrest or to throw any
person into prison.

Oracles, among the pagans, were the result of the

anxious curiosity about futurity, natural to the minds
of men, who, by that means, presumed to interrogate
the deity about human affairs.-This was the most so-
lemn species of prophecy, to which recourse was had for
the solution of all doubtful questions. To obtain the
opinion of the gods about declaring war, or concluding
peace, those pagans never failed to apply to some o-
racle; and the response, if intelligible, which was fel-
dom the cafe, was religiously complied with. Jupiter
was thought to be the chief source of most oracles.
Those who were more immediately employed in decla-
ring the pleasure of the god, were careful to express
themselves in ambiguous terms, which might receive
any explanation that the event might jufify.-It fiould
seem that Greece, from its earliest times, made use of
this method of consulting the gods; for we find no
precise period assigned for the firif introduction of o-
racles into that country. Those who had the chief ma-
nagement of affairs in the different Rates, found these
oracles very convenient. For, when they had a mind
to introduce any innovation into the system of govern-
ment, or wanted any favourite measure adopted by their
countrymen, they knew well how to procure the appro-
bation of the oracle; and in that cafe the people never
ventured to contradict the pleasure of the gods.-The
priests likewise found their advantage in this matter;
for they took special care not to permit the god to open
his mouth, till after the requisite preparations by sacrifices
and presents.- Oracles, therefore, appear to have
been entirely of human invention, founded on the cre-
Jlldity of the multitude, and kept up by the fltf-intereft
of the prieits, and the policy of the ruling men,

The

The most renowned oracle of antiquity was that of

Apollo at Delphos, a town in the diftrid of Greece
called Phocis. Apollo was there worshipped under the
name of Pythian Apollo; and the priestess assumed the
name of Pythia. She delivered her oracles standing
on a tripod called Cortina, which was placed on the
mouth of a hollow in Mount Parnassus, whence a va-
pour that affected the head was supposed to issue.
Round this hollowv was built the temple of Delphos.
In process of time, the priestess being unable alone to
sustain the fatigue of giving responses to the multitude
that thronged thither from all quarters to consult the
oracle, was obliged to make use of an affiflant, who
was likewise a female.

It was only on particular days, called hJappy, that the

prietcfiTes uttered their prophecies. For that purpoif
they prepared themselves by purifications, fasts, and fa-.
crifices. When the day arrived, the laurel tree that
grew before the gate of the temple, and the earth a-
round, were perceived to ihake. As soon as the priest-
ess was intoxicated by the vapour, her hair flood ere-,
her look grew wild, ile foamed at the mouth, and ap-
peared altogether frantic. Virgil, in the sixth book of
his 2Eneid, represents his Cumean Sybil as actuated in
the fame manner. Then she uttered several indistinct
words, which the priefrs carefully'colleded, and after-
wards arranged according to pleasure. For there re-
s1'onses were almost always dark, obscure, and capable
of different interpretations. Sometimes, indeed, but
extremely seldom, they were plain; for it was hardly
pofiible for the oracle to mistake the real solution of a
few among the infinite number of questions asked. It
is to be supposed, too, that the minifetrs of the god
would employ every fort of art and deceit to impost: up"
fin the multitude; and it is clear, iirom various pauages
in Iiliory, that they have accepted of bribes, in order
to return particular responses. Some pious Christians,

1 iln-

indeed, fathers of the church, and others, were of opi-
nion, that the devil took some concern in the matter,
by the permiflion of the Supreme Being, that the im-
pious inventions of those Pagans might turn to their
own punilhment and confuion.

Augury was another species of divination to which

the Greeks, as well as the other heathens, had recourse.
They honoured it too with the title of Jcience, though
it consisted of the most ridiculous puerilities. For those
who made augury their study, were exceediugly atten-
tive to the notes of birds; and carefully observed whe-
ther they appeared on the right or left hand; they took
special notice of the appetite discovered by chickens for
their food; of the appearance of the intrails of beaRss;
of monsters; of prodigies ; of eclipses; and of all other
extraordinary phenomena of nature. On such trifling
circumstances did the most important affairs of state al-
most always depend. For it is amazing, that not only
the vulgar, but even many of the greatest men among
the ancients, paid implicit faith to there ridiculous ab-
furdities. At the fame time it must be acknowledged,
that there were several who, so far from giving credit
to this foolish farce of divination, laughed at it, and
made it the butt of their raillery: such as Hannibal,
MIarcellus, Cicero, &c.

T1HE

# BOOK II. Containing the History of the SECOND AGE of GREECE. From the time that Hippias took refuge in Persia to the end of the Peloponnesian war, a period of about 100 years.

THE
HI S T O R Y

OF
ANCIENT GREECE.

B O O K II.
Containing the HiZtory of the SECOND AGE of

GREECE.
From the time that Hippias took refuge in PerJia to the

end of the Peloponnesian war, a period of about Ioo
years.

. HIS second age is the fame in the duration of
the Greek nation, that the space from twenty-five
to forty years of age is in the life of man, namely, the
period of its greatest strength and vigour. It may not
improperly, therefore, be called the manhood of Greece,
being altogether made up of the most glorious days
which that country ever enjoyed.

The Greeks, hitherto confined within the limits of a
narrow country, had found little opportunity of display-
ing, in the fight of the world, their valour and virtue.
But the Persian invasion that was soon to pour upoh
them like an impetuous torrent, was destined to set their
merit in the most conspicuous point of view, and to give
full scope to their wisdom and bravery. We Ihail by

z and

and by fee a very fiall army of Greeks marching bold-
ly against so vast a multitude of enemies, that a single
discharge of their darts is said to have darkened the face
of the iky. We shall fee those few Greeks attack with
undaunted resolution that immense croud of Persian
troops, and put them fairly to flight. We shall find
them in like manner engaging their enemies at sea un-
der the fame disadvantage in point of numbers, and yet
with the fame success. In a word, we shall have a ftri-
king proof of the great superiority of disciplined valour
over the blind impetuous courage of an irregular multi-
tude.

During this second age we shall fee the Spartans, who

by the admirable constitution of their government and
their private virtues, had acquired a pre-eminence over
all their neighbours, exerciling their power with a feve-
rity that favoured of the austerity of their manners, and
treating their allies with haughtiness and rigour. In
consequence of this behaviour, we fllall fee those allies
growing by degrees more and more impatient of the
Spartan yoke, and falling gradually under the influence
of Athens, who induftroufyiy availed herself of so fa-
vourable a conjuncture. The Athenians, therefore, in
their turn take the lead in Greece, and maintain theli
superiority down to the Peloponnesian war, constantly
faithful to their engagements, treating the other States
as equals, and exerting their power only in doing
good.

This period, so glorious for Athens, was of about

fifty years continuance. At length, however, the A-
thenians in like manner diuguited the other flates by
their haughtiness and insolence; and by the event of
the Peloponnesian war, the Spartans became a second
time the firlt people of Greece,

C H A P,

# CHAP. I. The two Persian invasions.

CH A P. I.

The two Persian inivafons.

D ARIUS I. the son of Hyitafpes, of whom
we have already taken notice, filled at this time 52Lr
the Persian throne, which he is said to have ob-
tained by the address of his groom. We are told that,
upon the death of Smerdis the magian, it was agreed
among the conspirators who had murdered him, that he
of their number whose horse flould neigh the first on
a certain appointed day, fllould be eleced king. The
groom of Darius being informed of this agreement, car-
ried a mare in the evening to the place where the meet-
ing was to be holden next day, and then brought his
master's horse to the mare. When, therefore, the Per-
iian noblemen came to the place appointed, the horse
of Darius no sooner reached the spot where he had met
the mare the night before, than he immediately neigh-
ed, and Darius was thereupon proclaimed king by the
reft *.

The Persian empire comprehended then not only all

that part of Asia presently known by the name of Per-
fia, but likewise what we call Turkey in Asia. It also
included on the African fide, Egypt and several coun-
tries on the coast of the Mediterranean sea; and on that
of Europe, part of Thrace and Macedonia. Indeed it
is true, in the several itates in the laft-mentioned coun-
tries were rather tributary than entirely dependent on
the Persian power: and the fame may be supposed to
have been the cafe with some others of their more re-
mote provinces.

I 3 But

* This story has a very ludicrous appearance, and will probably
flagger the belief of many readers.

But let us take a brief review of the various causes

that are said to have produced the war betwen the
Greeks and Persians. We have already observed, that
Hippias contributed greatly to this event, when, upon
finding all his attempts in Europe to reitore himself to
the sovereign power in Athens inefletual, he took re-
fuge in Persia; and having insinuated hirnfelf into the
favour of the Persian monarch,lle pra&tifed every artifice
to prevail with him to attack the Athenians. But this
was not all: Other causes concurred to forward the en-
deavours of Hippias.

Atoffa, daughter of Cyrus, and one of the wives of

Darius, had used all her influence with her husband to
persuade him to undertake an expedition into Greece,
that he might thereby give the Persians a conspicuous
proof of his courage and military prowess. Democe-
des, a physician, a man in high esteem with AtoiTa,
was, on account of his being a native of the Greek co-
lony, fettled at Crotona in Italy, pitched on as the most
proper person for travelling into Greece, tb examine
its Situation, and the strength of the chief towns along
the coast. In this journey Democedes was accompa-
nied by fifteen Persian noblemen, who had private in-
itru&tions to keep a strict watch on his behaviour, and
to bring him back again to Persia. After these Persians
had accompanied Democedes through the principal ci-
ties of Greece, and made the requisite observations in
that country, they next passed over into Italy, but
were apprehended as spies at Tarentum, and thrown
into prison. Here Democedes being seized with a
strong desire to revisit Crotona his native country,
found means to escape from his Persian companions,
and retired to that city. The other Persians having in
a little time recovered their liberty, returned to Periia,
after endeavouring in vain to prevail with the magi-
Ilrates of Crotona to deliver up Democedes.--- ence
w.e fee, that Darius had already begun to meditate an.

expe-

expedition into Greece; to the more immediate ex-
ecution of which he was instigated by the following
tranfaaion.

The Ionians, originally a Greek tribe, as we have

mentioned above, inhabited a considerable part of the
iea-coaft of Asia Minor, and had long conducted them-
selves as tributaries of the Persian empire. Some
wealthy inhabitants of Naxus, one of the Cyclades
islands, having been expelled their native country, took
refuge at Miletus, where they implored the assistance of
Ariftagoras the Persian governor of that city, to restore
them to their native country. This suggested to A-
riftagoras the design of reducing the island of Naxus
under the Persian power; which he hoped might
open the way to the conquest of the other Cyclades.
This plan he communicated to Artaphernes governor
of Sardis, and Darius's brother, who approved of it,
and procured the consent of Darius to attack Naxus.
Having made the necefl:ry naval preparations, Arta-
phernes gave the chief command of the expedition to
Megabates a noble Persian. But the people of Naxus
made so brave a refinfance, that the Persians, after be-
sieging the island for the space of four months, were
obliged to abandon the enterprise. Megabates attri-
buted the bad success of this expedition to the condue}
of Ariftagoras, and endeavoured to ruin him in the
opinion of Artaphernes.

Ariltagoras believing his ruin inevitable, resolved, in

order to avoid the resentment of the Satrap, to per-
fuade the lonians to revolt from the Persian yoke.
With this view, after having founded the inclinations of
the leading men among the lonians, and procured their
concurrence, he made a tour through the whole coun-
try, to dispose the minds of the multitude to promote
the projected revolution. Then he made himself ma-
fter of the Persian fleet, of which he had the command;
and travelled into' Greece to endeavour to prevail with

1 4 its

its various fiates to second his undertaking. He began
his negociation at Sparta, where he addressed himself
to Cleomenes, who was then on the throne, and repre-
sented to him what a noble occasion now presented itself
to the Spartans, of employing their valour in procuring
liberty to their countrymen the Ionians. Cleomenes he-
fitated at firit; but a present from Ariftagoras of. fifty
talents, induced him at last to assent to his proposal.
But, according to some authors, the Lacedemonians
not only refiufed to hearken to the request of Arista-
goras, but ordered him to depast from the city. From
Sparta Ari'tagoras went to Athens; where the inhabi-
tants, full of indignation against the Persians, for ha-
ving lately summoned them to roflore Hippias to the
regal dignity, were the belt inclined in the world to li-
lien to his request. They therefore infiantly embraced
his cause, and lent twenty filips to the assistance of the
lonians.

The first attempt of the Ionians was against the
504. city of Sardis; of which, being in a defenceless

Situation, they quickly got poffefilon. But a fol-

dier having set fire to one of the houses, the reit, which
were all of wood, immediately catched the flames, and
the whole city was reduced to ashes. The lonians, a-
larmed in the mean time at the approach of the Persian
army, refolyed to retreat to Ephesus, and to betake
themselves to their fleet; but the persians overtook
them, and cut many of them oif.

When Darius was informed of the burning of Sardis,

and that the Athenians had afiifted the lonians in their
revolt, he was highly enraged, swore by a solemn oath
to take vengeance on the Greeks ; and gave orders to
repeat in his hearing, every day vwhen he fat down to
table, " Sire, Remember the Athenians."

The lonians, notwithstanding their late disaster, pre-

sifted in their enterprise; and failing towards the Hel-
lefpont took Byzantium. But the Persians, that they

might

might oppose them every where, divided their forces;
and beat them in several engagements; in one of which
Ariftagoras was killed. At last uniting all their troops,
the Persians marched against Miletus the strongest city
of lonia, hoping that if they could reduce it, the other
Ionian cities would soon submit. The lonians, fufpea-
ing their design, quickly assembled their own Ihips and
those of their allies, forming altogerher a fleet of 350
fail. The Persians, not daring to attack this fleet, en-
deavoured by the way of negociation to detach the allies
from the confederacy, and were successful. As soon,
therefore, as the fluips of the allies were separated from
those of the Ionians, the Persians fell upon the latter,
now reduced to a very finall number, and entirely de-
feated them. Then they attacked Miletus, took it,
razed it to the foundation, and put all the inhabitants to
the fwvord. The other cities, terrified by his example,
immediately made their submissions. Hiitieus, uncle
of Ariftagoras, and tyrant of Miletus having gathered
together the remains of the lonian army, made an in-
curfion into Mysia. But he was attacked by Harpagus,
who commanded a considerable body of Perflan troops
in that country, was defeated, taken prisoner, and sent
to Artaphernes; who knowing him to have been very
active in promoting the revolt, crucified him, and lent
his head to Darius .

Darius, in the mean time, was continually meditating

an expedition into Greece, that he might gratify the
violent resentment he had conceived against its inhabi-
tants. At last he gave orders to fit out a fleet of more
than 300 fliips, and to raise at the fame time a power-
ful land army, that so he might crush the Greeks at
once. Of these forces he gave the chief command to
his fon-in-law Mardonius, whose inexperience contri-

buted

* In the year before Christ 498, Lartius was eleted firit D)iEa-,

tor at Rome; and, fix yeats after, Tribunes of the people were fire!
created.

buted not a little to the bad success of the expedition.
In the first place, he loft many of his fiips, together
with a great number of men, in a violent tempest, as
they were failing round a point of land formed by
Mount Athos, called at present Caipe Santo; and next,
his land-forces in pailing through Thrace, were by the
Thracians attacked in their camp during the night, and
a vast number of them cut oiff These disasters obliged
Mardonius to relinquiih this first expedition, and to re-
turn back again.

A war breaking out much about the fame time be-

tween the Eginetue and Lacedemonians, the latter
marched to attack the former. But by the mifconduc?
of Demaratus, one of their kings, who had quarrelled
with his brother-king Cleomenes, the enterprise mifcar-
tied. Cleomenes, in revenge, called in question the
legitimacy of Demaratus's birth; and the matter having
been referred to the decilion of the oracle, the priestess
was corrupted by Cleomenes, and gave judgement a-
gainfl Demaratus; who was thereupon deposed. En-
raged at this injurious treatment, he retired to the court
rs Persia, where he was received in the most welcome
manner, and loaded with wealth. But all this profu-
sion of kindness could not prevail with him to do any
thing prejudicial to the interests of his country.

The Athbenians having likewise quarrelled with the

F.;ginetac, fitted out a fleet against them; and on that
ot'c ion several en gagements ensued; of the circumftan-
c es of which we are ignorant. These intestine quarrels,
, ';<c-, er, g'le the

t Athenians an opportunity of beco-

'itin< ;-ery I-ilful in naval affairs, and prepared them to
nl.:e ihl.. vigorous resistance to the Perfan power,
vilich we lhall by andc by relate.

:t!eiens, in thz meanl time, enjoyed the sweets of the

i'ier;v - .rocutred lher by the c:;pulfion of the Pififtrati-
:.-,:; , nd produced many' citizens of extraordinary wis-
rmi.; an;A( v.alour- among whom Miltiades, Ariflides,

andt

and Themistocles, chiefly diftinguiflled themselves.
As these three illustrious Athenians are soon to make
a great figure in the affairs of Greece, we fllall here
exhibit in few words the chief outlines of their charac-
ters.

Miltiades was a proficient in the art of war, and no

person could boafl of equal skill in conduAing an ar-
my. He had a particular cause of hatred against the
Persians; by whom on their entering Thrace, he had
b;en deprived of a government he then held in that
country.

Aristides and Themistocles, though much younger.

than Miltiades, gave proofs of the greatest abilities.
But their different dispositions generally occasioned a
contrariety in their opinions. Themiflocles rwas a ple-
beian by birth, was naturally ambitious, and being at-
tached by prejudice and education to the party of tile
people, he made it his chief fludy to gain the goodwill
of the multitude. For that purpose, he behaved on all
occalions with extreme complaisance to the citizens,
whom he ihowed himself ever ready to oblige; and he
appeared very little scrupulous about the means he em-
ployed to accomplifli his enterprises.

Aristides, on the other hand, being noble by birth,

and an admirer by principle of the Spartain conflitution,
entertained a strong attachment to aristocracy. He was
perfetly indifferent about popularity, and made juflice
the governing rule of his whole conduct as well in uu-
blic as in private life. The public wellflare was the chief
objeA of his attention; and his love for his country,
his singular skill in public butinefs, and his disinterested
and upright behaviour, procured him the admiration,
the confidence, and the esteem of his fellow-citizens.

While the Athenian liberty nourilhed such citizens as

these, and while Sparta, adhering to the rigid inflitu-
tions of Lycurgus, produced a whole people of the bra-
'eit soldiers, Darius resolved to fall upon Greece with

all

all his forces. But desirous previously to found the in-
clinations of its various states, with refped to the fupe-
riority he intended to claim over them, he dispatched
heralds through all the cities of Greece, to demand
earth and water; a symbol which denoted the fubmif-
sion and dependence of those from whom it was re-
quired on him who required it. The Eginete, and a
few other cities, dreading the vast power of the Per-
lians, admitted the superiority claimed. But the Athe-
nians and Spartans, far from agreeing to the demand o&
the heralds, were lb provoked at the arrogance of their
commiflion, that through that violent disposition natu-
ral to those who live under a republican government,
they transgressed the law of nations in the persons of
the herald ; one of whom they threw into a well, and
another into a deep ditch, telling them, with a spirit of
raillery peculiar to the Greeks, that they might take
from thence as much earth and water as they pleased.

Darius, perceiving that he should meet with the mofi

obstinate refitance in his undertaking, made more for-
midable preparations for war than before, and increased
his armament to 500,000 men, and 500 fihips; the
whole commanded by Datis and Artaphernes. Hippias,
happy in so favourable an opportunity of revenging him-
self on the Athenians, acted as guide and conductor of
the expedition, under Artapheines, by whom he had
been hitherto treated in the kindest and most hofli-
table manner. The Persians quickly reduced all the
islands in the AEgean sea; and having taken Eretria, a
city in Eubcea, burnt it to the ground. hlien they
entered Attica, and encamped at Marathon, a small
town on the sea-coast; whence they sent to inform the
Athenians of the chastisement inflicted on the obstinate
and disobedient Eretrians.

Upon this the Athenians applied for assistance to

the Lacedemonians, who granted them 2000 men.
But a superstitious maxim that prevailed at Sparta,

pre-

prevented those forces from beginning their march
till after the full moon; by which means they did
not arrive at Athens till four days after the ensuing
battle. The terror of the Persian name restrained the
other fates fiom furnishing the expeaed assistance.
Platea alone sent 1oo0 soldiers to join the Athenians.
In this extremity the Athenians armed even their slaves;
a measure that had never been pradifed before: but,
after all, they could muster up no more than Io,ooo
men. This fiall army was commanded by ten ge-
nerals; each of whom was to exercise the chief com-
mand in his turn for no longer space than a day
at a time. But when it came to be Aristides's turn
to command, that magnanimous patriot, sensible of
the superior skill and experience of Miltiades as a
general, intreated him to accept the command in his
iHead. This example was followed by all the reft.-
When the public welfare is the sole obje&t in view, great
minds never fail to sacrifice every meaner motive to
the highest consideration.

They next deliberated whether they ought to wait for

the enemy in the city, or to march out and give them
battle :-And indeed how little probability was there,
that such a handful of men fiould in the open field be
able to sustain the shock of the Persian multitude ?-
Miltiades, however, was of opinion, that they ought to
march out and fight the enemy; and being seconded
by Aristides, the other generals assented likewise. That
skilful commander desired to take advantage of the im-
prudent iituation of the Persians; who being hemmed
in by the sea, by a steep mountain, and by the morass
of Marathon, could bring but a finall part of their for-
ces into ation, and could make no use at all of their
cavalry.

The Athenians, therefore, to the numbcr of
lo,ooo men, marched forth against an army of 49o.
oo,ooo foot, and io,oco horse. This memor-

abl--;

able day reflected the highest glory on Miltiades. To
prevent his little army being surrounded by the enemy,
he drew it up with a mountain in the rear; extended his
front as much as possible; placed his chief strength in
the wings; and caused a great number of trees to be
cut down, to keep off the enemies cavalry from char-
ging them in flank. The Athenians rufled forwards
on the Persians like so many furious lions. This is re-
marked to have been the first time that they advanced
to the attack running. By their impetuosity, they o-
pened a lane through the enemy, and supported with
the greatest firmness the charge of the Persians. The
battle was at firit fought by both parties with great va-
lour and obstinacy; but the wings of the Athenian
army, where, as we have just said, Miltiades had placed
his chief strength, attacking the main body of the ene-
my in flank, threw them into irretrievable confusion.
Six thousand Persians periflled on the spot, and among
the reit the traitor Hippias, the principal occasion of the
war. The relt of the Persian army quickly fled, and
abandoned to the victors their camp full of riches.

Thus the Athenians obtained a victory more real than

probable. Animated by their success, they pursued the
Persians to their very flips; of which they took seven,
and set fire to several more. On this occasion one Cy-
negirus, an Athenian, after performing prodigies of va-
lour in the field, endeavoured to prevent a particular
galley from putting to lea, and for that purpose held her
tfalt with his right hand; which being cut off, he next
Ifized her with his left; which being likewise cut off,
he took hold of her with his teeth, and kept her so till
he died. Another soldier, all covered over with the
blood of the enemy, ran to announce the victory at A-
thens; End after crying out, " Rejoice, we are conquc-
"rors," fell dead in the presence of his fellow-citizens.
Ariffides and Themitlocles distinguished themselves very
highly in the battle; but Miltiades gained the chief

glory

glory. As a reward for so signal a piece of service to his
country, and to perpetuate the memory of his Ikill and
bravery, they caused him to be painted in a large pic-
ture, representing the battle, in the attitude of giving
orders at the head of his io,ooo Athenians. They like-
wife railed monuments to the memory of those who had
fallen in the engagement, and thereon inscribed thlc
names both of the deceased, and of their particular tribe.

Their success at Marathon, as having made the

Greeks sensible of their own strength, is accounted the
principal caufc of their future victories; and indeed the
consideration of having with a handful of men defeated
io vast an army, might jultly inspire them with great
confidence. But what may not a ikilful general per-
form at the head of a small number of disciplined soldiers,
actuated by the most ardent love for their country, and
ready in its defence to confront death in every shape?

The Persian fleet, in the mean time, attempted to

surprise Athens before the Grecian army llhould arrive
to its relief. But the victorious Greeks, by a forced
march, fruitrated the delign of the enemy.

The Athenians, thus delivered from the Persians, re-

solved to chastise the islands that had afiftled their ene-
mies. For that purpose they sent out a fleet under the
command of Miltiades, who very soon subdued a great
number of the islands, and made-them tributary to his
countrymen. But he was unfuccefsfil at Paros, where,
upon a false alarm of the arrival of the Perlians, he pre-
cipitately abandoned the undertaking, and returned
with his fleet to Athens. Being obliged to confine him-
lelf to his house, by a dangerous wound he had recei-
ved in the course of the liege, his enemies took advan-
tage of that circumstance to prepoflefs the public againit
him with a belief of his keeping up a traiterous 'corre-
ipondence with the Persian monarch. The rath incon-
iiderate multitude immediately condemned him to death.
Every man of sense was athamed and fiocked at the

z~~~~~~2 iiinjuil.ie

injuflice and cruelty of this sentence. In vain did
his friends constantly remind the people of his beha-
viour at Marathon. All they were able to obtain, was
a commutation of the sentence from death to a fine
of fifty talents. His great exploits had already exci-
ted the jealousy of his fellow-citizens, who either thought
that they owed him too much, or were afraid left he
might aspire at sovereign authority; and careless of be-
ing called ungrateful, they accounted his late misfor-
tune a crime. Miltiades being unable to pay so high a
fine, was thrown into prison; where his grief and in-
dignation at such unworthy treatment rendered his
wound incurable, and soon brought him to the grave.
Thus did that great man afford a striking example of the
ingratitude and cruelty of his inconitant and capricious
countrymen.

His ion Cimon, who afterwards made so great a si-

gure, having been enabled, with the assistance of his
friends to discharge the fine, obtained the privilege of
burying the dead body of his unfortunate father; whose
death opened the eyes of the Athenians, and made them
sensible of the injustice of their behaviour. But their
furrow was too late, and could not redeem that excel-
lent commander from the grave, nor even prevent
their repeating the fame cruelty and folly on future
occasion.s

The wife Aristides very soon became a second viatim

to their capricious ungrateful disposition; but his dif-
gracc was honourable, being contfefedly occasioned by
his tfeady adherence to juitice. We have already men-
tioned, than the extreme contrariety of manners and
principles fiubifted between him and Themi'focles. The
latter, though of mean extraction, was extravagantly
nlmbitious, very bold and enterprising, and of so ac-
rive a dilpofition, that quiet and repose seemed a bur-
den to hint. He affeded to roam through the fireets
in the night; and when aiked the reason, answered,

1 That

That he could not sleep for thinking on the trophies of
Miltiades. He was exceedingly artful in finding out
and availing himself of the ruling passions of men; and
was so much the more dangerous by being very elo-
quent. Aristides, on the contrary, was of a reserved,
modest, steady disposition; governed all his actions by
the most scrupulous rules of justice; and regarded the
lofty projects of Themistocles as so many steps to fove-
reign power. Themistocles, impatient of being conti-
nually thwarted in his ambitious schemes by so rigid a
censor as Aristides, resolved to free his hands of him at
once. For that purpoie he applied himself privately to
form a party against Aristides; and at last got him ba-
nifled by the sentence of ostracism. It is said, that on
this occasion a peasant who did not know Aristides, and
could not write, having by accident applied to him to
write his own name on his shell, was asked by Ariflides,
Whether he had ever received any provocation from
the person he wanted to banish ! " None at all, Sir,"
answered the peasant, " but I cannot bear to hear him
; always called thejlifl." Aristides without faying a
word took the shell, wrote his own name upon it, and
returned it to the man. WThen going out of the city,
he begged of the gods, that no misfortune might hap-
pen to his countrymen which might oblige them to re-
cal him from banifliment.

Themistocles, in the mean time, foreseeing an ap-

proaching florm from the quarter of Persia, persuaded
the Athenians to employ all the money they drew from
their mines in fitting out a powerful fleet for the protec-
tion of their country.

Darius, more exasperated than ever against the Greeks

by the defeat of his army at Marathon, resolved to
exert his utmost efforts to wipe away that disgrace, and
to restore the glory of his arms. He gave orders there-
fore to make new levies of troops through all his pro-
vinces; and consumed no less than three years in pre-

K paring

paring for this third expedition against Greece, which
though then pretty far advanced in years, he intended
to conduct in person. But death disappointed all his
projects.-Darius was of a mild, humane difpofition,and
a ftriQ observer ofjuftice and the laws of his kingdom.
'But the keenness of his paflions hurried him Sometimes
into measures of which his calmer reason would have
disapproved. He reigned thirty-fix years, and is known
in scripture by the name of Abhafierus.

After the death of Darius, his son Xerxes, the eldefL

of his children by AtoIfa his second wife, succeeded him
in the kingdom of Persia, and prosecuted the warlike
preparations begun by his father. Having subdued the
Egyptians, he determined in the third year of his reign
to carry his arms immediately into Greece.

Xerxes therefore, assembling his council, in-
484. formed them that he was resolved to undertake

this expedition in order to punish the Athenians

for having been acceffiory to the burning of Sardis, to
wipe away the disgrace of the defeat at Marathon, and
to execute the other intentions of Darius his father.
Mardonius, of whom we have made mention above,
behaved on this occasion with all the balenefs of a ser-
vile flatterer, to please the vanity of his matler. He
aflured him, that no nation in the world would dare
to oppose his power; and he afifeed to vilify and to
despise extremely the courage of the Greeks. The reft
of the council, perceiving the king to be mightily pleased
with the flattery of Mardonius, did not fail, like well-
bred courtiers, to applaud his opinion, and to coincide
with him in every particular. So true it is, that princes
owe almost always their greatest misfortunes to the
complaisance and adulation of those about them. Arta-
banus alone, the uncle of Xerxes, ventured to contra-
dia the opinion given. He endeavoured to make the
king t'cn:ib.:t .r tl;: r raflnels of the intended. encerprile,
by putting him in mind of the unfortunate success of

another

another enterprise of the fame kind attempted by his
father Darius againfi the Scythians, and the imminent
danger into which it had brought that prince, who had
been utterly undone, if Hifteius had, agreeable to the
advice'of the other officers and courtiers, destroyed a
bridge he had thrown over the Danube. He likewise
reminded Xerxes of the shameful defeat of the Persians
at Marathon; and exhorted him not to give ear to the
flattering suggestions of inexperienced courtiers, nor to
susser his reason to be dazzled with the glaring profpet
of imaginary glory. He concluded with upbraiding
Mardonius for the insincerity of his advice.

Princes corrupted by flattery are apt to construe an

open generous behaviour into a seditious boldness. Thus
Xerxes, instead of profiting by the advice of his uncle,
was enraged at it; and told Artabanus, that his being
brother to Darius was the only consideration which pro-
tedted him from the effeis of his resentment. But on
cool reflection, Xerxes preceived the injustice of this
treatment of his uncle; and next day acknowledged in
open council that he had been in the wrong.

Herodotus relates a ridiculous story of an apparition, by

which he pretends that Xerxes was confirmed in his refo-
lution of invading Greece, and Artabanus deterred from
giving further opposition to that projec. It is generally
believed,that if there was indeed any foundation for this
fory of the apparition, which is extremely improbable, it
mufft have been some trick invented by the children of
Hippias or of those whose intereit it was to kindle up
the war. However that may have been, Xerxes per-
illed in his resolution, and thought of nothing but of
executing it. Before setting out for Greece, he made
an alliance with the Carthaginians, and sent money to
their general Hamilcar, to induce him to make war on
the Greek states in Sicily, in order to prevent them from
fending affiRiance to their countrymen on the continent.
With this money Hamilcar having levied in Spain and

K 2 Gaul

paring for this third expedition againit Greece, which
though then pretty far advanced in years, he intended
to conduct in person. But death disappointed all his
projects.-Darius was of a mild, humane disposition, and
a ftridt observer of justice and the laws of his kingdom.
'But the keenness of his pafions hurried him sometimes
into measures of which his calmer reason would have
disapproved. He reigned thirty-fix years, and is known
in scripture by the name of Ahafiterus.

After the death of Darius, his son Xerxes, the eldefl

of his children by Atoffa his second wife, succeeded him
in the kingdom of Persia, and prosecuted the warlike
preparations begun by his father. Having subdued the
Egyptians, he determined in the third year of his reign
to carry his arms immediately into Greece.

Xerxes therefore, assembling his council, in-
484. formed them that he was resolved to undertake

this expedition in order to punish the Athenians

for having been accessory to the burning of Sardis, to
wipe away the disgrace of the defeat at Marathon, and
to execute the other intentions of Darius his father.
Mardonius, of whom we have made mention above,
behaved on this occasion with all the baseness of a ser-
vile flatterer, to please the vanity of his master. He
assured him, that no nation in the world would dare
to oppose his power; and he affeaed to vilify and to
despise extremely the courage of the Greeks. The reft
of the council, perceiving the king to be mightily pleased
with the flattery of Mardonius, did not fail, like well-
bred courtiers, to applaud his opinion, and to coincide
with him in every particular. So true it is, that princes
owe almost always their greatest misfortunes to the
complaisance and adulation of those about them. Arta-
banus alone, the uncle of Xerxes, ventured to contra-
dit the opinion given. He endeavoured to make the
king fenfibe of the raflnefs of the intended enterprise,
by putting him in mind of the unfortunate success of

another

another enterprise of the iame kind attempted by his
father Darius against the Scythians, and the imminent
danger into which it had brought that prince, who had
been utterly undone, if Hifteius had, agreeable to the
advice'of the other officers and courtiers, destroyed a
bridge he had thrown over the Danube. He likewise
reminded Xerxes of the ihameful defeat of the Persians
at Marathon; and exhorted him not to give ear to the
flattering suggestions of inexperienced courtiers, nor to
fulfer his reason to be dazzled with the glaring profpedt
of imaginary glory. He concluded with upbraiding
Mardonius for the insincerity of his advice.

Princes corrupted by flattery are apt to construe an

open generous behaviour into a feditiousboldnefs. Thus
Xerxes, instead of profiting by the advice of his uncle,
was enraged at it; and told Artabanus, that his being
brother to Darius was the only consideration which pro-
tected him from the effects of his resentment. But on
cool reflection, Xerxes preceived the injustice of this
treatment of his uncle; and next day acknowledged in
open council that he had been in the wrong.

Herodotus relates a ridiculous story of an apparition, by

which he pretends that Xerxes was confirmed in his refo-
lution of invading Greece, and Artabanis deterred from
giving further opposition to that projedt. It is generally
believed, that if there was indeed any foundation for this
flory of the apparition, which is extremely improbable, it
must have been some trick invented by the children of
Hippias or of those whose interelt it was to kindle up
the war. However that may have been, Xerxes per-
filled in his resolution, and thought of nothing but of
executing it. Before setting out for Greece, he made
an alliance with the Carthaginians, and sent' money to
their general Hamilcar, to induce him to make war on
the Greek flates in Sicily, in order to prevent them from
fending assistance to their countrymen on the continent.
With this money Hamilcar having levied in Spain and

K 2 Gaul

Gaul an army of 3C0,0oo men, invaded Sicily accord-
ingly.

Xerxes departed from Susa in the fifth year of
481. his reign, for Sardis, the place of rendezvous of

his army; giving orders to his fleet to fail to-

wards the Hellespont along the coast of Asia Minor, and
commanding a pafiage to be cut for it through Athos, a
mountain in Macedonia, that Rfretches out into the Hel-
lefpont, in the form of a peninsula. Though it is pro-
bable that this order was never complied with, it is ne-
verthelefs a fsriking inflance of the ridiculous folly of
this great monarch, whom sensible people will be more
inclined to pity than admire. He is said, too, to have
been childish enough to imagine that he could controul
the elements; and to have threatened to punish them,
if they ihould presume to oppose his designs. It is even
reported that he addressed a letter in there terms to
Mount Athos. But this is too gross to gain implicit
belief.

After having parTed through Cappadocia, he halted at

Celene, a town of Phrygia. Here we are told that
Pythius, a very wealthy prince, received Xerxes in a
most magnificent manner, and offered him the use of
his treasures; that Xerxes disdaining to yield to him in
generosity, augmented his riches by large presents; but
that Pythius having begged of Xerxes to leave him one
of his five sons to be the support of his old age, and to
take only the remaining four along with him in the ex-
pedition, the cruel monster ordered the favourite son to
be put to death in pretence of his father .

Xerxes palted the winter at Sardis. From this place
he sent deputies to demand earth and water of all the

cities

* This story again (hocks the credibility of a considerate reader:

and it may be observed once for all, that the history of the Perian
expeditions against the Greeks refts entirely on the authority of
Grecian writers; who being justly prejudiced by those invasions
again't the Persian tyrants, may be reasonably supposed to have re-

presented

cities of Greece, except Athens and Sparta, whom he
affected thus tacitly to single out for vengeance. In the
spring he advanced towards the Hellespont; where he
enjoyed the pleasure of feeing the sea covered with his
fleet, and the land with his army. Artabanus took this
opportunity to make some refletions, in the presence of
the king, on the many miseries incident to mankind;
which it is the first duty of sovereigns to alleviate as much
as possible. He insisted, at the ifame time, on the great
uncertainty of human al-airs; and could not help ap-
plying his obf_-rvations to the present enterprise of
Xerxes, whose army was so nunerous, that no country
could for any considerable time furnish it with sub-
fiflence, and whose fleet was too large for any harbour
to contain.

To transport his troops from Asia into Europe, Xerxes

ordered a bridge to be thrown over a strait of the Helle-
fpont, about a quarter of a league broad, known at
present by the name of Gallipoli. But the work was
destroyed by a frorm. Xerxes, enraged at this acci-
dent, vented his resentment upon the sea. llerodo-
tus fays, he ordered it to be chattifed with 300 lafl-
es, and chains to be thrown into it, as if to bind it.
Then he commanded two new bridges to be conftruci-
ed, one for the army, and the other for the baggage.
One of thele bridges consisted of 360, and the other of
314 ffiips, moored endways across the strait. They
were secured by large anchors against the violence of
the winds and waves; and were joined together by fix
large cables, reaching from the one fide of the strait to the
other, and faflened on both fides to large wooden
llakes fixed in the ground. The ships were covered

K 3 with

presented faets in the light the most unfavourable to their oppressors,
and the most glorious to their own countrymen. In particular, the
number of the forces said to have been brought against the Greeks
is so extravagantly great, and the temptation to exaggerate it so evi-.
dent, that a.jidicioas reader vwill be inclined to make considerable
abatements.

with a fort of deck, and the army was seven days in
pafling.

When the army arrived at Dorifca in Thrace, Xerxes

desired to review it; and, for that purpose, ordered it
to be drawn up in the plains in the neighbourhood.
By Herodotus's account it was found to amount to
I,80o,oo0 foot, and 80,oo0 horse, which, joined with
the forces furnished him by the nations whom he had
subdued after passing the Hellespont, formed, altoge-
ther, a multitude of 2, r oo,ooo men. His fleet confill-
ed of 1207 galleys of three benches of oars, each car-
rying 200 men; which, when reinforced by 120 more
of the fame size furnished by the European flates, form-
ed a fleet of 1327 vessels, carrying 301,606 men, ex-
clufive of 3000 transports. The army was commanded
by fix generals, of whom Mardonius was the chief.
Datis was general of the cavalry; and Hydarnes of the
immortal troop, composed of 6ooo chosen men. He-
rodotus, who gives this account of Xerxes's armament.
lived at the time ; and further informs us, that these
vail forces were supplied with provisions by a great
number of fiips, solely employed for that purpose,
which attended the army along the coast, and conti-
nually brought them fresh supplies of all kinds of pro-
visions. He likewise tells us, that betides the prepara-
tions for this expedition made by Darius, no less than
four years were employed for the fame purpose by
Xerxes.

Xerxes, after reviewing his army, desired Demara-

tus to tell him, without flattery, whether he thought
-the Greeks would dare to oppose him. That generous
Lacedemonian frankly answered, That the Greeks, be-
in g a people inured from their cradles to poverty and
a fober hardy life, had, by that means, been hitherto
enabled to preserve themselves free and independent;
that as they had been educated, and had always lived
in liberty, he believed none of the Rfates of Greece,

but

but particularly his own countrymen the Lacedemoni-
ans, would ever liften to any terms that might seem to
encroach upon that invaluable privilege; and that he
was persuaded they alone, though deserted by all their
neighbours, would not decline fighting, let their ene-
mies outnumber them ever so much.

The Greeks, feeing the fiorm ready to fall upon them,
were somewhat alarmed at first, but by no means dif-
couraged. They held an assembly in the Isthmus, where
it was agreed to suspend all private contests, and to u-
nite their whole forces against the common enemy.
But the Bceotians, Theifalians, and several other fiates,
who were more immediatly exposed to the impending
danger, having declared for the Persians, the whole
burden of the war devolved on the Athenians and La-
cedemonians. The former applied for assistance to their
allies, to the Argives, to the Sicilians, and to the inha-
bitants of the islands of Corcyra and Crete; most of
whom declined to join them, under the asseted pre-
tence, that they could not be admitted to an equal share
in the command; the Sicilians even insisted for the
chief command. Most of them therefore submitted to
Xerxes. The Rates of Thefpia and Platea alone took
part with the Athenians and Spartans.

But this general desertion of the other Rates served

only to make those of Athens and Sparta to prepare for
their defence with greater vigour and circumfpedion.
Themistocles, fully sensible of the vast importance of
this war, and of his own capacity to conduct it with all
the skill and resolution it required, made it his first care
to remove out of the way by the force of money, one
Epicides, who pretended to compete with him for the
chief command, but whose sole merit confited in an
ostentatious eloquence, with which he had acquired con-
fiderable credit among the people. Themiftocles,there-
fore, who had on every occasion given proof of superior
parts, and shown himself capable of conducting the

K 4 greatest

greatest undertakings; and had particularly, on former
occasions, displayed a singular sagacity in seizing the
d.:cifive moment of adion, was unanimously chosen
commander in chief of the Athenian forces. Aristides
was recalled, after a three years banishment, together
with all the other banished citizens; no oppolition ha-
ving been made to the return of his rival by Themi-
flocles, who, on this occalion, set an example highly
w-c. ri.h the imitation of all men of influence in a state,
b, ;vhom jealousy and rivallhip ought, in times ou
danger; to be sacrificed to the intereils of their coun-
try.

Themistocles having plainly foreseen, from the time

of the battle of Marathon, that the war was nothing
less than finished by that engagement ; and being fen-
fible, that Athens, pol'efling such a barren and narrow;
territory, was much too weak to make head againfL the
powerful forces of the Persians by land; had therefore
from that moment applied ail his attention to the in-
crease of the naval strength of his countrymen. In this
he had so far succeeded, that they at present had a flee;
of ico large galleys, betides many velesls of three banks
of oars; and on the approach of Xerxes, he persuaded
them to equip ico more. To this finall fleet Greece
owed its preservation.

Eurybiades, a Lacedemonian, was named command--

er in chief of the united forces of both fiates. Here
we have another proof of the moderation of Themi-
ftocles, who readily sacrificed his ambition to the ad-
vanage of the common cause. For although the Athe-
nians were intitled to claim the chief command, as ha-
ving furnifled two thirds of the fleet, Themiitiocles ne-
verithelefs cheerfully acquiesced in the appointment of
lurybiades.

The irft slep taken by the allies was to di-
.So. pa coi: Leonidlas at the head of io,coo men, to

ta- i p cA .ei:on of the defile of Thermopylac, situ-

atTe.

ated at the foot of Mount Oeta, between Theifaly and
Phocis, a pass no more than 90 feet broad, and the
only one by which the army of Xerxes could penetrate
into Achaia. In the mean time, the fleet of Xerxes
coaffed along the lhore, regulating its motions by those
of the army. Every thing gave way to the Persians;
and the cities through which they paited furnished them
with provisions in abundance.

Xerxes, after marching through Thrace and Mace-
donia, came at last to the pass of Thermopyla:, guarded
by the Grecian troops ; which, according to Pausanias,
amounted altogether to no more than i i,oco; and of
tlefe only 4000 were more immediately destined to de-
fend the passage. But every man of that number was
fully determined to conquer or to die. Xerxes was far
from thinking that the Greeks would dare to dispute his
paiTage. But finding himself miltaken, and being in-
ormned by Demaratus, that a handful of men might at
this place ifop for a considerable time all his forces, he
endeavoured to corrupt Leonidas by magnificent pre-
lents, and the moit tempting promises, even that of
makling him supreme lord of Greece. But Leonidas
having rejecied all his temptations with disdain, Xerxes
ticreupon commanded him, by a messenger, to lend
hiin his arms; " Let your king come and take them,"
anl\wered Leonidas. Then the Medes advanced againit
the Greeks; but being unable to fuitain their at ack,
v-ere obliged to retreat. The troop of Periians, diftin-
guiihed by the name of immiiortal, next charged the
Greeks, and fought with great valour, so that the pafls
was chocked up with the dead. While the belt troops
of Xerxes were thus sacrificed to the Spartan valour, an
inhabitant of the country having dicovered to the Per-
sians a secret path conducting to an eminence that com-
manded the pals, a large detachment was immediately
sent to take pofieffion of it.

Leonidas receiving intelligence that the top of the

rocks

rocks forming the pass were occupied by 2o,ooo
Persians troops, whose darts mull soon overwhelm him
and his small party, intreated the greater part of his
men to retire, and reserve themselves for a more advan-
tageous opportunity of serving their country; while he
himself, with about 300 Spartans and a few Thespians,
would maintain the pass to the last. The reft having
accordingly departed, " Come, my friends," said
Leonidas, " let us dine cheerfully, in the hope of
" supping together in the other world." His brave
companions, who are superior to all praise, encouraged
by the example of their chief, thought of nothing
now but to fell their lives as dearly as possible; be-
lieving it incumbent on them, as the leading people of
Greece, to devote them-elves to certain death, thereby
to convince the barbarians how much it must colt them
to reduce a free people to flavery.-In the dead of night,
this heroic troop advancing diredcly forwards to the tent
of the king, penetrate to the middle of the Persian
camp, cut off all that came in their way, and spread
the most dreadful consternation among the enemy.
But day-light at last discovering them diltincly to the
Persians, they were immediately surrounded, and being
rather overwhelmed than conquered, breathe their la!t
above heaps of ilaughtered enemies; leaving to after
ages an example of intrepidity before unknown, and
hardly to be paralleled in hiftory.-The Persians are
said to have loll upwards of 20,000 men in this engage-
ment., and, among the reft, the two brothers of
X erxes.

To the memory of those brave defenders of Greece,

a iiperb monument was afterwards ereced, bearing
two inscriptions; the one in honour of all those who
had( served on that occasion, importing, that an army
of 4000 Peloponnelfan Greeks had there flopped the
progreis of the 'whole Persian force; the other in
honour of Leonidas, and his 300 Spartans, expressel,

.2 i11i

in a few simple words, to this effec: " Go, passenger,

tell at Sparta, that we died here in obedience to her
"laws."

This famous aarion at Thermopylae, in the opinion
of Diodorus Siculus, contributed very highly to the/
subsequent advantages obtained by the Greeks. For the
Persians, aflonifhed at so striking an instance of defpe-
rate valour, thence concluded, that it was hardly pof-
fible to subdue a nation of fich undaunted resolution;
and the Greeks likewise perceived from the fame ex-
ample, that valour and discipline are capable of vanquish-
ing the greatest multitude, and that therefore it was
pollible to overcome the Persians.

The very day that Leonidas fell at Thermopylae, the
Athenian fleet, commanded by Themistocles, having
discovered, while cruizing off Artemifa, a promontory
of Eubea, a detachment of the enemies fleet, amount-
ing to 203 vessels, attacked them in the night, and
funk more than thirty of them; and the reft were that
fame night wrecked on the coalt of Euboea by a florm
that succeeded the engagement.-The Athenians re-
ceiving next day a reinforcement of 53 ships more,
attacked those of the Cilicians, and funk many of them.
A general engagement ensued the fame day, in which
both parties fought with great bravery; and though
neither could boast of the victory, yet the loss was mo0t
considerable on the fide of the Persians. From the
event of there several actions, the Athenians learned,
that victory is not always determined by the greater
number of flips. Hearing, in the mean time, of what
had pafled at Thermopyla, the Greeks thought it ad-
vilable to retire nearer home, and therefore set fail for
Salamis, a finall island not far from Attica.-The very
fame day too of the acion at Thermopylae, the Cartha-.
ginian army, amounting to 300,000 men, which co-
operated with the Persians, and was endeavouring to

reduce

reduce the Greek states in Sicily, was totally defeated
by Gelon, tyrant of Syracuse.

Xerxes having now advanced into Phocis, after

marking his march all along with the effecs of his re-
fentment, the Peloponnesians resolved to fortify them_
selves within the Isthmus. The Athenians, therefore,
feeing themselves on the eve of being crulhed under
the whole weight of the Perlian power, sent, in this
extremity, to consult the oracle; who told them," That
" the only means of preJifrvzin their city were wooden
" walls." These wooden walls pointed out by the
oracle, were interpreted by ThemifRocles to be their
ihips; and he told his countrymen, that the sole means
of preservation left was, to abandon the city, and tu
betake themselves to their fleet. This advice was not
at all reiifhed by the people, who shuddered at thfl
thoughts of deserting their gods, and the tombs of their
ancestors. Themifrocles, however, succeeded at latt,
in persuading them, that the existence of Athens de-
pended neither on its houses nor its temples, but on
the lives of its citizens; and that the gods themlfelves
had, by the month of the oracle, plainly declared it to
be their pleasure, that the Athenians ought to leave
their city for a while. The people, at last, convinced
by his eloquence, consented to go on board of their
fiips.

It is difficult to fay, whether we are more asseted on

this occasion by the melancholy situation of the Athe-
nians, thus compelled by a barbarous prince to desert
their native country; or by the heroic resolution ol
those Athenians to go in this manner into a fort of vo-
luntary banishment, rather than to submit to their op-
prefibr.

The Athenians conveyed their women, children, and

the greater part of their old men, to Trezene, a fmiall
town on the sea-coast of Peloponnese, where they were
re ceived with all the marks of humanity that their fitta-

tios

ticn required. But many of their oldeRf men were
left in the citadel, being unable, by reason of their
great age and infirmities, to undergo the fatigue of
transportation.

Xerxes in the mean time approaching towards Athens.

sent a detachment of his troops to plunder the temple of
Delphos, which contained immense riches. But Hero-
dotus and Diodorus Siculus both tell us, that moll of
the soldiers sent on this errand perished by the way in
a violent tempest.

The Persian army arriving at Athens, find nothing

but silence and folitude'within the walls. They attack
the citadel, which, after a brave refifance by its feeble
garrison, was taken by storm, and all within it were
put to the sword. Xerxes ordered the reft of the city
to be set on fire.

In the mean time differences were like to arise in the

Grecian fleet commanded by Enrybiades, one half of
them being of opinion that they ought to advance to-
wards the Isthmus of Corinth, to be at hand to support
their army; and the other, that they ought by no means
to quit the advantageous post at Salamis. The latter
opinion was supported by Themiflocles, who on this
occasion gave another proof of his extraordinary mode-
ration and coolness of temper. For while he was main-
taining his opinion with some warmth again ft Eurybiades,
who was a man of a very choleric disposition, the latter
flew in a passion, and lifted up his cane to itrike him.
Themistocles called out to him, " Strike, but hear me."
His eloquence and firmness at lait prevailed, and the
Greeks saw that, being extremely inferior to the enemy
in the number, as well as in the lize of their fliips, it
was of the highest importance to avail themselves of their
present ituation, and to give battle in such a narrow
itlait as that of Salamis, where the enemy could not
ilring all their fleet into acion. They resolved, there-
1ore, to prepare to fight the Persians in this strait.

The

The Persians too determined to give battle, con-

trary to the opinion of Queen Artemifa, who represent-
ed to them, that the lots of a sea fight must be inevi-
tably attended with the deftrution of their army atland.
But her advice, though the most prudent, was rejeat-
ed, Xerxes himself having declared his sentiments for
their coming to adtion. Themistocles, in the mean
time, to put it entirely out of the power of his coun-
trymen to retire from Salamis, contrived to have false
intelligence conveyed to Xerxes, of their intending to
decline the engagement, and to make their escape,
and therefore advising him to order his fleet instantly
to advance and block them up. This stratagem he
communicated to Aristides, who undertook to exhort
the reft of the commanding officers with whom he was
in great credit, not to be dismayed at feeing themselves
hemmed in, but to behave with their usual intrepidity.
The stratagem had the desired effet; and the Greeks
feeing no other possibility of escaping, except by fight-
ing their way through the midst of the enemy, prepared
for the engagement.

Xerxes, who was on shore, being desirous of feeing

the battle, ordered a superb throne to be ereced obr
him on an eminence.-The fleet of the Greeks con-
lifled of 380 fail.-Themiftocles, who that day coin-
manded it, waited for the rising of a wind, which re-
gularly began to blow at a certain hour, in a direcion
exacly in the face of the enemy. The Persians began
the attack with great bravery; but the small fleet o' the
Greeks acting by the Ikill of its commanders under
every advantage, soon threw the enemy's first line into
confusion, and funk the Persian admiral. Those th:at
followed him, intimidated by his fate, partly betook
themselves to flight, and partly were funk. On the
wings, however, the acion continued very warm and
obstinate; but the wind being against the Persians, the
unwieldy size of their flips rendering them very dilli-

cult

cult to be managed, and their great number rather
embarrafing than availing them in such a narrow firait,
they could not long fuflainl the impetuosity of the Athe-
nians, but fell into a general disorder. The Ionians,
mindful of their Grecian extradion, were the firit that
fled; and they were quickly followed by the reft of the
Persian fleet, which soon appeared scattered up and
down in flight and confusion.

Queen Artemifa signalised herself by a courage far

above her sex. In the height of the battle, perceiving
herself to be on the point of falling into the hands of the
Greeks, she immediately hung out Grecian colours, and
attacking one of the Persian galleys, funk it. The
Greek that pursued her, deceived by this stratagem, be-
lieved her to be one of his own party, and quitted the
pursuit. The vidcory colt the Greeks 40o sips; but of
the Persians 200 were either taken or funk.

This engagement, one of the mofl memorable record-
ed in ancient hiltory, acquired immortal fame to the
Grecian wisdom and courage.-The renowned Cimon,
though yet but a young man, distinguished himself
highly on that occasion, and gave evident signs of his
future greatness. But as the principal glory of the
vitory belonged to Themiflocles, the eyes of all the
Greeks were fixed on him as their deliverer; and the
highest honours were conferred on him. At this time
every sentiment ofjealoufy was overlooked, and none
exceeded the Lacedemonians in their encomiums on
Themistocles, whom they crowned with laurel, the re-
ward of wisdom and valour. When he appeared at the
Olympic games, the whole assembly rose up to give him
place; every eye was fixed on him alone; and that day
was the molt glorious of his life.

This important defeat aitonifhed and disconcerted
Xerxes in the highest degree. Mardonius, however,
endeavoured to compose his mind by palliating his
loss; but at the fame time advised him to set out

for

for Persia; aluring him, that with 300,003 of his land.
forces, he, Mardonius, did not doubt of being able to
conquer the Greeks, notwithstanding the late disaster.
-The remains of the Persian fleet took refuge in Cumres,
a harbour in Eolia.

On the other hand, Themistocles, in concert with A-

riftides, sent private intelligence to Xerxes, that the
Greeks were preparing to destroy his bridge over the
Hellespont. That weak, credulous Prince believed the
information, and leaving Greece in a violent hurry,
with a strong guard of his best troops, arrived, after a
-ery painful march of 45 days, (attended with the double
misery of famine and difeafe,which destroyed the great-
efl part of his troops) at the bridge, but had the mor-
tification to find it already demoliihed by a great storm.
This mighty Prince, therefore, whose numerous fleet
had lately covered the sea, was reduced to the neceflity
of pafling the ltrait in a poor fishing bark. Thus was
the vanity effedtually humbled, and thus ended all the
lofty projedcs of this impious and presumptuous man,
who, before leaving his own dominions, had ordered
all the Greek temples of Asia to be burnt, and the im.
mense riches contained in them to be applied to defray
the expence of his expedition.

Mardonius, after wintering in Thessaly, took the

field, and began his operations, by making very advan-
tageous offers to the Athenians, to detach them from
their confederacy with the other states, promiiing not
only to rebuild their city, and to give them a valt film
of morey, but to fct them at the head of all Greece.
Aristides, then Archon, answered the meifengers of
Mardonius, that all the gold in the world was infufi-
cient to dorrupt the Athenians, or to induce them to
delert the defence of the common liberty of their coun-
try; that while the fun continued to light the world, the
Athenians would remain the mortal enemies of the Per-
sians, and would revengse, to the utmaoit of their power.

the

the mirchief they had brought upon their country, and
the burning of their houses and temples. As soon as
Mardonius received the answer of the Athenians, and
thence saw that no motive could induce them to break
their engagements, he ordered his army to advance to...
wards Attica. The Athenians, on the approach of the
Persian army, left their city a second time, and retired to
Salamis. Mardonius, thereupon, sent new deputies to
them, with terms ilill more advantageous than the
former. But the Athenians were so far from accepting
them, that they stoned to death one Lycidas, only for
faying, that they ought to give an audience to the de-
puties. The Persian general, provoked at the contempt
with which the Athenians treated all his proposals, en-
tered Athens, and burnt every thing that had formcriy
cfcaped the fury of Xerxes.

In this situation, the Athenians complained to the

Lacedemonians of their not having sent them the tiipu-
lated succours. The latter were then solely intent on
iantaining their ground within the Peloponnese, and
defending the entry of the iilihmus; but, in compliance
with the requisition of the Athenians, -who made a
great outcry against the slowness of their. proceedings,
tiley sent to their afliflance 5000 Spaitans, each of
whom was attended by seven Helots. These forces,
joined with those of the Athenians and Peloponnesians,
formed altogether an army of about 70,co0 men;
which, after afiembling at Eleusis, followed Mardonius
into Boeotia, and encamped at the foot of Mount Cithe-
ron. Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus, and viceroy of
Sparta, commanded the Lacedemonian troops; and
Arilides those of the Athenians.--- The Persian army
then amounted to 300,000 men.

Paulanias, in the mean time advanced towards Pla-

tea, with his forces drawn up in battle array;
the Athenians being on the right wing, and op- 479·
posed to the Persian troops; and the Lacedemo-

L nians

lians on the left, opposed to the Greek troops in the
service of the Perfians.-The Megareans, who were en-
camped on the plain, having been attacked by thePerfian
cavalry, were, after a very brave and long reffirance, on
the point of giving way, henn 300 Athenians ran to the-i
relief. The battle then became more obfiinate than be-
fore. But iVagilius, who commanded the Persian ca-
valry, being slain, his men betook themselves to flight.
The death of this ofPicer, who was reckoned the ableil in
the Persian army,fpiead universal confcernation throught
all their troops. Ten days intervened between this ac-
t.iio and the general engagement. Artabazus was of
opinion, that the Persians ought toavoid a generalbattle;
but Mardonius, a man of a violent fiery difpolition,
hought otnerwife.-Paufanias and Aristides, informed
of the deiign of the Persians to attack them, drew up
their army in battle order near to the city of Platca;
which Mlardonius perceiving, changed the intended or-
der of his attack. That day was wholly taken up witli
these evolutions. But the Greeks. finding themfelvh s
liraitened for water in their prelent situation, retlveld to
decamp. iMardonius believing this movement to be a
flight, immediately advanced with his mnen, utterinl
loud shouts, and charged the rear of the Greek army',
·coinpllord of the Lacedemonians ; who forming them-
feiles in a column, opposed the enemy with their ui'u:lI
valour, and falling on the Persians, with the greatt-t
iury, made a dreadcfil llaughter.

MIardonius fell in the beginning of the action. The
umain body of the Greek army advancing in the mean
time to the charge, in separate detachments, completed
the overthrow of the Periians. in another quarter of the
11eld, the 4,ooo0 Greeks in the Persian service, vwhl
vw-re engaged with the troops commanded by Ariftidic,
hearing of the flight of the Barbarians, followedl their'
example, and retreated likewise ; but rallied in their
camp, and there intrenched themselves. The Laced -

i11oniils,

monians, however,fupported by the Athenians, attacked
and forced their intrenchments; after which nothing
was to be seen but a general massacre: for the Periians
being too numerous to be made prilbners, received no
quarter, and were all put to tile sword. Artabazus, after
diftinguifiing himfell' both as a fiilful officer and as a
brave soldier, collected the scattered remains.of the Per-
lian army, amounting now to no more than 44,000
men, and returned with all expedition towards Persia.
- The lois of the Greeks in this engagement was
about Io,ooo men.

The Greeks, as a monument of this memorable vic-

tory, erected a statue to Jupiter in the temple of Olym-
pia, inscribed with the narmes of all the states of Greece
who had fought at Platea. It came next under conlide-
ration, whether the prize of valour ought to be ad-
juidged to thethehenians orto the Lacedemonians. But
to avoid all con troverfy on this head, whereby the general
joy arising from the vidcory might be disturbed, the
question was, by the influence of Ariflides, referred to
the determination of the other Greeks; who, to pre-
vent anyjealoufy between those rival states, adjudged it
to belong to the Plateans. Then, after fending a tripod
of solid gold to the temple at Delphos, and setting a-
j art a tenth of the spoil, as an offering to the gods, to
be applied to religious purposes, they divided, with
great juflice, the reft of the spoil; which was so im-
; ilmele, that Juffin is of opinion, it was the first great
cause of the corruption of the Grecian manners.

By the persuasion of Aristides, the Greeks pailed a

ifolemn decree, obliging all the states to fend deputies to
IPlatea, to offer sacrifices to Jupiter the deliverer; inili-
ituting public games at that place every fifth year; and
orderling a fleet of oo fliips, and anarmy of io,ooo foot,

'ind as many horfe,tobe kept always on foot, for making

?continual war on the Barbarians.--The Plateans were
'appointed to celebrate in time coming the anniverfiry of

Z zu]

all those who had fallen in this battle; which they regu,
larly performed with much pomp and ceremony.

The Persian fleet having, in the mean time, failed

towards Samos; that of the Greeks, under the com-
mand of Leotychides the Lacedemonian, and Xantippus
the Athenian, advanced as far as Delos, upon the ear-
nefl intreaty of the inhabitants of Chios, who. begged
to be delivered from their fubjedion to the Barbarians:
and liklewife in consequence of secret intelligence recei-
ved by them, of the intention of the lonians to revolt.
The Persians hearing of the approach of the Greeks,
retired to Mycale in Asia Minor, where they drew
their vceTels on snore, and surrounded them with a deep
ditch. The Greeks, however, pursued them thither;
and, with the affitlance of the lonians, attacked them.
The battle was at first bravely fought on both fides,
But the Milesians and Samians, followed by the reft of
the Asiatic Greeks, having deserted from the Persians,
the latter were vanquished, and 40,003 of them cut in
pieces. The Athenians took poTfefiion of the enemies
camp, burnt the Persian fleet, and returned to Samos
with a vast deal of plunder. I his engagement h3p-
pened on the fame day with that of Platea.

Thus did that memorable day for ever free ..il'

Geeks from any future Persian invasions, and deliv'r
them from those innumerable armies of barbarians.
vwhich like clouds of loc'ats, had consumed their coun-
try for two whole years. These grievous defeats were
never forgotten by the Persian monarchs; and they en-
tirely cured Xerxes of all desire of undertaking any (-
ther e:'.c! 'rifes of the finme kind. He thought no more
of execuiung vengeance on the Greeks; and to efiace
all remelmberance of his pall difaflers, he gave himself
wholly up to every fort of voluptuoufnefs and debauch-
ery. His court became one general scene of the moR
:hamreftul exccfles, murder and incest succeeding each
other in a perpetual round.--This weak licentious

prince

# CHAP. II. Affairs of Greece, from the final disappointment of the Persian invasion under Xerxes to the commencement of the Peloponnesian war.

prince was at length put to death by his own fubjeCtd-

The revere effects of tyranny formerly experienced

by the Athenians, had excited in them fucli a strong
desire of liberty, that to preserve it, they boldly hazard-
ed the greatefl dangers. Their bravery, however, was
admirably supported and conducted by the wisdom and
skill of their generals, who were particularly attentive to
chufe such a situation for giving battle, that the enemy
could not much avail themselves of their vail superiority
in point of number.

C H A P. Ir.

.Afairs of Greece, from the final dtifippointinent of the Per-
Jian invasion under Xerxes to the commencemenit o' the
PeloponneJian war.

T HE Ahenians having now recovered perfed tran-
quillity, brought back their wives and children to A-
thens; of which they rebuilt the walls, and confider-
ably increased the extent. The Lacedemonians taking
umbrage at this, from an apprehenlion left Athens
should become too powerful, represented to the Athe-
nians, that it was the general interest of Greece to have
no fortified place without the Peloponnese, because in
cafe of a fresh invasion, it might serve for a retreat and
warlike magazine to the enemy. Themiflocles having
procured himself to be named arbaffador to Lace-
demon, there, to juflify the conduct of his countrymen,
maintained in open senate, that it was as much for the
common advantage of the allies as for that of the Athe-
nians. that the latter had fortified their city with good
walls; that besides, it was but equitable that they, as
well as the reft, should take proper measures for their
own safety; and, in fine, that they were able to defend
themselves either againit foreign or domeflic enemies.

L 3 In

In the next place, Themiflocles, solely intent on in-

creasing the power of the republic, fortified Py7reus, the
famous harbour of Athens, in the fame manner as he
had done the city; and persuaded the Athenians to aug-
ment their fleet yearly with twenty fllips. The object
of this skilful politician, was to deprive the Lacedemnn-
nians of the superiority hitherto poficffed by them over
the other states of Greece. But it muff be confessed,
that he was not very scrupulous with regard to the
means employed by him for that purpose. An instance
of this was his project of burning the Grecian fleet in
the harbour of Pegazus, whither it had retired to winter
after the defeat of Mardonius ; or, according to some
authors, that part of it only which belonged to the La-
cedemonians. But not daring openly to propose this
scheme, he was desired by the people to communicate
the matter privately to Ariltides; who having been ac-
cordingly informed of it, declared to the people, that
though the project of Themistocles was indeed highly
useful, yet, at the fame time, it was moif unjuil.
Themiiftocles was therefore prohibited from putting it in
execution.-How becoming, thus to fee a whole state
prefer what was jutl to what was useful ! and whalt a
high idea of the jutlice of Aristides mull we not con-
ceive, when we fee him chosen singly by a whole peo-
ple, to determine whether a projec of the utmoui ge-
neral importance was just or unjust!

The Lacedemonians, about this time, proposed that

the deputies who had formerly been admitted to feats in
the council of the Ampihytions, from Theilily, !irc:n
'Thebes, from Axrgos, and from the other flates that had
ifbmitted to Xerxes, should, as a punifhi.ent for their
defection fr:om the conmmon cause, be for the future de-
privec of' that privilege. The proposal appeared to be
equitablc, and coincided xs ith the resentment entertain-
ed of the puiilanimous and treacherous conduc- of thole
ilates. But T'hemliftoclcs, apprehenlive left by the pro-

p1 Oge

pored exclulion the Laccdemonian intererr might pre-.
ponderate too much in that important council, emplov-
ed all his eloquence and add rels to get the proposal re-
jeled: and his endeavours were fuccelfsful. This ilep
exasperated the Lacedemonians extremely againfl: The-
miflocles, whom they ever after oppoled in all Iis
fehemes. In particular they ecxrted their influence to
support the riling fortunes of Cirnon in opposition to
Therniftocles; and by their intriguecs they ,rere very
intlrurilental in promoting the fuliferluent pr-iecution
and banifhnlent inlliclcd on him by his ungzrateful
collitrymen.

Ariilides having nothiini in view but thle wellare of

Iis country, was ccnlailllny. employed in promoting
her interelis. I-is prudence prevented ditiirbances
t!hat were likely to ariif in Athens by the licentious aind
turbulent difpo!ftion o' lthe people, who finding them-
Iclves now in peace and becurity, deflred to ta'.ke the
:,'i:]e power of goverinment into their own hands. To
-ljere f ditious pro ecLs they were chiefly in!-igated by
Themitiocles, partly from motives of opposition to his
rival Aristides, who supported the party of the better
Ifrt; but principally from partiality to the. party of the
commons, to which his birth naturally attached him.
Ariltides, to quiet them, procured the o'ice of Archon,
hitherto confined to the richer tribes, to be renciered
ttainable by every rank in !he itate. By this concef-
lion he, for the present, satisfied the people, and divert-
ed them from a scheme that musi infillibly have occa-
li;ned a civil war.

As the Pefians were still in pofieflion of sone cities in

Aia Miiior, the Athenians and Lacedemonians refol-
r"ed to deliver those cities from their fuljeaion ; and
ftr that purpose, sent out a fleet unler the command of
'l'ulmnias, Arittides, and Cinon the son of Miltiades.
ihis expedition was attended witil the dercled fucceis,
:tud the Persian garrisons were expelled from all the ci-

1J 4 ties.

ties. Then the fleet failed up the Hellespont, and at-
tacked Byzantium; which Pausanias had the glory of
taking. But the haughty disposition natural to that
Spartan, appeared to be greatly increased by his late
success. He treated the officers in the most arrogant
and overbearing manner, and soon became perfectly
unsupportable. This excefive pride slained the glory
of his acdions, and at last brought on his ruin. For
desiring to become the fon-in-law of Xerxes, his vanity
induced him to betray his country, and he offered to
make that monarch master of Sparta, and of all the reft
of Greece, on condition of receiving his daughter in
marriage, and of being invested with sovereign autho-
rity over the country he should thus betray. Xerxes
embraced the proposal, and transmitted to Pausanias
large frms of money, to enable him to make good his
engagements. The plot, however, was discovered.
But as the Lacedemonians could not, for the present,
procure sufficient evidence of his treason to juftity a ca-
pital punishment, they were satisfied with deposing him.

The allies, now weary of their fhbjeclion to Sparta,

which Pausanias had exercised over them with the ut-
most severity, and charmed at the fame time with the
mildness, affability, and justice of Aiifides and Cimon,
conferred on them the chief command of the fleet, and
put themselves under the prote&ion of the Athenians.-
Thus did Sparta, by the haughty imperious behaviour
of Paufanias,lofe that superiority over the reft of Greece,
which her justice and moderation had at first procured
her.

As Cimon is about to appear in a very intereffin.

light, as chief commander in Asia, it is proper here to
take notice of a few particulars of his life, previous to
his appearing in that characer. We have already men-
tioned his having undertaken to discharged the fine im-
posed upon his father, in order to obtain the privilege
of burial for his dead body. That ad of filial afteiAion

hal

had procured him the efeem of every body. Thence-
forward he daily gave distinguished marks of the finest
parts, and soon ihowed himself capable of rivalling his
father in valour and military skill; Themistocles in a-
cuteness and prudence; and Aristides in integrity and
juflice, The latter conceived the highefl regard for Ci-
mon while yet very young; and preceived that he was
equal to the most important offices of the fiate. In the
two memorable engagements at Salamis and Platea, Ci-
mon lignalized himself remarkably, and quickly attrac-
ted the admiration of his countrymen.

After delivering the Greek colonies from the Persian

yoke, he continued to push on his conqueits in Asia,
and reduced several of the enemy's cities.--- He next
attacked, near the island of Cyprus, with a fleet of 25o
fail, that of the Persia.ns, amounting to 340 fail, and
iupported by a powerful army encamped along the
liore. The engagement was desperately supported at
firtf. But the Greeks having funk several of the ene-
mny's fllips, put the reft to flight. Then Cimon, failing
towards the 'Thracian Chersonese, took the city of Eione
on the banks of the Strymon. On this occasion, the
Persian, Butes, who was governor of the city, finding
it impossible to preserve the city, throw his riches into
the river, and then burnt himself and all his family on
a funeral pile.

After this, Cimon subdued the other hates in that
country, drove from Syrops the pirates that infested
the lEgean sea, established an Athenian colony ill
their place, and made himself master of DNTaxus.
Crusing along the coasts of Asia, he reduced all the
maritime cities of Caria and Lycia, and left not the
Persians in possession of a tingle inch of ground be-
tween Ionia and Pamphylia. Hearing that the Per-
fiun fleet lay at anchor at the mouth of the river Eury-
medon, waiting for a reinforcement of Phenician flhips,
that they might attack him with their united forces; he

immediately

inmmediately failed against the former to prevent their
junction; charged them with fclic vigour, that they
were obliged, in spite of their great superiority in num-
ber, to run their Ihips aground ; and took more than
too of them. Withlout giving his men time to breathe
after their victory, he infiantly landed them, and at-
tacked the army of the enemy, which was drawn up on
the banks of the Euryinedon. The Persians sustained
the first charge of the Greeks with great firmness. But
the troops of Cirnon, animated by their late success,
broke them at lait, put them fairly to flight, made a
great number of them prisoners, and got a vait booty.
Cimnon crowned his vidories with the capture of the
Phenician dteet which was coming to the aflilance of th:
Persians, and by that means gave a fatal blow to the
Persian naval power.

The Lacedemonians, importuned by conti-
474. nual complaints against Pauftiias, ifummoned lihh

to return home to jutify his conducd. OHe obey

ed, and was for the preifnt acquittel, either through
the defeEt of evidence, or the gratitude of his country-
men for his past important services. He returned,
tlerefore, to Byzantium; but immediately renewed
his negociations with Artabazus, to whom Xerxes had
referred him, that they might together fettle the plan of
operations. The whole matter, however, was at lait
clearly brought to light. A slave, whom he had char-
ged with certain dispatches. for Asia, having obfcrve(d,
that of all his companions formerly dispatchcd thither on
business of the fame kind, none had returned, became
apprehensive of meeting with the fame fate himflf. He
was therefore tempted to open the letter of his ma.Per;
where, perceiving at once all the importance of his com-
niflion, he refo!ved to deliver his dispatches to the E-
phori, who, after maturely weighing every circum-
itance, ordered the slave to take rsfuge in the temple of
l'Teptune; and then propagated a report, that the re:.-

*.,.. * sun~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t

son of his doing so, was to beg pardon of the god for
having opened a letter of his master. Pausanias ha-
tlens to the temple; where the Ephori being concealed,
overhear his whole conversation with the slave, are there-
by entirely convinced of the full extent of his trealon,
and reiblve to bring hin to immediate punihmnent.
Pausanias, perceiving his danger, flies for safety to the
temple of Minerva. The Ephori, not chufing to vio-
late the privilege of the temple, but desiring, at the
fime time, to punish the traitor, ordered the entry to
le fliut up, and part of the roof to be uncovered, that
lie might be starved to death ; which happened ac-
cording!y.

The ardent paflion of Themiflocles so- power,
,t length offended the Athenians; who, provo- 471.
kel at his constantly reminding them of his ier-
vices, baniihed him from Athens. Theminfloclcs was
obligrd to take refuge at Argos. In the mean time, it
was alledged, that tome paflages in letters, found in
the poflellion of Pau!fnias after his death, seemed to in-
dicate a secret underltanding betwreen him and Themi-
flocles. But the truth of this fact was never properly
afeertained. The Lacedemonians, however, upon whose
ambition he had been a conflant check, took advantage
of this circumllance to ruin him, and communicated
the pretended discovery to the Athenians. Themiflocles
endeavoured to justify himiflf by letter. But his ene-
nies, glad of so fair an opportunity of accomplifling
his dettruction, used every argument to convince his
countrymen of his guilt, and were at last successful.
Themiifocles, getting notice of these proceedings, re-
tired to the island of Corcyra, and from thence into E-
pire. But thinking himself unsafe even there, lie next
took refuge at the court of Admetus king ot the Mo..
lolli. This was a very dangerous and daring ftep in
' ,emifrocls. Thtiprince entertained a f(rong resent-
:niit againfl niimn il account of fonme suit of his ha-

s4/" ving

'*'"'): ~ ~ ~

ving been harshly refused by the Athenians, while the
authority of Themistocles was at its height among that
people. Touched, however, at feeing at his feet, and
in his power, the greatest man of Greece, he gave him
a kindly reception, and resolved to proteE him.--.
We shall, by and by fee the fate of Themistocles.

Let us now resume the general history of Greece,

where we {hall behold the glory of Aristides in full
splendor. The Athenians, at present in the undisputed
possession of the principal authority in Greece, and,
by consequence, enjoying uncontrolled influence in
the management of public aftfirs, resolved in com-
pliance with the request of several of the Rfates, to put
the funds furnished for the purpose of the general de-
fence of the country on a new footing, by imposing on
each city a tax proportionable to its whole revenue. It
required a man of great integrity and disinterestedness
to proportion and to colled this tax. Aristides was
unanimously pitched upon for that purpose; and he dif-
charged the trust reposed in him to the fatisfa&ion of
all the parties concerned, and in such a manner as did
honour to the choice of his countrymen. The period
of his administration is confidered as the happiest in the
history of the Greeks. For, in the sequel, under the
management of Pericles and his successors, the increase
of unnecessary expences required the tax to be first
doubled, and afterwards tripled.

It is hardly poflible to carry the contempt of riches

to a greater length than Ariffides did. He even glo-
ried in his poverty. Of his sentiments on this head, he
gave evident proofs in his defence of Callias, one of
the richest citizens of Athens, to whom it was imputed
as a crime, that being rich, and the friend of Ariltides,
he had nevertheless suffered him to remain in poverty.
But of this charge Aristides fully \justified him, by de-
claring to the judges, that Callias had, often pressed him
to accept of considerable fums, but which he had as of-

ten

ten refused, from a persuasion, that the want of riches
prevented in him all desire of superfluities, and left him
at liberty to apply himself entirely to the management
of public affairs. What magnanimity!

The leading men who succeeded Ariflides, reple-

nifled Athens with beautiful porticoes, with statues,
and with other decorations; but his study, fays Plu-
tarch, was to adorn it with virtue. He was not always,
adds the fame author, a magistrate; but he was always
employed in the service of his country. His house was
a public school for found policy, wisdom, and virtue;
and was ever open to all the Athenian youth, who re-
paired thither as if to consult an oracle, and were liften-
ed to and inftruted by him in the most familiar and
obliging manner. Though he had, on several occa-
sions, given signal marks of his courage, as at the
battle of Marathon, when he supported the opinion of
Miltiades, to march out and give battle to the Persians
in the open field, yet equity was his diflinguiflling cha-
rateriltic, and procured him the appellation of jzsi.,
lie possessed uncommon equality of temper, which did
not desert him even in his banifiment, but enabled him
to preserve his affeclion for his country, .and to petition
the gods in favour of his fellow-citizens, at the very
infiant when they were treating him with the most cruel
ingratitude. His only object was the glory of Athens ;
and provided she were successful against her enemies,
he was little solicitous whether it was by his means or
those of another. Of this he gave a strong proof with
respeCt to Themistocles. After sharing with him the
whole danger and conduEt of the war, he never of-
sered to dispute with him the glory of the fuccels ; but
suffered him to enjoy it without a rival. Ariflides was
in all respects the perfec' model of a good citizen.

The reader cannot fail to be anxious to know the

circumflances attending the last part of the life, and the
final exit of this great man, But hiflorians have left

11

us altogether in the dark on' that point. It is probable,
however, that he ended his days in peace. History
only informs us, that after pofefling for a long while
the sole management the public money, he died in
such absolute poverty, as not to leave fuficient funds to
bury him. But the republic charged itself with this lahf
duty to its best citizen ; and likwife with the care of
providing suitable matches for his daughters; and his
son Lyfinachus was maintained in the Prytaneun at the
public expence.

It was nearly about the time of lwhich v:c
455. are now faeaking, that the Romans, havin,

heard of the wisdom of the Greek institutions,

sent ten of their citizens to Athens, to inform them-
selves of the different laws there efablifhed. It was
from the collection made at Athens by those ten citi-
zens, that the laws of the twelve tables were cornpofel,
.which formed the basis of the after system of Roman ju-
rilfrudence.

A.rtabanus, captain of the guards to Xerxes, secing

his sovereign dilguled with all attempts of conquel,
imnmerlcd in pleasure, and despised by his fubjedCs, con-
ceived the design of dethroning him; and for that pur-
pose formed a conspiracy with one of the chief eunuchs.
1H-aving accordingly aflfafinated Xerxes in his chamber,
lhe haltens to find Artaxerxes, surnamed Lonigilmaniuzs,
that prince's third son; acquaints him with the murder
of his father, and accuses Darius, thle eldc foni of
Xerxes, as the murderer. Artaxerxes believing the
villain, lills his brother in the first transports of his
rage, and mounts the throne. Artabanus forms a con-
federacy flr dethroning the new king. Artaxerxes gct-
ting intelligence of this conspiracy, puts Artabanus t)
death. Thle p-rtifans of the latter, together with his
sons, to the number of seven, all grown men, resolved
to revenfoe the death of Artabanus. This new confe-
deracy
: '.gains Artaxerxes produced an open war, and

a

a bloody battle. But Artaxerxes prevailed in the end,
and exterminated the greater part of his enemies. Be-
come at last peaceable poitifibr of his kingdom, he
deposed all his viceroys of whose fidelity he entertained
any suspicion ; reformed many abufcs that had crept in
during the late reign; and acquired the characer of a
great prince.--- We fiall have occasion to make men-
tion of him more than once in the sequel.

Let us once more look back to Themiflocles. The
Athenians, relolved not to permit him to remain in quiet
under the prote&0ion of King Admetus, rcquired that
prince to deliver him up, under pain of their difilea-
iure. Themifiocles informed by Admetus of the di-
lemma into which he had brought himself on his ac-
count, determined, without hesitation, to retire to a
greater distance siill from his cruel and ungrateful coun-
tr men. He goes on board of a fllip ; and after escaping
fcveral dangers, arrives at Cumes in Armenia. The
Persian monarch having heard of his being proscribcd
by his countrymen, had already set a price on his head
;icl ilfued orders, that all persons who arrived in any
part of the coast of his dominions !hould be fric^ly ex-
;:nined. Themistocles, however, found means to reach
Elolia undiscovered ; and, by the friendship of his hoih,
a man of considerable fubfiance in that country, he
was from thence conducted in a covered waggon to
Suza; the conduclor of the wav.:yon telling those he
nmct, that the person conveyed in the waggon was an
l1alian ladv, whom he was coindIcuing to a nollelman at
court. He was permitted therefore to pais wViiout
fuirther inquiry, the ladies in Persia being always care-
fully guarded from public view.

As soon as he came to the court of Artaxerxes, he
told that he was a Greek, and begged an audience of
tlhe king. Being accordingly admitted into the royal
presence, he profirated himniclf as usual before tIhe mo-
narch, and made a most moving speech to obtain his

2 pru tcLion.

protection. You fee at your feet, fays he, Themi.
ftocles; a man who has indeed done much harm to the
Persians, but who has it in his power to render them
important services. My life is in your power. If you
save it, you will eternally oblige a man who begs it at
your hands ; if you deprive me of it, you will deftry
the greatest enemy of Greece. Artaxerxes was aftonifi.
ed at his intrepidity, and could not help admiring him.
le made him no answer for the present; but, on being
left alone, he gave himself up to the highest transp[orts
of joy, crying out from time to time, " I have Themin

R ftocles in my power." Next day, however, after

deliberating cooly on this unforeseen event, he resolved
to at the generous part, and to bind Themifioclcs to
his interefs, by loading him with favours. He there-
fore called him into his presence; received him in the
kindest and most obliging manner; presented him with
2oo talents, and questioned him much about the afflirs
of Greece.

Themiflocles, that he might be able to convcrfe

more freely with Artaxerxes, applied himself to the
study of the Persian language, and soon learned to fpe;k
it. In the mean time, the Persian monarch was :.'!h
giving him flill greater and greater marks of favou,
and on all occalions testified a particular efleein for
him. He married him to a Persian lady of the highclt
birth ; made him his comp nion in all his pleasures; and
converted with him with great familiarity His credit
was so high, that he was himself amazed at it. It i
said, that being one day at table with his children, and
reflecing on the magnificence with which he was
treated, he could not refrain from exclaiming, " We
' had perished, my children, if we had not perished.'
He fixed his residence at Magnesia, a city of Asia Mli
nor, and continued there for the remaining part of lis
life. The revenues of three cities were afiigned him ai
a fond of fubfiftance.

~~I~~~~~~~~ ~~~After

After Cimon had gained over the Persians the vido-

ries already mentioned, he returned to Athens, and
employed part of the spoils taken from the enemy in
fortifying Pircus, and embellishing the city.

Cimon was no less admired by the Athenians in

time of peace, than he had been during the war. Be-
fides erecing various public flructures, both for the
ftiength and for the ornament of the city, he planted
the academy with groves; brought water into it, and
laid it out in delightful walks. He likevwife planted plane
trees round the forum. He applied his riches to the
noblest of purposes. He ordered his delightful gardens
to be at all times open to his fellow-citizens. He kept a
very plentiful but plain table, to which all persons,
rich and poor, citizens and irangers, were made wel-
come ; and he assisted w-ith his wealth, not only his par-
ticular friends, but the greater part of the Athenians.
As he walked through the flreets of Athens, the ser-
vants that attended him had orders to put money pri-
vately into the hands of all the poor citizens who came
in their way; and to give cloaths to such as seemed to
fiand in need of them. But all this was done by Cimon
without the smallest oflentation; and without any in-
tention of courting the favour of the people; for, in
point of politics, he was inviolably attached to the party
of the nobility.

Being chosen to condu& another expedition againfr

the Plerians, he expelled them from the Th'r:cian Cher-
ionefe, and laid siege to Thafus, whofa inhabitants had
revolted against the Athenians. i his siege is remark-
able for its having continued three years; and for the
ol)linate resistance of the befiged, whereby they ex-
posed themselves to the severest misfortunes of war. It
was declared capital for any person to talk of surrender-
ing; and the women seconded the efforts of the men,
even cutting offt their hair to make ropes. The city

M accordingly,

accordingly, flood out till famine had carried off mnof
of its inhabitants.

Cimon next subdued all the country opposite to

Thrace, as far as Macedonia, of which kingdom, too,
he was on the point of attempting the conquest.

Under these favourable circumitances the number of

inhabitants in Attica appears to have been greatly en-
creased. For notwithflanding a great loss of mnen in
the course of the war, they sent out large colonies, to
Eion on the river Strymon, to Amphipolis in Macedo-
nia, and to the island of Sciros.

Artaxerxes hearing of these important successes of

Cimon, and of the increase thence derived to the Athe-
nian power, proposed to Themiflocles to take the com-
mand of a powerful army, which he had resolved to
fend against Attica. Such a proposal threw that illuRfri-
ous exile into the greatest perplexity. Agitated on the
one hand by the firong affedion fRiil retained by him for
his native country, and the thoughts of the dishonour
he fliould draw on hinmfelf by bearing arms against it;
and on the other hand, by the powerful sentiments
of gratitude entertained by him towards a prince
who had loaded him with the highest favours; he
perceived that death alone could deliver him from
his distressful situation. I-Ie resolved therefore to facri-
fice his life to his duty to his country, and to his gratitude

to Artaxerxes. Afiembling his friends, he bade
466. them a moving farewell ; swallowed a draught of

bull's blood; and died at the age of fixty-five

years. Artaxerxes was flruck with admiration at this
inflance of magnanimity, and highly regretted his dying
so prematurely. But according to Thucydides, he did
not die by poison, but by a natural disease.

Themiflocles poffefled great magnanimity, invincible

courage, and an insatiable desire of glory. He enjoy-
ed wonderful power of memory, uncommon penetra-
tion and sagacity, and a difpofiticn singularly acirve,

indc-

indefatigable, and persevering. WVe have seen, that it
was the most extreme neceflity which forced him to
take refuge with the enemies of his country, on find-
ing hinfelf persecuted in the most rigorous manner, by
a jealous and ungrateful people, whom he knew by ex-
perience to be capable of the greatest cruelty to those
who had rendered them the most signal services. Next
to Miltiades, whose fate was recent in his memory, he
was the principal author of their safety. He gained the
confidence and affetion of the allies, by his mild and
condescending behaviour, and by his insinuating ad-
dress. By his prudence he extinguished that spirit of
discord which prevailed among the Greeks at the time
of the Persian invasion, the subsistence whereof might,
on that occasion, have proved fatal to themn; and he u-
nited them against their common enemy. He convinced
his countrymen, that their naval strength was their
greatest safety, and could alone procure them a fupe-
riority over the other Greeks; and to him principally
the Athenians owed their skill in naval affairs. His was
particularly diftinguified by an acute ditcernment, and
an accurate foresight with refpec& to future events.
Stratagem, indeed, and cunning were much employ-
td by him: but in that refpea he aded from a prin-
iciple which, though perhaps wrong, was universally
iadopted by his countrymen, namely, That every thing
xvbhich contributed to the advantage or glory of the com-
n:monwealth was lawful and laudable.

About this time, the most violent earthquake ever
siclt before in Greece happened in Laconia. Not only
'ere most of the houses thrown down by it, but the
earth opened and swallowed up fevcral spots of ground
Iin that neighbourhood. The I-elots, taking advantage
,rs this calamity, attempted to assert their liberty ; and
,joilning the Meffenians, made war on the neighbouring
citcs. The Lacedemonians were reduced to the ne-
ce.fity of begging aflilance of the Athenians. Citnon,

M 2 thinking

thinking it ungenerous to take advantage of the mis-
fortunes of a rival city, persuaded the Athenians to assist
them; and marching himself into Laconia at the head
of 4000 men, he dispersed the Helots.

This is the proper place to fix a celebrated

epoch.-lIt was in the seventh year of the reign 467.
of Artaxerxes, that the lfraelite Esdras, that mo-
narch's cup-bearer, obtained permission of his royal mna-
fler to return to Jerusalem, to re-establish the Jewifl re-
ligion and to live according to the law. Thirteen
years after, and in the twentieth year of the reign of
Artaxerxes, Nehemiah, another of his cup-bearers, obh
tained of that prince a decree, permitting the Jews to
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.

About this time Herodotus began to write his history,

It is remarkable, that the time of Esdras, the last writer
of sacred history, and by whom the several books of that
history were ranged in their prefcnt order, coincides
with that of the 'first writer of profane hist-ory. The
sacred writings, reckoning only from the time of A-
braham, had then existed for the space of fifteen cen.
turies.

To return to Athens. The celebrated Pericles had

lately made his appearance in public business, and had
already acquired great influence in the adminiftralion.
.Animated with a more ardent desire of glory than Ci.
mon, he was become jealous of the reputation of that
Illustrious Athenian; who, by his services to the slate,
and his liberality to his fellow-citizens, had gained their
highest esteem. Pericles, therefore, resolved to oppoif
him. Cimon was connected with the noblest families
of Athens. Pericles, on the other hand, in imitation
of the political conduc of Themistocles, embraced the
party of the people; and omitted nothing to attract the

attention

* A solemn contest between the tragic poets sir-s inlLituted at

A'.lecns. On this occasion Sophocles, only twenty-eight years old, was
preferred to Efchylus, though then in the zenith of his fame.

attention and the favour of the crowd. It muff be con-
sessed, that his extraordinary parts oorrefponded per-
feEtly with his soaring ambition. He possessed uncom-
mon elevation of sentiment, and a firiking dignity of
manner and deportment. He had received the inoft
important part of his education under the celebrated
philosopher Anaxagoras ; from whom, betides natural
philosophy, he had learned a chaste and lofty style.
Pericles had likewise studied with much care the art of
government among his countrymen; and his singular
penetration quickly enabled him to manage their paflions
and their prejudices to the best advantage. His quality
of senator gave him an opportunity of displaying to the
greatest advantage his powers of oratory, which he
possessed in a supreme degree. His natural elocution
was enforced by all the graces of a fine voice, and very
captivating exterior accomplishments, in so much that
he in a manner charmed the imaginations of his audi-
ence, and managed them as he pleased. The boldness,
too, and the impetuosity with which he spoke, so afto-
nifhed his hearers, that they fancied a resemblance be-
tween his declamation and the thunder of Jupiter. This
procured him the appellation of Olympian. But find-
ing it necessary, in order completely to gain over the
multitude to his fide, to rival Cimon in liberality, his
sirs care was to insinuate himself into that branch of
the adminifiration which regarded the management of
the public funds. It is apparent, that in this employ-
ment he by no means proposed to ac2 on the rigid prin-
ciples of Ariflides. He first obtained the conquered
territories to be divided among the citizens; and then
he procured a certain proportion of the public money
to be paid to each of them as a gratuity for their at-
tending the popular assemblies; a policy that corrupted
the Athenians, and accustomed that fober frugal people
:o luxury and idleness.

By lavishing the public money in the most pro-

M 3 fuse

thinking it ungenerous to take advantage of the mis-
fortunes of a rival city, persuaded the Athenians to assist
them; and marching himself into Laconia at the head
of 4000 men, he dispersed the Helots.

This is the proper place to fix a celebrated

epoch.- It was in the seventh year of the reign 467.
of Artaxerxes, that the lfraelite Esdras, that mo-
narch's cup-bearer, obtained permission of his royal ma-
fter to return to Jerusalem, to re-establish the Jewifhl re-
ligion and to live according to the law. Thirteen
years after, and in the twentieth year of the reign of
Artaxerxes, Nehemiah, another of his cup-bearers, ob-
tained of that prince a decree, permitting the Jews to
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.

About this time Herodotus began to write his history.

It is remarkable, that. the time of Esdras, the last writer
of sacred history, and by whom the several books of that
history were ranged in their prefcnt order, coincides
with that of the first writer of profane history. The
sacred writings, reckoning only from the time of A-
braham, had then existed for the space of fifteen cen.
turies.

To return to Athens. The celebrated Pericles had

lately made his appearance in public business, and had
already acquired great influence in the adminiflration,
Animated with a more ardent desire of glory than Ci-
mon, he was become jealous of the reputation of that
illustrious Athenian; who, by his services to the slate,
and his liberality to his fellow-citizens, had gained their
highest esteem. Pericles, therefore, resolved to oppofc
him. Cimnon was conneced with the noblest families
of Athens. Pericles, on the other hand, in imitation
of the political conduce of Themistocles, embraced the
party of the people; and omitted nothing to attract the

attention

* .A solemn contest between the tragic poets firit inllitutcd at

Althcns. On this occasion Sophocles, only twenty-eight years old, wai
preferred to Ecfhylus, though then in the zenith of his fame.

attention and the favour of the crowd. It must be con-
sessed, that his extraordinary parts oorrefponded per-
fetly with his soaring ambition. ile possessed uncom-
mon elevation of sentiment, and a irriking dignity of
manner and deportment. He had received the nmof
important part of his education under the celebrated
philosopher Anaxagoras ; from whom, besides natural
philosophy, he had learned a chaste and lofty style.
Pericles had likewise studied with much care the art of
government among his countrymen; and his singular
penetration quickly enabled him to manage their paflions
and their prejudices to the best advantage. His quality
of senator gave him an opportunity of displaying to the
greatelt advantage his powers of oratory, which he
pofftffed in a supreme degree. His natural elocution
was enforced by all the graces of a fine voice, and very
captivating exterior accomplifhlments, in so much that
he in a manner charmed the imaginations of his audi-
ence, and managed them as he pleased. The boldness,
too, and the imnpetuofity with which he spoke, so afto-
niihed his hearers, that they fancied a relemblance be-
txeen his declamation and the thunder of Jupiter. This
procured him the appellation of Olympian.- But find-
ing it necessary, in order completely to gain over the
multitude to his fide, to rival Cimon in liberality, his
firt care was to insinuate himfeif into that branch of
the adminiflration which regarded the management of
the public funds. It is apparent, that in this employ-
inent he by no means proposed to ad on the rigid prin-
ciples of Aristides. He first obtained the conquered
territories to be divided among the citizens; and then
lie procured a certain proportion of the public money
to be paid to each of them as a gratuity for their at-
tending the popular assemblies; a policy that corrupted
the Athenians, and accustomed that fober frugal people
to luxury and idleness.

By lavifliing the public money in the most pro-

M 3 fuse

fuse and oltentatious manner, Pericles succeeded in
seducing the people to his fide. In the prosecution of
this plan, he received no opposition from his rival Ci-
mon. That great man being of a mild, candid, and
peaceable disposition, and of sentiments too elevated for
little political intrigues, enjoyed in quiet the fruits of his
former success, and placed his chief pleasure in sharing
lis wealth with his fellow-citizens. Peric'es therefore
made hafiy advances towards the objea of his am-
bition.

Thle Helots having about this time formed a new con-

federacy, made themselves maflers of Ithome. The
Lacedemonians by a frefl embafly begged assistance of
the Athenians; but, in consequence of a sudden change
of opinion, they very abruptly dismissed the Athenian
troops that had been sent to their aiflltance. This ca-
price gre:.tly disgusted the Athenians. Cimon having
warmly supported the demand of the Lacedemonians,
and displayed much zeal in their favour, Pericles and
Ephiates availed themselves of that circumstance, pri.
vately to prepoflefs the people against him, and to render
him suspected. Cimon was destined, like most of the
great men of this republic, to have his services rewarded
with the punifliment of ostracism. He was banifhled for
ten years.

Pericles took advantage of the absence of Cimon, and

of his own credit with the people, to make innovation;
in the eitablifhed form of government. He deprived
the Areopagus of the power of judging in the most im-
portant queltions that had formerly belonged to their
iurifdi.ion ; he rendered the other courts of justice sub-
servient to his pleasure ; and he became so abfo!ute il
Athens, that under this republican government Bh
poffcit a power almoit deilpotic.

The mifunderltanding which at this time took plac

between the Sp rtans and Athenians, was the beginning
f tlhe mutual animofit that conrantiy afterwards sub-

^
/" *" ~~~~~~~~~~~~~I'.S'

filled between those two flates, and brought to view the
spirit of rivallhip, with which they had long been secretly
animated against one another. The spirit of diford
broke out much about the fame time among the other
itates of Greece, and set them all in arms. As it is
unnecefiary, and would be inconfitlent with our plan,
to take notice of the particulars of all the petty wars
that were the consequence of these disputes, we (hall
content ourfrives with the most cursory mention of
them. ¥We do this the more willingly, because a par-
ticular detail of the misery and ilaughter of which they
vere produL&ive would ihock the humnanity of most
readers, without conveying any precise or difinEt ideas
to those who take pleasure in the fludy of military
operations.

The inhabitants of rMegara had fQrmed a spirited re-

solution to render themselves independent of the Ar-
gives; but being totally defeated in an engagement by
their opprefiors, their city was besieged, and, in spite of
the molt ob{tinate ref!lbance, was taken and razed to the
ground.

'Ihe Helots, after defending themselves in Ithome for

ten years against the whole Spartan power, were at !a~s
obliged to surrender; and being expelled the Pelopon..
nefe, fettled at Naupatus.

The Mlegarians, by renouncing their connection with

the Spartans, and fiding with the Athenians, excited
the jealousy of the Corinthians, who on that account
fought two battles with the Athenians, in which each
party was conqueror in its turn.

The inhabitants of Egina, autuated by the fame mo-

tives of jealousy, likewiiC declared war against the Athe-
nians, but were defeated in a lea megagement by Leo-
crates, who blockaded up their town. The Corinthians
having laid wane tlhe territory of Mlegara, were totally
routed by the Athenians, who had come to the relief of
that country.

M 4 d

A war likewise breaking out between the Dorians and

Phoceans, the former, supported by the Spartans, re-
mained the conquerors.

About the fame time a sharp engagement happened

between the Spartans and Athenians in the neighbour-
hood of Tanagra in Bceotia. Cimonn, who was then in
banishment, came to the field of battle, and begged per-
miflion of his countrymen to ihare with them in the
danger of the engagement.-But this they refuted him,
on pretence of fufpeting his intentions. He exhorted,
however, those of his tribe who were present, and lay
under the fame suspicion of favouring the enemy, to
give proofs of their loyalty and fidelity. They obeyed
his injuntions so effectually, that every one of them
fell, fighting bravely, and the Athenians loft the battle.
Two months after, the Athenians had their revenge for
this defeat. Under the command of Myronidas, one
of the befL generals of Greece, they totally vanquified
the Spartans, deflroyed Tanagra, .nd laid waile Boeotia.

Egina having in the mean time capitulated, had its

walls razed to the foundation.-About the l-ame time,
the Athenian commander Tolmedes surprised Giltheum,
a sea port town of Laconia, burnt the Lacedemonian
fleet, and defeated the inhabitants of Sicyon in battle.

JWhile the flates of Greece were in this manner em-

ployed in the mutual deliruction of each other,
463. the Athenians, by the iiiftigation of Inarus king

of Lylia, undertook an expedition into Egypt,

which had lately revolted againlt the Persian power.
On their jundion with the king of Lybia, they gave
battle to the Persians, put them to flight, and got pof-
session of a part of Memphis. 'lNext year, however, the
scene was greatly altered, For after several fruitless as-
faults, they were at last obliged to raise the siege of that
city on the approach of the enemy, and to retire to Bi-
blis, an island in the Nile. In this place they withstood
an eight months siege. But their fleet happening to lie

at

at anchor in the Nile, the Persians, by changing the
course of the river, rendered the ground round the ships
dry, took every one of them, and put the greatest part
of their crews to the fiword. The army being thus dis-
;abled from opposing the enemy any longer, partly pe-
ri(led, and partly diiperfed. Such was the event of this
unfortunate enterprize, in which the Athenians confu-
med fix years.

During the Egyptian expedition, Pericles, desirous of

diilinguiihing himself in the character of a soldier, as
well as in that of a ftatefnan, ravaged the coafis of La..
conia, and beat the Sicyonians in two engagements.

The Athenians becoming sensible at last of the injuflice

of their treatment of Cimon, recalled him after five
years baniilllhent. Soon after his return, that great
man succeeded in bringing about a peace between his
countrymen and the Lacedemonians; and with a view
of diverting the Athenians, grown lpref;mptuous bi
tiheir late good fortune, fromn making war on their
neighbours, he resolved to find occupation for their ari:s
abroad. Departing, therefore, for Cyprus with
a fleet of 140 vefIels under his command, and 450.
bcing there joined by 60 more from Egypt, he
attacked Artabazus, the. admiral of Artiaerxes; and
took 0 oo of his ships. He next made a deccenc upon
Cilicia; and totally defeated Megabazus, another officer
of that prince. He then returned to Cyprus to form
tle siege of Citium. In the courfi of this siege, Cimon
fi!i sick. Perceiving his end approaclhig, he
bcfeeched his men to keep his death a lecret. 449.
They followed his advice, and proceeding with
dleir operations, obtained a signal vicory, in which
tihcy took 0oo of the enemies ships, and then failed
back in triumph to Attica.

Cimon's death was much regretted by the Atheni-
ans. Plutarch, among other lofty encomiums, de-
feribes him as having been an affectionate son, a iaith-

ful

ful friend, a zealous citizen, a moit skilful commander,
and so extremely liberal, as never to have been equalled
in generosity. We muff add, that he had a share in
all the important exploits of his time, and that he very
much increased the naval power of Athens. It ap-
pears to have been a principal objec with Cimon to
keep his countrymen in unremitting acion, while at the
fame time he readily admitted the slightest pretences to
excuse their allies from personal service. His motive for
this is o'bvious. The Athenians daily became more
warlike, while their allies grew effeminate and unac.
quinted witl the use of arms. When young, he was
a great favourite of Arif'ides, who reclaimed him from
lis extravagancies. In the sequel Cimon imitated his
friend in his dilintereftednefs and love of juflice*.

The Spartans having forcibly deprived the Pho-
447. ceans of the fuperintendancy of the temple of Del-

phos, the Athenians replaced them in it after beat-

ing the Bceotians. But in a subsequent engagement the
Boeotians, with the afliftance of their neighbours, cut the
Athenian army in pieces, and killed their general Tol-
medes. Megara revolts; and the Spartans make an ir-
ruption into Attica. Pericles, anxious to bring the war
to a conclusion, privately corrupted Pliftonax king of
the Lacedemonians; and having by that means secured
the safety of Attica, failed againit Euboa, and subdued
that island. The fiates of Greece, weary of such an ex-
haulting war, use their united endeavours to reitore
peace; which is at length concluded between the tvo

republics

* A remarkable instance of Cimon's difinterc[tednefs is recorded

ly Plutarch. A Perlian of diftin&ion having incurred the relent.
ment of his king, withdrew with great riches to Athens. Here, t
procure Cimon's prote&ion, having offered that illustrious Athenian
a magnificent present, Cimon afied him, "' whether he desired to
"' have him for lis friend or for his mercenary ?:'-For my friend, U"'
qunetionably," anfrivred the Persian.--" Then," said Cimon, " r
' tain your prefen t; for if I Ie your fir-ind, I m1ina command youwr i1;o''-

s~ r,..c} e,.r} s o~t:Z~s '' )a

republics of Athens and Lacedemon, and their refpccive
allies, for the space of thirty years. *

Let us now turn our eyes to the adminiflration of Pe-

ricles. To counterbalance his exorbitant power in A-
thens, the better fort set up in opposition to him Thu-
cydides, the brother-in-law of Cimon, who exerted his.
utmost endeavours to curb Pericles, and to maintain
the balance between the nobility and people. Pericles,
on the other hand, to retain the aifleion of the po-
pulace, entertained them with shows and feasts; took
into his pay a great number of them to serve on board
of a fleet he was fitting out ; and eftablifle-d several
colonies in the Chersonese, both with a view to disburden
the city of a great number of superfluous idle people,
and likewise to hold the allies in awe.-In all thele un-
dertakings he professed to have no other aim than the
public good. After the example of Themiflocles h:
annually augmented their navy with 50 flpips, a policy
that, by displaying the power and strength of the
Athenians, rendered them formidable to their enemies.,
and refped-able among strangers. -le divided the landcs
conquered by the republic among the old disbanded
soldiers.

Pericles, by a judicious distribution of proper rewards,

excited a noble spirit of emulation among the profefibrs
of the fine arts; and adorned Athens with the nmafer-
pieces of the mot ifkilful artists. It muff be acknow-
ledged, to the honour of Pericles, that whatever works
of Greece, either in architeture, sculpture, or painting,
have attracted the admiration of after ages, were the
fruits of his government, and of the attention bellowed
by him upon the most elegant fubjeats. For many of
those maeterpieces we are indebted to Phidias the cele-
brated flatuary, of whom the famous ftatuc of Pallas,

fto

· In the year before Chrifl 444, military tribunes with consular
power were created at Rome:-_ and next year censors were for the
firt time eliCted there.

so highly valued by the belt judges, was a capital work.
Pericles replenished the city of Athens with ornaments
that attracted the admiration of firangers, and inspired
them with a high idea of the Athenian genius and power.
-Athens assumed a new face. Pomp and magnificence
supplied the place of its original simplicity. But the
belt and most sensible citizens discerned, in this superb
display, an approaching corruption of manners. Peri-
cles, according to Cicero, was by these men blamed for
having exhausted the public money to fill the city with
superfluous decorations.

The allies in the mean time, and the enemies of Pe.

ricles, complained loudly of his wantonly lavishing away
in those works the funds that ought to remain appropri-
ated for the exigencies of war. Pericles answered, that
the Athenians were by no means accountable for their
conduct in this refpeat to their allies, who ought to be
satisfied with the proteCtion afforded them against the ir-
ruptions of the barbarians. He added that the works
at which they were pleated to take umbrage, furnilh-
ed employment and fublitence to a vast number of
citizens.

But this was not all; the orators of the opposite sac-

tion attacked him with great acrimony. Thucydides, in
particular, whole invectives vwere sharpened by personal
animosity, harangued againfl him with singular keenncls
and ability; and the contelt betweenr Pericles and him
rose to such a height, that it became necefiary that the
one or the other ihould be baniihed the city. Periclcs's
addrcfs prevailed, and brought about the banifhiment of
his rival. Become now sole malfer in Athens, he di-
poled of the whole power of the republic at his pleaiure,
and reigned absolute in its molt flouriliing days.

Pericles perceiving his authority to be at last firmly

eftablithed, and that the favour of the people was now
less necesSary to him, gave another turn to the govern-
ncinta, and insensibly circumnfcribed the power of the dce-

Inccr2acy,'

mocracy. In this undertaking he met with his usual fuc-
cess, by.m eans of his admirable flill in managing the
minds of the multitude, and bringing them to the temper
he desired, by the force of his eloquence, His conduct,
too, was now perfectly irreproachable ; and his only aim
seemed to be the public advantage. He possessed indeed
a noble difintereftted foul: for, during the long space
that he enjoyed the entire disposal of the public money,
his private estate did not appear to have been at all in-
creased; and excepting the largesses procured by him
for the people, and his expences in embellishing the city,
his management was guided by the most wife and pru-
dent oeconomy.

The fixed objea of Pericles's whole conduct was, to

raise Athens to an unrivalled superiority over the other
fiates of Greece. But though of diftinguifled personal
bravery, he appears on the whole to have been rather
averse to war, from the most amiable of all motives, hu-
manity: and when unavoidably engaged in it, he seems
to have been careful, from the fame motive, never to
undertake doubtful or hazardous enterprises, condu&ing
his measures so prudently as' hardly ever to venture an
engagement without a certainty of success. All his war-
like operations were managed with consummate skill
particularly his successful expedition into the Chersonese,
during which he fortified the Greek cities in that coun-
try, and by building a firong wall across the IRlhnus,
secured it against the inroads of the Thracians. HIe led
an expedition as far as the kingdom of Pontus. -He re-
eftablified, by force of arms, the Phocians in the ma-
nagement of the temple of Delphos, whereof they had
been difpoffeffed by the Lacedemonians. Hie entirely
subdued Eubcea, and rendered the Athenian power eve-
ry where refpedable.

In the dispute between the Samians and Milesians,
the Athenians tided with the latter, by the persuasion of
Pericles ; who, setting fail for Samos with a fleet of 40

si ps,

so highly valued by the best judges, was a capital work.
Pericles replenished the city of Athens with ornaments
that attracted the admiration of strangers, and inspired
them with a high idea of the Athenian genius and power.
-Athens assumed a new face. Pomp and magnificence
supplied the place of its original simplicity. But the
best and most sensible citizens discerned, in this superb
display, an approaching corruption of manners. Peri-
cles, according to Cicero, was by these men blamed for
having exhausted the public money to fill the city with
superfluous decorations.

The allies in the mean time, and the enemies of Pe.

rides, complained loudly of his wantonly lavishing away
in those works the funds that ought to remain appropri-
ated for the exigencies of war. Pericles answered, that
the Athenians were by no means accountable for their
conduEt in this refpe& to their allies, who ought to be
satisfied with the protecion afforded them againlf the ir-
ruptions of the barbarians. He added that the works
at which they were pleased to take umbrage, furnillh-
ed employment and iubliftence to a vast number of
citizens.

But this was not all; the orators of the opposite sac-

tion attacked him with great acrimony. Thucydides, in
particular, whole invecives were hfarpened by personal
animosity, harangued against him with fngular keenncis
and ability; and the contelt between Pericles and him
rose to such a height, that it became neceiaTry that the
one or the other Ihould be baniihed the city. Periclcs's
addrcfs prevailed, and brought about the banishment oi
his rival. Become now sole master in Athens, he lifl
posed of the whole power of the republic at his plealure,
and reigned absolute in its most flourishing days.

Pericles perceiving his authority to be at last firmly

established, and that the favour of the people was now
less neceflary to him, gave another turn to the govern-
imint, and insensibly circumscribed the power of the dc-

Iloc racy.,

mocracy. In this undertaking he met with his usual fuc-
cess, by.means of his admirable skill in managing the
minds of the multitude, and bringing them to the temper
he desired, by the force of his eloquence, His conduc,
too, was now perfectly irreproachable ; and his only aim
seemed to be the public advantage. He possessed indeed
a noble disinterested foul: for, during the long space
that he enjoyed the entire disposal of the public money,
his private estate did not appear to have been at all in-
creased; and excepting the largesses procured by him
for the people, and his expences in embellifling the city,
his management was guided by the most wife and pru-
dent oeconomy.

The fixed obje& of Pericles's whole conduEt was, to

raise Athens to an unrivalled superiority over the other
flates of Greece. But though of diftinguifled personal
bravery, he appears on the whole to have been rather
averse to war, from the most amiable of all motives, hu-
manity: and when unavoidably engaged in it, he seems
to have been careful, from the fame motive, never to
undertake doubtful or hazardous enterprises, condueting
his measures so prudently as' hardly ever to venture an
engagement without a certainty of success. All his war-
like operations were managed with consummate flill;
particularly his successful expedition into the Chersonese,
during which he fortified the Greek cities in that coun-
try, and by building a strong wall across the Ifhmnus,
secured it against the inroads of the Thracians. lle led
an expedition as far as the kingdom of Pontus. Hle re-
established, by force of arms, the Phocians in the ma-
nagement of the temple of Delphos, whereof they had
been difpoffefied by the Lacedemonians. He entirely
tubdued Eubcea, and rendered the Athenian power eve-
ry where refpedable.

In the dispute between the Samians and Milesians,
the Athenians tided with the latter, by the persuasion of
Pericles , who, setting fail for Samos with a fleet of 40

ships,

ships, there eftablithed democracy, and left a
441. garrison in the town. After his departure, the

citizens,who had withdrawn themselves on his ap-

proach, having received a reinforcement from the go-
vernor of Samos, entered the town by night, and put
all the garrison to the sword. Pericles getting intel.
ligence of this, returned with a greater force than be.
fore, defeated the Samian fleet, and blockaded the
town. In vain did the Phenicians come to its relief.
Pericles, having received an additional reinforcement,
battered the walls with such vigour, that he obliged the
Samians to capitulate, and to pay the expences of the
war. This exploit added greatly to the reputation and
glory of Pericles.

The Corcyreans likewise, finding themselves unable

to make head against the Corinthians, who had attack-
ed them, implored the assistance of the Athenians.
The Corinthians too, on their part, sent deputies to A-
thens, which for a considerable time kept the public re-
solutions in fufpence. But the Corcyreans so far pre-
vailed at last, as to procure themselves to be received in-
to alliance with the Athenians; who did not, however,
choose openly to declare war against the Corinthians,
being by no means displeased to fee those two powerful
maritime states weakening each other by their mutual
quarrels.

The Athenians, grown insolent from their success,

wantonly attacked every state which they even fufpcctedc
to be an enemy. They commanded the inhabitants of
Potidea not only to demolish the walls of their city on
the Fallenus fide, but likewifc to dismiss the magiltrates,
whom, as a Corinthian colony, they had received from
Corinth. The Corinthians, provoked at this instance
of the Athenian inju.iice, declared war against them,
and sent an army into the territory of Potidea. An en-
gagement ensued, in which victory declared for the
Athemians. In this battle Alcibiades, as yet a very

young

young man, and his mianer Socrates, chiefly diflin-
guilhed themselves. That philosopher was observed to
support the fatigues of war with an alfe that must have
been the consequence of the hardy temperate life to
which he had inured himnfelf; and in the action he be-
haved with a courage that would have done honour to
the bravest veteran. On this occasion he procured the
prize of valour to be adjudged to his scholar Alcibiades,
intending by that means to inspire him with a love of
glory.

This advantage of the Athenians did not at all sub-

due the refitance of the Potideans, who resolved to
complain to the Spartans. These readily espoused their
quarrel, and secretly prevailed with Perdiccas king of
Macedon to take arms in their behalf. A battle ensued,
in which the Athenians having broken the main body of
that prince's army, obtained the viEtory, and laid siege
to Potidea. The Corinthians having likewise complain-
ed at Sparta, obtained, like all thol' who had been in-
jured by the Athenians, a very favourable hearing
from the Lacedemonians, who at last declared the peace
to be infringed on the part of the Athenians, and pro-
claimed war againit them.

It is certain that the overgrown power of the Athe-
nians; the presumption inspired by the viatories over
tle Persians, of which they attributed the whole honour
to themselves ; their affc&ilon of superiority over the
Spartans; and their overbearing behaviour to their al-
lies, by assuming to themselves an exclusive power of
judging in every matter that concerned the wilole conft-
deracy; had at this time offended all their neighbours.
The Lacedemonians, therefore, and the other itates of
Greece, thought it now highly necessary to humble their
pride; and for that purpose made use of every pretext
to juflify an open declaration of war.

During their hostile preparations, the Lacedemonians
endeavoured to cover their resolutions with the appear-

ance

ance of cquity. Among other old subjects of dispute
revived by them, they required the Athenians to re-
flore liberty to the cities over which they had assumed
an authority; and particularly to abrogate a law made
by them against the inhabitants of Megara. Pericles
answered their complaints with great strength of argu-
ment. He demonstrated, that these were by no me;ns
sufficient grounds for a war, and at the fame time
convinced the Athenians, that they had no reason to
be alarmed at the threats of the Lacedemonians, being
in a much better situation to support a war than they.

At this time the enemies of Pericles, not daring open-

ly to attack himself, vented their resentment against his
friends, and framed accusations against Phidias, Afpa-
fia, and Anaxagoras. The firit was accused of having
embezzled large furs of money, destined for the con-
ftrution of his itatue of Minerva. But this assertion his
accusers were unable to make good. Then he was ac-
cufed of having engraved representations both of Pericles
and of himself, upon the part of the shield of that god.
defs which exhibited the battle of the Amazons; a piece
of vanity surely, very pardonable. For no greater crime,
however, was Phidias condemned to an imprisonment,
in which he is said to have ended his days. But some
authors believe that he was only banished.

The second, Aspasia, was accused of impiety ant a

disorderly life. This Lady was renowned for her vit,
her beauty, her eloquence, and her extraordinary poli-
tical abilites. The mofi distinguished men at Athens
took pleasure in lifening to her conversation. Socrates
himself used to fay, that of her he learned rhetoric.
Pericles, in particular, was extremely fond of Aspasia;
in so much, that he was even believed to have married
her. IHe therefore charged himself with the care of her
defence; and pled her cause with such force of argu-
ment, and so pathetically, that the judges, affected with
his tears, pronounced her innocent.

The

The last, Anaxagoras, was accused of maintaining

doEtrines contrary to the eftablilhed religion; because
he taught and pretended ,to account for the motion of
the heavens ; and affirmed, that the regular and beauti-
ful order visible in the disposition of the universe, muff
be the work of one supreme Being, possesscd of perfect
intelligence. That philosopher, sensible how difficult it
is to combat the superstitious prejudices of a bigotted
populace, thought it his wifefl course to secure himself
by flight.

It was at present the interest of Pericles to engage

the Athenians in a war; for they had already passed a
law obliging him to render an account of the public
money. To avoid the itorm that threatened him, he in-
dulged the Athenians in their inclination for war, which,
by employing them about a business more urgent, and
more direcly interefling, might not only divert themn
from prying minutely into his preceding management of
the public funds, but might likewise give him additional
importance in the tlate, by obliging them, in the con-
dut of the war, to have frequent recourse to his coun-
fel and direction.

The people, in the mean time, held an assembly to
deliberate on the demands of the Laccdeilmoians. Pe-
ricles, on this occasion, juffified the measures of the
Athenians with admirable eloquence. H-e demonstrated
the demands of the Lacedemonians to be no other than
afieEled pretences, under which they hoped to conceal
their jealousy, the real motive of their conduct, as they
could not behold, without an envious eye, the Athe-
ni;ns pofleffed of the superiority in Greece; that it
would be disgraceful in the Athenians to have their
mealures controuled by such enemies ; and that the
sword was the shortest and the only method to fettle the
controversy. Still farther to encourage the Athenians
to undertake this war, he gave them a flattering de-
scription of their army, their navy, and their funds.

N Thia

# CHAP. III. Containing the history of the Peloponnesian war.

This description made a stronger impression, and ani-
mated them the more, because they knew certainly
that it was just. For there were at that time in the
public treasury 9600 talents; the contributions of their
allies amounted to 460 more; and they had an army of
30,000 men, and a fleet of 300 galleys. Pericles, after
giving his opinion for the war, proceeded next to de-
liver his sentiments with refpeEt to the conduct of it.
He advised the Athenians never to hazard a general
battle, especially far from home ; to make the defence
of the city their principal objec ; and by all means to
preserve their superiority at sea. He concluded with
laying before them the plan of operations for their first
campaign.

C H A P. III.

Containzng the hijlory of the Peloponlnefiatn war.

T HE war that now ensued among the Greeks is
known in history by the name of the Pelopolnnefian
war. It was of twenty-feven years duration; and was
attended with an immense expence, and an incredible
effusion of blood. In the course of it, each party ex-
perienced the most cruel reverses of fortune; and dif-
played a courage that might have procured them, if
united, the greatest advantages over their common ene-
mies. Thucydides writes the history of the first twenty-
one years of this war, and Xenophon continues it.

It has already been observed, that the jealousy, con-

ceived by the other states of Greece, of the exorbitant
power of the Athenians, was the more immediate occa-
sion of this war. All the states within the Peloponnelc,
except the Argives alone, joined the Lacedemonians,
who were further supported by tle Megarians, Lo-

2 crians,

crians, Bootians, and Ibole others. The Athenians,
on the other hand, were supported by the inhabitants
of Chios and Lesbos, by the city of Platea, and all their
tributary countries, such as, lonia, the Hellelpont, the
cities of Thrace, &c.

Hostilities were begun by the Thebans, who

attacked Platea, a city of Bceotia, in alliance, as 431.
we have just mentioned, with Athens. All
Greece was immediately in motion. The Lacedemo-
nians march towards the lfthmus of Corinth, a narrow
neck of land, about fix miles broad, which joins the
Peloponnese to the country properly called Greece.
Archidamus, one of the Spartan kings, before advan-
cing farther, dispatches an ambafTador to the Athenians,
to require of them to relinquilh their pretensions. But
the Athenians command the melnenger to retire, with-
out deigning even to give him an audience. The La-
cedenonians thereupon advance towards Attica with
ali army of 60,000 men, while that of the Atlienians
amounted to no more than 18,ooo; but, to make up
tlhe odds, the larter had a fleet of 300 gallies. On the
approach of the Lacedemonian army, the inhabitants of
the country abandoned their habitations, and, carrying
away every thing they could, took refuge in Athens.

The plan of operations purfiedi at this time by the

Athenians, on the suggestion of Pericles, was, to weary
out the enemy, by protrating the war. The Lace-
"iemionians entering Attica, laid siege to Enoe. But
l'eing obliged, after a few fruitless aflaults, to re-
inquilh that attempt, they advanced fill nearer to
Athens, and encamped within half a league of the city.
Pericles, unwilling, while so much inferior in point of
numbers, to haz'rd the fate of the republic in a gene-
ral battle, found it diflicult to prevent the Atheniains,
e-xlfperated at the fight of the ravages committed on
ti[eir country, from ftallying forth upon the enemy.
But by means of his admirable art in managing the

N 2 multitude,

multitude, he kept both the senate and the people from
assembling to deliberate, though at the expence of num-
berlefs ifuilts from his enemies; in spite of which he
persisted in his plan, unmoved either by threats or in-
treaties. In the mean time he dispatched a fleet of loo
ihips to. ravage the coafls of the Peloponnese ; which
being joined by that of the allies, nade a descent upon
Laconia, and laid walte the territory of Sparta. The
Iacedemorians., finding all their endeavours to draw
the Athenians out of their city ineffecaual, and receiving
intelligence of the ravages comimitted in Laconia by the
Athenian fleet, found themselves under the necefflty of
withdrawing, from Attica.

On the ietting out of the expedition against the coast

of Laconia, an extraordinary eclipse of the fun happen-
ed, juil as Pericles was going on board of his galley.
Pericles perceiving. the Athenians to be terrified at this
pheno:nenon, which they confidered as an unlucky pre-
sage, threw his cloak over the face of the pilot, and ask-
ed him if he f£w ? lThe pilot having answered in the ne-
gative, Pericles explained to the byf{anders, that the bo-
dy of the moon, being in like manner interposed at that
iuitant between their fight and the fun, prevented them
firom feeing his light.

When the Lacedemonians retired out of Attica, the

Athenians appropriated -loo talents of money, and Ic3
of their eft fihips, for the more immediate defence of
their country, in cafe of a' frefll invasion, prohibiting
any person, under p.ain of de;:th, from proposing a dit-
ferent application of those resources. 'Ihey then expl-
led from the illand of Egina its present inhabitants,
whom they regarded as the principal cause of the wanr;
and they divided that illand by lot among the citizens of
Athens. They made an alliance with the kings of Ma-
cedon and lThrace ; iubdued the island of Cephalonia;
laid waste the territory of IVMegara ; and took the harbour
of Nifeum. This concluded the first campaign.

Thle

The Athenians next celebrated funeral rites to the

memory of those who had fallen since the beginning of
the war. For this purpose, a large tent was conftruEt-
ed, wherein they exposed the bones of the slain, which
were covered with flowers and perfumes thrown on
them by those that went to fee them. Then the bones
were carried with much pomp and folermn'ty to a sub-
urb of the city called Ceeranzicus, where they were de-
posited in a monument dellined to he the tomb of those
who fell in war. And lastl'y, one of the citizens pro-
nounced a funeral oration in their praise; a charge
which on this occasion was undertaken by Pericles him-
self. Though always superlatively eloquent, lie at this
time seemed to out do himself; and in pronouncing the
eulogium of those who were no more, he omitted no ar-
gument that might inflame the courage of those who re-
mained. Thucydides has preserved this famous oration,
of which the beautiful expreflions and lofty Ientiments
are equally admired *.

The army of the Lacedemonians, and their allies, re-

turned into Attica, and laid every thing waste with fire
and sword. But the plague, which then raged among the
Athenians, was frill more pernicious to them, depriving
them of their best citizens and bravest soldiers ; and
Athens exhibited nothing but a melancholy scene of
sickness and death.

From remotest antiquity down to the present times,

Egypt has been noted as the unlucky region where this
fatal scourge of the human race has been generated:
and the plague which now desolated the city of Athens
is particularly mentioned as having proceeded from the
banks of the Nile. Thucydides, who was himself seized
by this plague, has given a description of it. Some au-
thors write, that Hippocrates, the famous father of the
healing art, who was a native of Cos, having been sent

N 3 so

" Meton and Enucemon begin the nineteen years cycle of the
moon on the x5th of July in the year 432 before Clrilt.

for by the Athenians, employed every resource of physic
to flop the infeCtion. As the fame plague was then
raging in Persia, where Greek physicians were in high
estimation, Artaxerxes hoped to prevail on -lippocrates,
by the molt splendid offers, to come to his court. But
all his promises were inffetual. For that celebrated
physician, possessing a foul that looked on gold with
contempt, answered the Persian monarch, IThat his flill
and care were devoted to the relief of his fellow.
citizens, not of the cnemies of Greece ; and without re-
garding the resentment denounced against him and his
country by that prince, continued in Athens till the
plague had entirely ceased. The Athenians, as a re-
ward for his useful care, presented him with the freedom
of their city, assigned him a handsome maintenance for
life in the Prytaneumr, and gave hlimi a crown of gold,
of the value of about L.2oo Sterling.

Pericles, in the mean time, sent out a detachment of

4000 foot, and 3co horse, on board a fleet of 10o
galleys, with orders to ravage the Ptloponnefe. This
diversion obliged the Peloponnesians to return home to
the defence of their own country. But the Athenians,
distressed by the waste committed on their territories by
the enemy, murmured bitterlv at the conduct of Pe-
ricles, and sent propotals of peace to Sparta. 'lihe La-
cedemonians having refused to Learken to any acconm-
modation, the complaints were renewed againtl: Pericles,
who at last alrembled the people, and endeavoured to
justify his measures. But their prelent luflerings ou;-
weighed his eloquence; and they not only depriv l
him of all power, but likewise imposed on him a heavy
fine.

Nor were the dillrcifes of that great man confined to

his public flation alone. They were heightened by
others of a domeflic nature. liis own son Xantippus,
a young man of an expcnfive turn, unable to bear

the

the ftriE ceconomy of his father, was the first to com-
plain of his condut; as if it were not the duty of a
son to submit with patience to the measures of his
father, even although he should carry his frugality to
an extreme. Pericles had the misfortune to lose this
son, with several others of his relations and friends, by
the plague. But amidst all his affltisions, his fortitude
never forsook him.

The Athenians beginning to be hardened by their

sufferings, repent of their severe treatment of Pericles ;
and finding by experience, that they had at present no
other person capable of directing their affairs, they in-
treat him once more to ftep forth and undertake the
administration *.

Potidea, in the mean time, unable any longer to sup-

port the miseries of famine, which had produced the
mnolt dreadful calamities among its inhabitants, is obli-
ged to surrender. Its few remaining citizens were
forced to abandon it for ever; and the place was re-
peopled with Athenians.

The Peloponnesians, about this time, invested Platea,

a city in alliance with Athens. This siege is not only
reniarka!le for the obstinate resistance of the besieged,
but for being the first recorded in history which was
conduaed with any fort of regularity. Both parties
here made use of mounds of earth, the one to attack,
the other -to defend. The Peloponnesians burnt a part
of the town, by means of bundles of flicks, to which
they %lt fire. On the other hand, the besieged ne-
gldted no expedient to frufirate the various attempts
of the enemy. But the most surprising circumstance of
all is, that so finall a place as Platea, which contained
no more than 400 inhabitants, and So Athenians, was

N 4 capable

" About this time the Athcnians, to repair the devastations occa-

sioned by the plague, pafied a law, allowing all the male citizens to
marry each two wives. Socrates is said to have been the first wlh
took the benefit of this law.

c

capable of making so vigorous a refinance against a
powerful army. The enemy at lat changed the siege
into a blockade, and surrounded the town with two
ditches. The Boeotians were left to guard these en-
trenchments, and the bulk of the army marched away.

About the fame time the Athenians were beaten in

an engagement by the Chalcidians, a people of Thrace,
and pursued to the very gates of Athens. But their
victory at Naupactus made amends for 'that disaster,
Phormion attacked, near that place, a Peloponnesian
fleet of 46 vefiels, took i of them, put the reft to
flight, and entered Athens in triumph. Brafidas and
Cnemus, two Spartan officers, having failed against Sala-
mis with a fleet of 40 vessels, made a descent upon that
island, and laid it waste,

This year was rendered remarkable by the
429 death of Pericles. Plutarch fays he died of the

plague. Other- authors write, that he was worn

out by a languishing consumption, It is reported of him,
that a litte while before his death, on hearing some of
his friends extolling his vicories, (for he had ereEed
no fewer than nine trophies), he told them, that they
overlooked a more glorious circumstance still, namely,
that he had never, on any private personal account, given
cause to a single fellow-citizen to wear mourning. Iis
death was universally regretted by the Athenians. He was
unquestionably one of the greatest men that Athens ever
produced; having displayed on all occasions uncommon
magnanimity, and shown himnfelf perfeEtly qualified
for every office that he undertook. 'The absolute power
that he enjoyed in this republic for the space of 40 years
was wholly attained by his admirable eloquence, which
was so powerful, as to triumph even over the prejudices
and pailions of his opposers, and to bring them over to
his views,-the perfection of that admirable talent. A-
thens flourished while Pericles held the helm of govern-
Tnentl

;s - Although

Although no oration of has own composing his reach-

ed to our times, yet, from the effects of his eloquence,
and what is reported of it by historians, he may be just-
ly placed at the head of the Grecian orators. By Cice-
ro's account, it was he that introduced into Athens a
tafle for perfect eloquence. He had learned of Anaxa-
goras all the principles of persuasion; and his own ge-
nius directed him to employ those principles to the great-
eft advantage. On account of the force and vehemence
of his declamation, he was said to thunder and lighten;
and to denote the beauty of his language, and his strength
of argument, the goddess of persuasion, with all her
graces, was said to dwell on his lips.

It was this power of eloquence that enabled him
boldly to oppole the unreasonable desires of the Athe-
nians; preserved to him, for the space of forty years,
an absolute power among that most fickle and capricious
people; and procured him such vast influence over their
nminds, that he changed even their fyfiem of goverr-
iment at his pleasure, and erected Attica into a kind of
monarchy, of which his own exraordinary merit render-
ed him in effed&, the king. But he used this exten-
five authority with such lenity and moderation, and con-
iduted himself with such extreme caution and reserve,
:as to prevent his administration from wearing the ap-
:pearance of tyranny. His talents for war were univer-
ilally acknowledged ; but it was observable, that he cau-
|itioufly avoided undertaking any expedition till he was
ilinoft sure of success. He depended more on firatagem
than on desperate courage.- His application of the
large revenues of the state, prove him to have been
a man of the most refined tafle, a lover of real glory,
and far above any little fordid views of felf-intereft. He
employed them in what he reckoned the good of the
Comnmonwealth, in promoting the liberal arts, and in
decorating and ornamenting the city.- The Athe-
ialns became daily more and more sensible of the great

loss

Moss they had sustained by his death; for his successors
in the government, at the fame time that they wanted
his experience, were much inferior to him in point of
natural abilities, and appeared to be more concerned
a.bout their private interetis than the good of the com.
monwealth.*"

Anaxagoras

* I thus dismiss with regret the characer of this mol illutlriotls

Creek, the nature of my work having obliged me to speak of him
much more concifcly tha:n his extraordinary merit appears to me to
¥icferve. Every circunmfance indeed of his life is deeply intcclling,
and claims the moR minute and attentive investigation. For I nm
inclined to regard him as the mo{t accomplished chara&teq thalt oc
curs in the hiitory of all antiquity.

As a statesman, his condua affords a rroft inftnRcive patrcra

o all lwho apply to public business. His life was totally exempt.
ed fromr the smallest tinA.n-e of difiupation. He itudied with un1.
yemirtiilg assiduity the affairs of the commonwealth, and under-
Iood every branch of them with the utmolt precision. He ma-
Trged the revenues with irreproachable dlfinterefednefs so far a;
repeeilel his private fortune: and his public expenditure, for
w-hich he has been so harfily censured by some rigid historians, fur-
niilhes incontrovertible proof of elevated sentiments, and an elegant
taSle. His decorations of the city displayed all that was beautiful
and ftblime in sculpture and in architecure ; and by the encourage.
mnent bestowed by him on men of distinguished genius, he renderl.l
Athens the residence of all the fine arts. At the fame time t:o,
that, as an admirer of the drama,. I entertain much gratitulel
to Pericles as its chief patron, I cannot fcverely blame, even iii a
political light, his partiality for theatrical rcprefentations. To di-
,-ert his r-ctlefs countrymen from diltnrhing his adminiltration 1by
sleir cabals, he found it ncceffary to furnish them with other amnfe-
m cnts. For this he cannot be blamed: and if so, with what amllf-
ment could he have inidulged them, at once so inofenlive, lo elgan"t,
'l, in!llrucivc ?

it muit however i-5 admitted, that the {tate of the times, and the
-'eafonahdc dcfires of the Athenian mob ; or, in other words, tlhat

./i::.-a/l m:.,ty3, fo)mcrliucs forced Pericles to adopt meiafnrees uwblch
: s ownm fupcrior zoOul fLnfe muit have condemned, and whicli, wil',
om~ fcih cornpullion, he never would have adopted. But it is trul
,sd n.rable, that, on iucll occasions, his comprelhenrive genius crn:l'l

.'!1 to makle fich inear-'i s ths Ictl pernicious, and the moftl faibi
-,.;, i',) ioub'ic utityii t:hat their nature could Foflibly admit.

Anaxagoras the philosopher died the fame year, and

before his scholar, in extreme poverty. It is reported,
that when Pericles was informed of his situation, and of
the resolution he had formed of flarving himself to death,
he went to fee him, with an intention to dissuade him
from his design. But Anaxagoras answered him in
these words: " Those who need the light of a lamp,
': take care to feed it with oil." Insinuating, that
though Perciles had taken care of his fortune, while he
had occasion for his inltrution, yet when that purpose
was served, he had suffered him to languith in poverty.

The Peloponnesians ravage Attica for the third time.

- All the inhabitants of Lesbos, those of Methymne
alone excepted, resolve to break their alliance with
Athens. The Athenians, fenlible how great a loss to
their affairs the defection of this island must be, sent
out a fleet of 40 gallies to attack that of the Mitylenians,
lwho finding themselves repulsed, proposed terms of ac-
commodation ; which were lillened to by the Athenians.
\ fufpienfion of hostilities being agreed on, the Mityle-
nians dispatched ambafTadors both to Athens and to L:-
cedemon at the fame time. The ambassadors were told
i.y thl Lacedemonians, that they flould be fully heard
at the approaching Olympic games, where the other al-
lics would have an opportunity of afiifting at the con-
iorence. Thucydides has tranfinitted to us the import
of what was urged by those arnbalfadors; from which
we fee, that they admitted the treaty anciently conclu-
(ed between the Leofians and Athenians, and alfigned
the ambition of the latter, not their present misfortunes,
as the reason that induced them now to relinquifl that
*treaty. The allies were satisfied with their reasons, and
admitted them into their confederacy.

It was likewise resolved in this afiembiy, to prosecute
the war more vigorously than ever againfl the Athenians;
' 'ht, receiving information of the great preparations ma-
, ing ?ganft them, fitted out a fleet of Ico fail, appear-

ed

ed unexpectedly off the promontory of the Isthmus of
Corinth, and made a descent upon the Peloponnese,
while another fleet proteted the coafls of Attica. Ne.
ver had they raised so formidable an armament before;
and it so overawed the Lacedemonians, that they hur-
ried back to the defence of their own country. The
Athenians, in the mean time, pushed on the siege of
Mitylene, whither they sent a detachment of tooo fol-
diers, and the town was blocked up both by sea and
land. The inhabitants receiving no affillance from the
Lacedemonians, and being pressed by famine, were ob-
liged to surrender at discretion. The authors of the re-
volt, to the number of more than Iooe, were conveyed
to Athens, and there put to death. Orders were at the
fame time issued to maff.cre the reft of the inhabitants,
by way of example. But the people flocked at such
horrible cruelty, caused the decree to be revoked, and
dispatched counter-orders; which luckily arrived at the
inltant they were proceeding to put the first in execu-
tion. Then the town was difinantled, and the whole
territory of the island, except Methymne alone, was di-
vided by lot among the inhabitants of Athens.

Let us now look back to the siege of Platea. The

besieged having loft all hope of succour, resolved to at-
tempt to make their escape out of the town ; which
about one half of them elffeted by a very daring ftr>-
tagem, suggested and executed by despair. The re.
maining half, dismayed at the dangers attending the at-
tempt, continued in the town. But finding themselves
unable to defend it any longer, they were at lat obliged
to surrender at discretion. Eight Spartans were sent to
decide their fate. The minierable Plateans pled in v.in,
that they had been forced, through neceflity, to fide with
the Athenians, in order to obtain their protetion again/
the Thebans, by whom they were grievously opprcffld
They were all murdered in cold blood; their wives were1
carried into slavery and their town was razed to the!

ground.

around. Such was the melancholy fate of the Plateans,
who, during the Persian war, had rendered the moil im-
portant services to Greece.

About this time, a dissention betw'een the magifirates

and common people of Corcyra, produced a flocking
massacre in that place. The people had requested as-
fiftance of the Athenians; and the magistrates desired
to retain them in the interests of Sparta. But the for-
ner, on feeing 60 Athenian ships arrive to their support,
ofinfolent became furious, and falling upon the magi-
Itrates and their adherents, nothing was to be seen but
an universal fiaughter; the inhabitants murdering one
another even in the houses and temples.

The plague breaks out afrefll at Athens, and carries
off multitudes.-The Ladedemonians invade
Attica, and the Athenians make a descent on the 426.
Peloponnese. Each campaign was opened in that
manner. The war proceeds more vigorously than ever.
Demosthenes the Athenian general being sent with 3o
ships to make a descent on Etolia, was engaged by the
iEtolians, and defeated. In returning home, how-
ever, he threw a reinforcement into Naupadus, and
defeated the Ambraciota. Then joining his fleet with
that destined against the Peloponnese, he took Pylus, a
finall town of Messenia, and there fortified himself. The
Lacedemonians, desirous to recover this place, besieged
it by sea and land, and it became the scene of extraor-
dinary feats of bravery. But the Lacedemonians having
thrown a detachment of 400 of their best troops into the
little iiland of SphaCeria, the Athenians surrounded the
illand, and cut off all supplies of provisions. The Lace-
demonians, anxious to lave those troops, fee themnfelves
reduced to the neceflity of fending ambassadors to Athens
with proposals of peace.

The ambafladors frankly owned the extreme neceflity
that had obliged the Lacedemonians to submit to so humi-
liating a ftep, put the Athenians in mind of the uncertain

fate

fate of arms, and exhorted them to embrace this oppor
tunity of restoring tranquillity to Greece. But the A-
thenians grown presumptuous by their good fortune, as
well as by the flattering orations of their favourite de.
magogue Cleon, required, as a preliminary condition,
that the troops confined in the island filould lay down
their arms, and be conducted to Athens; upon the pro-
mise of the Athenians to set them at liberty, as soon as
the Lacedemonians had delivered up the places con-
quered by them from the Athenians. The Lacedemo-
nians refuting to comply with this condition, both par-
ties prepared themselves for war.

The Athenians, in the mean time, were very vigilant

to prevent any provisions from pafling into the island of
Sphateria. The Lacedemonians, on the other hand,
engaged the whole country round to contribute their ut-
molt efforts to relieve the hefieged troops, and promired
to set free all the slaves who should succeed in carrying
them provisions; awhich many did, at the extreme hazard
of their lives. in the mean time, the Athenians in Pvlus
began, on their part, to be itraitened for provisions. Cle-
on persuaded the people, tlhat the flowncis of the siege
wvas owing to the inativity of their commanders ; and
maintained, that a little vigour must very soon reduce
the island, which he offered to accompliilh himself. Ha-
ving been accordingly 'ent thither, and having joined
Demonothenes, they landed together in Sphaaeria, and
beat the enemny to the extremity of the island. T'he, La-
cedenonians, however, took poffeflion of a fortification,
and defended, with the molt desperate courage, the only
pdiTage by which they could be attacked. But the ge-
neral of the MelfTenians having discovered a difficult pass
that led to the fortification, marched that way, and
appearing utixpecsedly on the rear of the Lacedemo-
nians, called aloud to them to lay down their arms. The
Lacedemonians, exhausted with heat and fatigue, obeyed
the fuoiimons, by laying their ihields on tle grouid ; and,

after

after a short conference, they surrendered at discretion
'he Athenians after erecting a trophy, reimbarked on
board of their fleet. This siege continued 62 days. Cleon
is said to have caused 128 of tlhof ulnhappy Spartans to
be murdered. The relt were conveyed to Athens, and
thrown into prison till peace flioukl take place; the
Athenians threatening, at the fame time, to put them
all to death, if the Lacedemonians made any more in-
curlions into their country.

Upon the death of Artaxerxes king of Persia, his son
Xerxes mounted the throne in his ifead. But he had
hardly enjoyed his dignity 45 days, when he was afiffi-
nated by a ion of one of the concubines of Artaxerxcs,
named Sogdianus, .ho succeeded him in the kingdom.
The bloody disposition of Sogdianus soon rendered him.
the terror of the nation; which revolted againflt him,
put him to death, and raised his brother Ochus to the
throne. Ochus, finding himself secure in the kingdom,
inflead of the name of Ochus, affurned that of _Drius ;
but historians, to diflinguifl him from othier kings of
Persia of that name, superadded the title of 2Aotbh',
signifying ballard. This prince committed the vwhole
power of the /iate to three Eunuchs. -1is reign xw::
lifturbed with continual troubles. The Egyptians, in
particular, revolted, and expelled the Persians from their
country.

Nicias being chosen one of the Athrrian cornmand-

=ers, reduced the ifiands of Cvthcra and Tiiyre;, ;and ex-
termninated all the Eginetre, who ha1 taken refuge there.
-These Eginexa were the profcfl'ld ald inveterate ene-
mies of the Athenians.

The war of Sicily begins. It was occasioned by a
jdilpute between the cities of Syracuse and Leontium i
tlle latter of which having procured the support of the
Athenians, prevailed with them to fend out a lleet of
o0 fiips to their affiflanlce. But, in the mnean time, tl.e
}greeks of Sicily growing jealous of the Athenians,

willou

fate of arms, and exhorted them to embrace this oppor-
tunity of restoring tranquillity to Greece. But the A-
thenians grown presumptuous by their good fortune, as
well as by the flattering orations of their favourite de,
magogue Cleon, required, as a preliminary condition,
that the troops confined in the island fllould lay down
their arms, and be conducted to Athens, upon the pro-
mise of the Athenians to set them at liberty, as soon as
the Lacedemonians had delivered up the places con-
quered by them from the Athenians. The Lacedemo-
nians refusing to comply with this condition, both par-
ties prepared thenfelves for war,

The Athenians, in the mean time, were very vigilant

to prevent any provisions from palling into the island of
Sphacderia. The Lacedemonians, on the other hand,
engaged the whole country round to contribute their ut-
molt efforts to relieve the besieged troops, and promised
to set free all the slaves who should succeed in carrying
them provisions; which many did, at the extreme ha zard
of their lives. in the mean time, the Athenians in Pvlus
began, on their part, to be straitened for provisions. Cle-
on persuaded the people, that the flowneis of the ficge
was owing to the inactivity of their commanders ; and
inaintained, that a little vigour must very soon reduce
the island, which he offered .to a.ccompliih himself. Ha-
ving been accordingly lent thither, and having joined
D)ermolthenes, they landed together in SphaEteria, and
beat the enemy to the extremity of the island. The La-
cedemonians, however, took poffefijon of a fortification,
and deienidd, with the moit desperate courage, the only
passage by which they could be attacked. But the ge.
neral of the AMeI-Teians having discovered a difficult pals
that led to the fortification, marched that way, and
appearing unexpectedly on the rear of the Lacedemo-
nians, called aloud to them to lay down their arms. The
Lacedemonians, cxhaulted with heat and fatigue, obeyed
the futlmaons, by laying their lhields on the ground ; and,

after

after a ftort conference, they surrendered at difcretiono
'The Athenians after ereaing a trophy, reimbarked oct
board of their fleet. This siege continued 62 days. Cleon
is said to have caused 128 of those unhappy Spartans to
be murdered. The reft were conveyed to Athens, and
thrown into prison till peace flioul take place; the
Athenians threatening, at the fhme time, to put them
all to death, if the Lacedemonians made any more in-
curlions into their country.

Upon the death of Artaxerxes king of Persia, his son

Xerxes mounted the throne in his f Beacd. 3ut lie had
hardly enjoyed his dignity 45 days, whelln he was aiftfi-
nated by a ion of one of the concubines of Artaxerxes,
named Sogdianus, vho succeeded hi in ithe kingdoinm.
The bloody disposition of Sogdianus loon rendered hil
the terror of the nation; which revolted a;gainit him,
put him to death, and raised his brother Ochus to the
throne. Ochus, finding himself secure in the kingdom,
in(tead of the name of Ochts, ailumed that of Dariu.J s;
but historians, to diflinguifl him from other kings of
Persia of that name, superadded thle title of Vot/Jzfs,
signifying ballard. This prince conmmitted t!he whole
power of the itate to three Eunuchs. His reign Wv::a
disturbed with continual troubles. The Egyptians, in
particular, revolted, and expelled the Persians from their
country.

Nicias being chosen one of the Athcrian conmand-
ers, reduced the ifiands of Cvthcra and Thyvre;:, and ex-
terminated all the Egineta, who hal taken refui.e tlire,
-These Eginea woere the prorifIcd and inveterate cnc-
.nies of the Athlenians.
I The war of Sicily begins. It was occasioned by a
dtilpute between the cities of Syracule and Leontium ;
the latter of which having procured the support of thei
'Athenians, prevailed with them to fend out a fleet of
20 flips to their aiffifance. But, in the mean time, t.e
greeks of Sicily growing jealous cf the Athenians,

;whom

whom they fufpeted of a design to make themselves
matters of the island under the pretence of assisting one
of the parties, made peace with each other.

The sedition of Megara happened next. The inha-

bitants of that town, after expelling their magistrates,
quarrelled among themselves, one party being for re.
calling their magistrates, the other for delivering their
town into the hands of the Athenians. Brafidas, in the
mean time, the best officer the Lacedemonians than had,
having come before Megara, its gates are immediately
thrown open to him. The exiled magistrates returning
soon after, and resuming their authority, condemn to
death xoo inhabitants of the opposite fadion. Brafidas
advances into Thrace, subdues several cities, and lays
liege to Amphipolis, a place of much importance to the
Athenians, who thence got the greatest part of their
wood. They therefore dispatched Thucydides, the fa-
mous historian, to its relief; but the place was taken
before his arrival. His countrymen, however, imputed
to him the loss of the place, and banished him at the in-
figation of Cleon. The Athenians having about the
fame time advanced into Boeotia, under the command
of Demosthenes and Hippocrates, were defeated near
Delium by the Thebans; who, after their victory, be-
fieged and took that town.

No decisive advantage had been hitherto obtained by

either party. The Athenians and Lacedemonians,
therefore, agreed on d truce for a year; which Brafi.
das, who had been successful in all his enterprises, bore
with great impatience. Cleon, on the other hand, who
had acquired much authority in Athens, by means ot
his bold and vehement eloquence, incited his country-
iuen to resume the war. Being more perfumptuous
than ikilful in military operations, he refulved to at.
tempt the retaking of Amphipolis, hoping to be assisted
by a body of troops from Perdiccas king of Macedon,
But Bradfidas got the start of him, and threw himself in-

to

to the town. To increase the presumption of Cleon,
the Spartan general, who was well acquainted with his
characer, affeded to he afraid to encounter him. But
after making the proper dispositions, Brafidas sallied forth
unexpectedly, and attaked the left wing of the Athe-
nians, which being the flower of their army, made a vi-
gorous resistance. Brafidas, however, at last broke
them, and killed 600 of them, with very little loss on
his own fide. This attack disconcerted and terrified
Cleon, who was killed by a spartan soldier as he was
flying from the battle. Brafidas was of the number of
the slain on the fide of the Lacedemonians.- He was an
excellent officer, equally brave and prudent, and de-
serves to be ranked among the Lacedemonian heroesi
It was the mother of this general, who, on hearing the
exploits of her son commended, answered, " It is true
" my son was a brave man; but I doubt not that Spar-
" ta has many citizens as brave as he." As for Cle.
on, he merited no regret, having been no more than an
insolent boafler, of a cruel overbearing disposition, and
very avaricious.

The Lacedemoni;ns, in the mean time, apprehensive

left the Helots should take advantage of the, present bad
posture of their affairs, and revolt, used them with the
most barbarous perfidy. Having decoyed the bravest
of them to Sparta, under pretence of giving them their
liberty, they are said to have murdered no fewer than
2ooo of them; a striking iiftance, to what excess of
barbarity a people, that is guided by no other motive
than a blind hard-hearted policy, will proceed !

The Athenians, since their late difafler, began to
think seriously of peace ; to which the Lacedemonians
werelikewife well disposed, being desirous to recover
from captivity their brave citizens who had been taken
at Sphateria. After mutual conferences, a peace was
agreed on, for the space of fifty years, between the two

0 421 .

republics and their refpetive allies. This
42 t. work was greatly forwarded by Nicias, who was

as worthy a citizen as he was a skilful general.

The war was nothing less than concluded by this

peace. Before the expiry of the firIt year, discord
sprang up afrefn between the Athenians and Lacedemo-
nians, both fides breathing nothing but war. Alcibiades
who was now beginning to appear in the public as.
femblies of the Athenians, was principally ative in
opposing the means of reconciliation proposed by Nicias.

Alcibiades had been educated by his uncle Pericles,

who discovered in him, while very young, extraordinary
natural parts, and a singular mixture of good and bad
qualities. Socrates, too, entertained the most tender
friendship for him, and took delight in inflilling into his
mind the most valuable branches of every kind of know-
ledge. That best of philosophers laboured chiefly to in-
spire his scholar with the purest maxims of morality, to
fortify him -gainft the power of the passions, and to pre.
serve him from the dangerous allurements to vice, to
which his youth and wealth exposed him. Alcibiades,
sensible of the affection of Socrates, and charmed with
the graces of his conversation, listened attentively to the
lessons of alis master; though his natural inclination for
pleAflure, and the seduction of his companions, made
him frequently forget them.

At his firfl appearance in public, Alcibiades displayed

a daring fatious genius capable of the boldest and mot
hazardous designs. Though addicted to pleasure, even
to debauchery, he was so perfectly master of his pas-
sions, that he could accommodate himself, with ease, to
the humour and way of life of every person with whom
he had occasion to converse, however different from his
own. He was a rake in Ionia,-temperate and au-
stere in Sp rta,-and, in Persia, he exceeded the natives
in luxury and magnificence. Never did any man de-
serve so well the name of Proteus. Ambition, how-

ever,

ever, was his ruling passion; and, in every dispute, he
aspired at superiority with the utmost eagerness. He was,
indeed, in all refpeas, intitled to pre-eminence in A-
thens; for he possessed every qualification requisite in :.
leading man. His ability in business; -his illustrious dc-
scent; the beauty of his person, which was calculated to
procure him the love and admiration of all who saw
him; his immense riches, which he spent with the moit
ostentatious profusion; the public feasts furnished by
him to the people; and the high magnificence in which
he lived, dazzled the eyes, and attracted the respect
and confidence of his fellow-citizens. When. to all
these advantages, are added his admirable eloquence,
and his singular knowledge in the art of war, we clearly
fee, that he must soon become the idol of the people.
His faults were overlooked , those airs of superiority,
which, in this republic, would have been accounted
criminal in any other person, were excused in him ; and.
his wild excesses were called by the softer name of
youthful frolics.

It has been already observed, that he exhibited the
first proofs of his bravery at Potidea. Having.been flat-
tered, on that occasion, with predictions of his soon
eclipsing the ablest generals of Greece, he conceived a
desire for war; and becoming jealous of the hi.h repu-
tation of Nicias, he exerted his utmnot efforts to pre-
vent the peace concluded by that wife Athenian, :e-
tween his countrymen and the Lacedemonians, froui
taking effect. He laboured underhand to detach the
Argives from the Spartan interest, and to exafpcrate
the Athenians against the Spartans, on account of the
latter having delivered up the fort of Panastus in a ruin-
ous condition, and not fortified as it ought to have been
in terms of the treaty. He endeavoured, at the fame
time, to render Nicias fufpeaed.

While there intrigues were going on, ambafladors from
Sparta arrived at Athens. Alcibiades, by £tratagemr or

0 a rather

rather by a piece of anjaRifi, ble roguery, provoked the
people to such a degree agdinil the ambassadors, that
they dismissed them in a very contumelious manner.
The ambafladors returned to Sparta, full of indignation
at the insolent usage they had received at Athens; and
the war was immediately renewed. The Athenians con-
elude an alliance with the Mnntineans and Eleans, name
Alcibiades general, and fend an army to ravage La.
conia.

Nicias and Alcibiades enjoyed between them all autho.

rity in Athens. The former had dilfulted the people,
by opposing their unreasonable desires; the latter had
provoked them by his haughty behaviour and dissolute
life. Each of theme however, was fupporred by a faction,
ant; they reciprocally ran the hazard of being banihrd
by ottracifm. For Hyperbolus, a man of a profligate cha-
ratter, who poftffed orme influence in the republic, used
every art to irritate the people against them, flattering
himself with the hope of succeeding to the place and
power of him that fiould be baniihed. But Nicias and
Alcibiades uniting their interests, procured the banifl.
ment of Hyperbolus. As this punishment of oftracifin
had never before been employed, except against persons
of iuperior merit and distinction, it fell into disuse ever
after this time, on account of its having been excrcifed
upon so unworthy a subjec.

Alcibiades, in the mean time, indulged himself, with-

out reserve, in his pleasures. The luxury and voluptu-
oufnefs in which he lived, made every virtuous Atheuni
an aflhamed. He was engaged in a continua:l round of
feasting and debauchery; and the wiser fort became ap-
prchenfive, left by means of his extravagant profusion to
the people, and of the daily shows with which he enter-
tained them, he Ihould arrive at last at supreme and ab-
solute power, and become their tyrant.

Since the ileath of Pericles, the Athenians had main-
tained a itria alliance with the Leontines in Sicily, wlh,

011

on being attacked by the Syricufans, had sent an em-
baffy to Athens, at the head of which was the celebrated
orator Gorgias, who pleaded the cause of the Leontines
in an oration so elegant and pathetic, that the request of
the ambassadors was complied with; and the Athenians
I int a fleet to Rhegium to aflilt the Leontines. Next
year they sent thither a more numerous fleet fRill, under
pretence of assisting the towns oppressed by the Syracu-
fa;is, but, in fa', to open to themselves a way to the
c iqueft of Sicily. Alcibiades, by his harangues, in-
f:gated the Athenians flill more and more to this un-
dertaking, and talked of nothing less than extending the
conquests of Athens over Africa and Italy.

While the minds of the Athenians were full of those

mighty projets, ambalfadors arrived from the Egiftians,
to implore their affiitance against the Selinontines, who
were supported by the Syracufans; offering, at the fame
time, to pay the troops that flould be sent to tlieir as-
filtance. The Athenians, tempted by these promises,
named Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus. to command
a fleet dellined to succour the Egiftians. Nicias remon-
llirated against this expedition in the ftrongelt terms,
;and painted out, in the molt lively colours, what ruin-
ous consequences might thence result to the republic.
He represented to the Athenians, that they had but too
many enemies on their hands already, without going a-
broad to seek for more; and that though they were
hardly beginning to recover from the misfortunes occa-
fiuned by the late war and plague, they were wantonly
exposing themselves to a greater danger flill.

'licias, in this harangue, likewise reflected indirectly

on the luxury of Alcibiades, who h:id now carried his
extravagance to an incredible pitch. The expence ol
the furniture of his houle, and of his retinue, was pro-
digious. His table was as sumptuous as that of any
prince; and he contended at the Olympic games with
ieven different sets of horses. To support bs expenfivc

03 a

a life, it was abfoulhtly necessary for him to possess vast
fun s; and Nic!s, no doubt, meant to insinuate, that
Alciiliadcs expecRed to have an opportunity, by this ex.
pedition. to repair his private fortune, which muff have
b;-tn greatly diffipared by such enormous expences.-
Alcibiiadcs answered the harangue of Nicias. by telling
the udicence, that his magnificence was intended to re.
flct honour on his country. He put them in mind of
his lerv~i . to the commonwehth. He assured them that
the cities of Sicily were so weary of the oppression of
tleir pei;,, overeigns, that they would inflantly open
their gates I) the firit power which should appear to de.
liver ithem :-oi. their present slavery; and he concluded
vwiTi telling tihci'? that to carry their arms abroad, was
the {ureft w.:y to damp the courage of their enemies,
and that the Athenians muff always continue masters
at sea: in spite of the Licedemonians.

'he Athenians, delighted with this flattering speech of

Alcilbiades, entirely disregarded that of Nicias, who was
a mn;n of a soft pufillanirnous disposition, and of an
irresolute temper. They therefore persisted in their
resolution to undertake this expedition, and began to
make the necessary preparations for it with the utmost
dilpatch.

Just as the Athenian fleet was on the point of setting

fail, several evil presages fell out that extremely perplex-
ed the minds of the people. If, The feast of Adonis
h:ppened at this time, which was celebrated by the wo.
men, uttering piteous groans and lamentations; and it
was cuttomi ry for all the inhabitants on that occasion to
wear mourning. 2dly, The statues of Mercury, one
of which lood before the entry of every house, were all
maimed in the faie night, and the author of this piece
of flcrilege could not be discovered. The wild libertine
character of a1l ibia'e* expnfir him to suspicions of ha-
ving been concerned in this mischief. But the afiedion

entertained

entertained for him by the soldiers and sailors, who de-
clared, that they would not proceed on the expedition,
if the smallest violence were offered to his person, pre-
served him at present from any trouble on that head.

Alcibiades demanded to be tried, that he might have

an opportunity of jufifying himself before his departure.
But the people, impatient for the expedition proceeding,
obliged him to set fail. The view of the fleet under
fail attracted the admiration both of the citizens and of
firangers; for never had a tingle city in the weitern
world displayed so grand and magnificent an armament.
It confiRled of 136 venfels, carrying 6280 soldiers, of
whom the greater part were heavy armed. Betides
these, there were o3 vessels loaded with provisions; and
the whole was attended by ioo barks, without includ-
ing merchant ships, or the after augmentations of the
fleet. Besides the sea forces, there was a body of troops
for the land service, and among these a few cavalry.
All the forces were equipped in the most complete
manner: and, upon the whole, there could hardly be a
grander or more beautiful exhibition.

When the troops were embarked, the whole

fleet, on a signal given .by a trumpet, weighed 4r,5
anchor, attended with a general ihout of the
fpedtators, pouring out their most earnest vows for the
success of their fellow citizens. The fleet directed its
course towards Rhegium, whither they dispatched some
ships before the reit, to fee that the money promised by
the Egeftians was ready; of which, however, they found
no more than thirty talents provided. Nicias availed
himself of his circumstance, to enforce the reasons he
had insisted on againit the expedition, and advised to
terminate the dispute between the Egeftians and Seli-
nontines in an amicable manner; to oblige the former
to fulfil their engagements; and then to return to A-
thens. Alcibiades, on the contrary, said it would be
disgraceful to return without performing some signal

0 4 exploit

exploit with so powerful an armament; that they ought
to endeavour to detach the Greeks in Sicily from their
connecion with Syracuse, to bring them over to their
own party, and, after obtaining from them reinforce.
ment both of troops and provisions, to attack Syracuse.
Lamachus advised to march immediately against Syra.
cufe. But the opinion of Alcibiades prevailed. T'hey
therefore, continued their course for Sicily, where Alci.
biades reduced Catana.*

Let us now look back to Athens. The enemies of

Alcibiades, intent alone on gratifying their resentment,
without regarding the public interest, took advantage
of his absence to renew against him an accusation of
having in a debauch profaned the mysteries of Profer-
pine and Ceres; and they prosecuted the accusation
with the most inveterate malice and animosity. Many
persons were accused, and thrown into prison, without
being even permitted to be heard; and a vessel was difl
patched to bring Alcibiades to stand trial before the
people. To this he apparently consented, and went on
board of the galley; but on arriving at Thurium he dif.
appeared. Not having therefore obeyed the summons
within the limited time, he was condemned to death
for contumacy, and his effects were confiscated.

Nicias finding himself, by the absence of Alcibiades,

inverted with the sole command, managed matters in
that flow irresolute manner that was natural to him,
wafting the ardour of the army in fatiguing, infignifi-
cant marches along the coasts; and at last he retired to
Catana, without performing any greater exploit than
ruining a finall village.

Alcibiades arriving at Argos, applied to the Spar.

tans for permiflion to live in their city, and under their
protection, making them in return an offer of his belt
services. The Spartans, overjoyed to have in theit

power

Q In the year 4 6 before Christ, the Agrarian law was firit pro"
po!'ed at Ronme,

power so able a general of their enemy, received him
with the highest marks of good will and esteem. Here
by the singular faculty he pofleffed of accommodating
himself to the way of life of every country in which he
had occasion to live, he imitated, with the greatest ease,
the Spartan temperance and austerity, and, by that
means, quickly gained their sincere affection.

The Syracufans, in the mean time, made vigorous

preparations for an obstinate defence, and beg-:n to up-
braid the Athenians for remaining shut up in Catana.
Nicias, stung with these reproaches, resolved at lait to
attack Syracuse by sea and land.

As this siege of Syracuse is one of the most remark-

able recorded in history, it is proper, in a very few
words, to give some idea of the situation of that city.
It was originally founded by Archias the Corinthian, on
the eastern coast of Sicily. It had a greater and lesser
harbour; the circumference of the greater being about
fix miles. The town itself was one of the most beauti-
ful and powerful poffefled by the Greeks; and confilled
of three principal divisions: i/f, The island, called
Ortygia, which was separated from the main land by a
narrow arm of the sea. This quarter was every where
firongly fortified in the fashion of those times, and
might therefore be regarded as the citadel of Syracuse.
The 2d division Acradina flood on the main land nearest
to the little [trait that bounded Ortygia, with which it
communicated by a bridge thrown over that strait. This
formed the body of the city. Tjcbe, the 3d great division,
adjoined to Acradina on the land fide; and a mass of
building or fortification, named Hexapilus, commanded
the access to Tyche. Beyond and contiguous to Hexa-
pilus was the large suburb of Epipioliis, situated for the
greater part on a sleep eminence. 1 he whole united
formed perhaps one of the most extensive cities at that
time in the world.

The news of the arrival of the Athenian fleet in

Sicily

Si.ily produced the greatest consternation among the
Syracufans, who immediately applied themselves, with
the utmoit diligence, to make the necessary preparations
for repelling the attack of the enemy. The backward.
ness of Nicias contributed not a little to revive the
courage of the Syracufans; a party of whose horse
appro:ched to the very flkirts of the Athenian camp.
Nioias, not daring to disembark his troops in the face
of an enemy prepared to receive them, procured false
intelligence to be conveyed to the Syracufans, who in
conlequence thereof hoping to surprise his camp, march-
ed all their forces towards Catana. But Nicias, in
the mean time, reimbarked his men, and failing towards
the neighbourhood of Syracuse, effeEted a landing at
Olympia, and there pitched his camp.

The Syracufan troops finding themselves deceived,

returned to Syracuse, and drew themselves up in battle
order before the walls of the city. Nicias did not de-
cline the combat, which proved long and obstinate.
The Syracufans, however, were at last obliged to give
ground, and under cover of their cavalry to retreat
into the city. The Athenians being too weak to attack
the city, failed back to Catana, where they took up
their winterquarters, intending to return to Syracuse
in the spring. But being in want both of money and
provisions, they sent to Athens for both. The Syracu-
fans, in the mean time, acquiring fresh courage, chose
for their general Hermocrates, a man of ditlinguifled
bravery, and very skilful in the art of war. By his
advice, they dispatched ambafiadors to Corinth and
Sparta to renew their former alliances, and to beg as-
fiilance; which they accordingly obtained. Alcibiades,
'who was then at Sparta, meditating vengeance against
his ungrateful countrymen, supported the request of the
Syracufans, and persuaded the Lacedemonians to fend
Gylippus as general into Sicily, and, at the fame time,

t9

to make a diversion to the Athenians arms, by attacking
them in Attica.

The Syracufans, in the mean time, were diligently

fortifying their city. ''hey raised a wall along one fide
of the suburb of Epipolis, and getting intelligence that
the Athenians were at Naxus, ordered their army to
march and burn the Athenian camp at Catana.

Nicias having received 300 talents, and a reinforce-

ment of some troops of horse, advanced towards Syra-
cufe. Though this general was very flow in entering
upon aCtion, yet when once in motion, he proceeded
with much spirit and diligence. Sailing from Cat;;na,
he arrived within less than a mile of Epipolis; and
having there landed his forces, he retired with the fleet
towards Thapsus, a part of Syracuse that forms a pe-
ninfula, of which he shut up the entry. A body of
Syracufans, to the number of 700 men, having attack-
ed the Athenians, were repulsed, after losing 300 of
their number on the spot. The viCtors ereCted a trophy,
and formed the design of throwing up a fortification on
the highest part of the Epipolis. Nicias, at the fame
time, received a reinforcement of 300 horse from the
Egeftains, which, joined to 250 lately sent him from
Athens, and the few he had before, formed, altogether,
a body of 650 cavalry.

Encouraged by this afiftance, he raised a line of cir-

cumvallation on the Tyche fide, to fiut up the city all
the way from Tyche to the sea on the north. This
work advanced very briikly, in spite of repeated attacks
made by the Syracufans, in one of which their cavalry
was routed. The Syracufans, on the other hand, be-
gen to ere& a fortification that might prevent the Athe-
nians from carrying on their line of circumvallation.
But the Athenians attacked those who guarded it, pur-
sued them into the city, and then deflroyed the fortifi-
cation. Having completed the line along the north fide,
the Athenians proceeded to confiruc another that

might

might completely hur up the city. The Syracufans, to
prevent their extending this second wall to the sea.side,
threw up a ditch across a marsh, and lined it with pali.
fadoes; but the Athenians descending fu'denly from E-
pipolis. filled up the ditch. On this occasion they had
an engagement with the Syracuians, in which they w,'re
at first successful; but in attempting to cut off the
flight of the enemy, their right'wing was charge; by
the Syracufan cavalry, and thrown into disorder ; :,nd
L.lnachus advancing to its afliftance with the Argive
auxiliaries, was killed. The Syracufans, animated by
this advantage, determined to attack the Athenian fort
on lpipolis. But Nicias though then sick, saved it by
a itratagem; giving orders to set the wood between the
entrenchments on fire; the flames of which deterred
the Syracufans from their enterprise.

In the mean time, the Athenian fleet, which lay at

nnchor at Thapsus, having received orders to come be-
fore the city, entered the large harbour, and ouliged
the Syraculans to slut themfclves up within the walls.
The. Athenians, not fi:tisfied with their fortifications on
the top of Epipolis, threw up two walls at the bottom
of it, one for a defence againif the Syracufans within
the city, and the other against their army, which was
encamped without the walls. When all these works
were completed, Nicias entertained the moil sanguine
hopes of taking Syracuse; and his expectations were
confirmed on his being joined by several of the itates of
Sicily, and receiving a fresh supply of proxifions. 'Ilhe
Syracufains now looked upon themselves as loft; and a
rumour prevailed that the Athenians were become ma-
fters of the whole island. But the arrival of Gylippus
with succours from Lacedemon, give a new turn to
their affairs.

Nicias, from too great a confidence in his own

strength, was not at all alarmed at his arrival, nor took
any trouble to oppose his landing. The event how-

3 Cevr,

ever. was decisive; for Syracuse was capable of making
no further resistance, and its citizens were consulting
about the articles of capitulation, when they received
notice, that Gylippus was come to their affiflance
with several galleys. lThey immediately sent out 414.
a body of troops to cover his landing; which was
no sooner effected, than they advanced in order of
battle towards Epipolis. I he Athenians though taken
unprepared, made dispositions for fighting; but, in
their confusion, Cylippus attacked the fortification on
thlt top of L.;pipolis, and carried it by .ffault

Nicias's whole hope being now confined to his naval

force, he thought it necessary to fortify the promontory
of Plemmyrus, which narrows the entrance into the
great harbour, and for that purpose ereEced on it three
different forts. But a large detachment of his soldiers
and sailors having gone in quefl of wood and water,
were intercepted by the enemy's horse. Gylippus, on
his part part, completed the fortification which had been
begun by the Syracufans; and daily offered battle to the
Athenians. He was beaten in the firfl engagement,
chiefly on account of the narrowness of his ground.
But having next day drawn up his men on -a more ex-
tensive spot, he charged the left wing of the Athenian
army, broke them and pursued them to their c;imp.
This success raised the courage of the Syracufans, whole
horse sallied out upon the enemy, and took several
prisoners. After this vicory they fitted out rome
galleys, and sent to Lacedemon and Corinth to implore
fresh succours.

Nicias finding his troops diminishing every day, wrote
to .thens a very pressing letter, in which he patheti-
cally described the ruinous condition of his galleys, and
the alarming decrease both of his sailors and soldiers by
mortality and by the usual operations of war, the latter
chiefly occasioned by the fupericrity of the enemy's
cavalry. He likewise informed his countrymen. that

Gylippus

Gylippus was employing every artifice to unite against
them all the states of the island: and he concluded with
intreating them either to recall him, or to fend out
another armament as powerful as the first, with money
and provisions in proportion; and in any event, to
look out for a successor to him in the command, his
infirmities incapacitating him to discharge that duty any
longer.

This letter spread an universal dejeAion over Athens,

After several deliberations, they appointed two officers,
Menander and Euthydemus, as affiRants only to Nicias,
not to supersede him in the command; and other two,
Eurymedon and Demosthenes, to supply the place of
Lamachus. Eurymedon set out before the reft with Io
galleys, and some money.

Let us for a moment look back to the war of the

Peloponnese. The Lacedemonians, under their king
Agis, made a fresh incursion into Attica, laid waste the
country, and fortified Decelia, an important post, with-
in eighteen miles of Athens, whence they commanded
the whole country, and prevented the Athenians from
working their silver mines, or deriving any advantage
from their lands, which they durst not labour. To add
fill further to the distress of the Athenians, they were
obliged to watch day and night, being kept in a conti-
nual alarm by the daily incursions of the enemy. Be-
fides, as all provisions, before arriving at the city, were
brought a great way about, they became very dear;
and many of their slaves deserted to the enemy for
want of food. Money, too, was very scarce, neither
their mines nor lands yielding them any thing. On
the whole, the Athenians, found themselves in a most
distressful situation.

To return to Syracuse. Gylippus having raised in Si-

cily a great number of recruits for their army, persuaded
the Syracufans to exert all their resources in the equip-
ment of a powerful fleet, that they might be able to

attack

attack their enemies both by sea and land. In a very
little time 80 Syracufan galleys appearing off Plemmyrus,
the Athenians got on board of their fleet, and failed
againit the enemy. A very obstinate engagement en-
sued, which however was not decisive for either prty.
But Gylippus, in the mean time, attacked the forts on
Plemmyrus, and carried them by assault, after killing
many Athenian soldiers, and taking several prisoners.
In these forts Gylippus found a good deal of money and
ammunition, with the furniture of a great number of
galleys; and by putting the Syracufans in pofieffion of
that important post, he rendered it difficult for Nicias
to receive any convoys. The Athenians, therefore,
were seized with great coniternation.

But this success of the Syracufans received about this

time a considerable check. For their ships having fallen
foul of one another at the entrance of the lesser har-
bour, the Athenians attacked them, funk 1 of them,
and dispersed the reft. In memory of this vitory the
Athenians erected a trophy on a small island.

Several other infignifi-ant engagements, which it
would be tedious to recount, h ppened between the
two parties. The Syracufans, however, confidering that
it would be prudent for them to hazard another battle
before the arrival of the reinforcements expected by the
enemy from Athens, began to prepare themselves for it
with all possible diligence. Nicias, on the contrary, fen-
fible how dangerous it was to venture another engage-
ment, his men being so much dimiuifhed in point of
numnbers, and exhausted with fatigue, resolved todecline
fihlting till the expected affiflance should arrive. But
/vcnander and Euthydemus, actuated by jealousy against
Nicias, maintained, that the honour and reputation of
Athens would susser by their declining the combat; and
they insisted with such obflinacy on his giving battle,
that Iicias was forced to comply.

The

The fleets at first only engaged in small fkirmnifhes.

But towards the end of the third day, the Syracufans,
after making a feint of retiring, as they had done the
two preceding days, turned suddenly upon the Athe.
nians, who being thus taken unawares, and not ha.
ving time to form. were obliged to fly, after losing seven
galleys, and a great number of soldiers. The miferi:)le
situation to which Nicias saw his affairs now reduced by
suffering himself to be over-ruled by his, colleagues,
threw him into despair.

The day after the battle, the expeEted Athenian fleet,

consisting of 73 galleys, commanded by Demosthenes,
all richly ornamented, and carrying about 8000 soldiers,
came in fight, and advanced with an air of triumph.
The Syracufans were confounded at their appearance,
believing the resources of the Athenians to be inexhauft-
ible, and that they were to be exposed to greater cala-
mities than ever.

Demosthenes resolved to avail himself of the conlter-

nation into which his arrival had thrown the Syracufans,
flattering himself with the persuasion of taking the city
at once. But his design was rash. Nicias represented
to him in vain, that the Syracufans being reduced to
the last extremity for want of money and provisions,
would very soon surrender; which he knew certainly by
the information of tome persons within the town, who
advised him to wait patiently a little longer. But as he
did not choose to mention those from whom he received
this intelligence, his remomftrances were disregarded;
for not only Demosthenes and the other commanders,
but even the inferior officers, believed this opinion of
Nici.s to be entirely suggested by fear. Demosthenes
even proceeded to upbraid his backwardness ; his re-
proaches were applauded by the reft, and all discovered
the utmost impatience for fighting.

Demosthenes immediately resolved to attack Epipolis.
iaving led thither all his forces at night, he himself be-

gan

gan the attack of the entrenchments, killed those who
guarded them, and at the fame time repulsed the- troops
that had sallied out upon him from the city. The A-
thenians, animated by their success, hurry forward in
disorder, and bear down every thing that opposes them.
But the Bceotian troops unexpe&edly flop their career,
and, attacking them with levelled Ipears, put them to
flight, and make a great slaughter. The whole army is
seized with a panic, which is increased by the darkness
of the night. Some in their flight fall from the tops of
the rocks, and are dashed in pieces ; others wander into
the country, and are either killed or taken by the Syra-
cufan horse. Upon this occasion the Athenians are said
to have loft upwards of 2000 men.

This grievous disaster entirely discouraged the Athe-
nians; whose number, too, was continually diminifl-
ing by the diieafes that prevailed in the army, occasion-
ed by the unwholesome vapours of a morals near to
which the army was encamped. Demorfhenes there-
fore advised to raise the siege immediately. But Nicias,
:though of the fame opinion, thought an abrupt de-
iparture would but expose their weakness too much;
and that, at any rate, they ought to wait for orders
|from Athens. On this point Demosthenes was obliged
to fiubmit to his colleague. But Gylippus having, in
ithe mean time, brought a fresh supply of troops to the
aid of the Syracufans, the apprehensions of the Athe-
nians were so much increased, that they resolved to de-
]part immediately.

The Syracufans getting notice of this resolution, pre-
pared to attack them by sea and land. They fell first
upon their entrenchments, which they carried; and
then. their galleys failed againtf those of the Athenians.
Eurymedon having separated himself from the reft of
the fleet, with an intention to surround the Syracufans,
Wvas pursued by them to the bottom of the gulf, defeat-
ed, and killed, and the galleys under his command were

P driven

driven on shore. But Gylippus having attacked the A-
thenian soldiers as they were making their escape out
of the galleys to the land, was repulsed with loss. In
the mean time, however, the Syracufans took possession
of 18 of those galleys, after cutting off their crews.

This blow threw the Athenians into the deepest de-

jetion. Ihe Syiacufans, on the other hand, promised
tliemrflves a complete conquest over their enemies; and
began to devise new obstacles to their departure; for
whici purpose they fliut up the mouth of the great har.
bour with iron chains. The Athenians finding themn
selves thus hemmed in, and ftraitned for provisions,
resolved to hazard another sea fight. With this view
Nicias embarked the flower of his foot soldiers on board
of I lo galleys, and drew up the reft of his troops along
the ihore.

The generals on both fides, after using the molt

powerful arguments to encourage their men, led them
on to the engagement, which proved extremely bloody.
The Athenians advancing to the mouth of the harbour
to break the chains, and the Syracufans likewise hurry.
ing thither to prevent them, the galleys were so crouded
together, that they could neither move backwards nor
forwards, nor fight in any fort of order, and the battle
grew extremely furious. Nothing was to be seen but
the ruins of ships, and numbers of dead bodies. The
uproar and confusion was so great, that the orders of
the commanders could no more be heard. The Athe-
nians lill endeavoured to break the chain, and their
enemies to defend it. At last, however, after a very
long and obstinate contest, the Athenian fleet was driven
on shore by the enemy, and victory declared in favour
of the Syracufans.

The unfortunate Athenians, not daring to attempt

the passage a second time, had now no other resource
left, than to retreat in the night by land, and to aban-
'don their fleet to the enemy. Harmocrates guessed their

design,

design, and procured false intelligence to be conveyed
to Nicias, of the enemy having seized the puiffes. The
Athenians, therefore, inflead of setting out in the night,
delayed their march till the second day after; so that in
the interval the Syracufans had time really to possess
themselves of the most difficult passes, to break down
the bridges, and to post their cavalry along the plain.

The departure of the Athenians exhibited one of the

most melancholy scenes that can well be imagined;
being obliged to leave behind them their sick and
wounded, who conjured them by every tender name to
carry them with them, and called on the gods to wit-
ness the cruelty of their fellow-foldiers. Terror appear-
ed in every countenance. Nicias, though worn out
with sickness, and deprived of common necessaries, ex-
erted his utinoft efforts to keep up their drooping spirits;
telling them, that they were (till formidable by their
numbers, and that fortune must at last cease to persecute
them.

The army was disposed in two different columns;

and the retreat was at firit conducted with pretty good
order. But being able to discover no free p;tff.ge, the
troops were continually galled by the Syracufan cavalry.
Their provision failing in the mean time, they altered
their plan, and resolved to march in the night. This
expedient proved fatal to them. For one half of the
rear guard, with Demoflhenes at their head, having
loft their way in the dark, were next day overtaken by
the Syracufans, who surrounded and attacked them in
a narrow defile. The Athenians, however, defended
themselves with the most desperate bravery, till, ex-
hautted with hunger and fatigue, they were at leng:h
compelled to surrender at defcretion, together with De-
mnofthenes their commander, though amounting still to
about 6000 men.

Nicias, after passing a river, and encamping on a ri-
sing ground, was likewise overtaken by the enemy, who

P z ordered

ordered him to lay down his arms. In this situation he
offered to deliver them hostages, as a security for his re-
paying them all the expences they had incurred by the
war, provided they would permit him and his men to
depart from Sicily. The Syracufans rejeted his propo-
fals, and immediately attacked his troops, who still de-
fended themfclves with great bravery. Arriving at last
at the river Allinarus, his soldiers, half dead with thirst,
greedily plunged into it to drink. But the Syracufans
immediately renewing the attack, entered the river a.
long with theAthenians, and cut them off while quench.
ing their thirst. Nicias feeing this slaughter, agreed to

surrender himself to Gylippus, if he would spare
413. the reft of his men. They were accordingly all

taken prisoners, and conducted into the city in
triumph,

Next day the Syracufans deliberated about the fate of

the prisoners, and their two commanders. Diodes advif-
ed to confine the other prisoners in the public prisons, and
to put the two generals to death. This last article thock-
ed the wiser part of the citizens extremely; and one of
them, named Nicholaus, a venerable old man, mount-
ing the speaker's place, pronounced a most pathetic
and sensible speech, telling his countrymen, that such a
gross ad of humanity must make them abhorred and
detelted by all nations, more especially as the gods had
already sufficiently punished the Athenians. This speech,
which was enforced by many other powerful arguments,
made a great inprefiion upon the citizens, who seemed
to be mercifully disposed, till tome of them who were
more exasperated than the reft against the Athenians by
the loss of children and relations, flood up, and repre-
sented in the itrongeft colours the numberless miseries
brought upon their country by the Athenians. The
recital of those miseries so inflamed the resentment of the
people, that they instantly followed the advice of Dio-
cles, and condemned to death the two Athenian com-

x nmanders;

manders; who were executed accordingly. The tragical
fate of those two unhappy generals was commiserated by
every moderate person, particularly that of Nicias, who
had always opposed this fatal expedition. The reft of
the prisoners were confined iu the public prisons, where
they underwent the cruellest hardships, receiving every
day a very finall allowance of only meal and water for
sustenance. At the end of eight months, they were
taken out of those dungeons, and fold for slaves: but in
the mean time many of them had died.

We may easily conceive the confiernation of the A-

thenians, when they heard of the miserable event of
their Sicilian expedition, and the entire ruin both of
their army and fleet. This unfortunate enterprise gave
a fatal blow to their power. Never before had they
been reduced tofo distressful a situation, without money,
without any army, without a fleet. However, after ha-
ving vented their resentment against those who had been
principally infirumental in engaging them in that expe-
dition, they resumed their courage, used every means to
procure money, and applied themnfelves with all possible
diligence to equip a new fleet.

But their difficulties and misfortunes- continued to

multiply upon them. The Greek allies, particularly
thole of Eubcea, Chios, and Leibos, weary of
furnifling contributions to carry on the war, 412.
thought this disaster presented them with a fa-
vourable opportunity for aflerting their independency,
and throwing off the Athenian yoke. They applied
therefore to the Lacedemonians to take them under
their protection.

But this was not all. Tiffaphernes, the Persian go.

vernor of Lydia and Ionia, provoked at the opposition
made by the Athenians to his levying the usual contri-
butions in his province, promised to furnish the Lacede.
monians with the necessary expences of their warlike
preparations, to incite them to proceed against the A-

P 3 thenians

thenians with more diligence and alacrity; and Pharna-
bazus, the Persian governor of the Hellefporit, made
them a like offer. Alcibiades, however, persuaded the
Lacetlemonians to rejea- the proposals of Tiffaphernes.
That famous Athenian had been long uniformly em.
ployed in plotting mischief againfl his countrymen, in
revenge of their unjust treatment of him ; and with that
view he had made a journey to Chios, and had prevailed
on several cities of lonia to revolt. Nothing was done
in Sparta but by the interposition of Alcibiades. But
his exorbitant power in that city at last drew upon him
the jealousy of its king Agis, and the principal Spartans,
who devised a plan for the defirucion of so acive an
adversary.

Alcibiades, informed of his danger, fled to Sardis,

and put himself under the protection of Tiffaphernes.
His engaging manners, and the charms of his converfa-
tion, soon procured him the friendship of that satrap,
.wh-o, though of a haughty fierce disposition, and a bar-
barian, freely communicated all his. secrets to Alcibia-
des. But of what value are wit, bravery, and the finest
exterior accomplishments, when they cover a bad heart?
Alcibiades, on this occasion, showed himself to be a
man of no principle, and void of all affecion for his
country. He advised Tiffaphernes to keep up the ani-
mofity between Athens and Sparta, and to aflift them
against each other, that they might exhaust their re-
sources in their mutual deftru.iop, and so become in
the end an easy prey to the Persian monarch. Tiffa-
phernes adopted his plan; and from that time forward,
the Persians, who durst not now attack the Greeks
with open force, employed their meney and influence to
foment quarrels among the different states; fending con-
fiderable fums sometimes to Athens, Sometimes to Spar-
ta, as the necessities of each required, to keep the ba-
lance even between the two, and to. enable them to ruin
each other.

The

The Athenians hearing of the great credit of Alcibia.

des at court of Tiffaphernes, repented heartily of their
harsh usage of him. For though by means of their fleet
they had lately been able to reduce the revolted islands
to obedience, yet they entertained strong apprehensions
of Tiffaphernes, who was soon to receive 150 vessels
from Phenicia. Alcibiades being no firanger to their
sentiments with reipeE to himself, had it privately hinted
to them, that he was desirous to return to Athens, and
would procure them the friendship and assistance of
Tiffaphernes, provided they would abolish the popular
form of government, and establish aristocracy. This met
with great opposition at first. particularly from the ene-
mies of Alcibiades. But as there appeared no other
means of saving the republic from utter ruin, the people
at lalt consented, though much against their inclination.

Pifander, accordingly, with ten other deputies, were

appointed to treat with Alcibiades and Tiffaplernes.
But the latter, apprehensive of rendering the Athenians
too powerful, and choofing rather to adhere to the
plan laid down by Alcibiades of fomenting the war
between the two republics, insisted upon it as a prelimi-
nary condition, that the Athenians should relinquish all
their possessions in lonia; and made other demands of
such an extravagant nature, that the deputies broke off
the treaty in disgust, convinced that Alcibiades had
only meant to make them ridiculous. Tiffaphernes, at
the fame time, concluded an alliance with the Pelopon-
nefians, by which he agreed, on their ceding all their
provinces in Asia in favour of his malfer the king of
Persia, to defray the expence of the Lacedemonian fleet,
till the arrival of that of the Persians. These tranfac-
tions happened in the eleventh year of the reign of Da-
rius Nothus.

At Athens but too much deference was paid to the

opinion of Alcibiades. In consequence of his advice, the
popular government was abolished, and aristocracy set

P4 up

up in its place. The whole magistracy was thrown into
the hands of 400 persons, who were invested with abfo-
lute power. These new rulers soon discovered their
tyrannical disposition. Entering the senate armed with
poniards, and surrounded with guards, they dissolved it,
after paying the 500 members of it the salaries due to
them. Their adminifIration was ushered in with fen-
tences of banishment, proscriptions, and poisonings of
those from whom they expeted opposition. But this
violent behaviour quickly exasperated all the citizens
against them ; and the army which was then lying at Sa-
mos, hearing of their proceedings, was so highly enra-
ged, that they reduced such of their officers as they sus-
peted to be conne&ted with the aristocracy, appointed
Thrafylus and Thrafybulus in their stead, and anxiously
intreated Alcibiades to take the chief command.

Alcibiades obeyed; and putting himself at the head

of the Athenian forces, proceeded to Miletus, to pre-
sent himself in his new dignity before Tiffaphernes, and
to shew the satrap, that the power of his countrymen
was still formidable. Returning to Samos, he found
there messengers from the 400 waiting for him. But
the soldiers would not even deign to hear them, insist-
ing to be instantly led against the tyrants. Alcibiadts,
however, confidering, that by departing with the arnmy
from Samos, he flould leave Ionia exposed in a de-
fenceless situation to the attempts of the enemy, and
fearing, besides, left his appearance at Athens might be
producive of a civil war, in which his countrymen
would exhaust their strength against each other, refused
to comply with the request of the soldiers ; but at the
fame time he declared it to be his opinion, that it was ne-
ceffary to abolifll aristocracy, and to restore the senate.

The fleet which Tiffaphernes had promised to fend to

the assistance of the Peloponnesians, arriving in the
mean time at Afpendos in Pamphylia, Alcibiades failed
to oppose its proceeding any further. But the Lacede-

monians

monians having defeated the fleet sent by the 400 to the
relief of Euboea, and having taken pofeffion of that
island, the Athenians were thrown into the greatest con-
fternation, as Eubcea furnished them with the greater
part of their provisions. Had the Lacedemonians pro-
fited, as they ought to have done, by the confusion
produced by this event at Athens, and advanced with
their victorious fleet against that city, the fate of the A-
thenian republic might in all probability have been de-
termined. But the slowness with which the Lacedems-
nians conduced all their enterprises, gave time to the
Athenians to put themselves in a proper pofiure of de-
fence. They immediately recalled Alcibiades, deprived
the 400 of their authority, and fitted out another fleet,
of which they gave the command to Thrafylus and Thra-
fybulus. These commanders accordingly set fail, and
falling in with the enemy's fleet on the coaf[ of the Hel-
lefpont, totally defeated it.

Alcibiades, naturally fond of glory, and desirous of

performing some exploit, before returning to Athens,
that might render his arrival more welcome to his coun-
trymen, cruized with his fleet about the islands of Cos
and Cnidus; and getting intelligence that the other'A-
thenian fleet was on the point of coming to a second en-
gagement with that of the Peloponnesians near Abydos,
he hurried to the afliflance of the former, and arrived
jult as they were beginning the battle. He immediately
falls on the enemy with eighteen flips, takes thirty of
theirs, destroys many of the remainder, makes a great
Ilaughter of their soldiers while endeavouring to save
themselves by swimming, and erects a trophy. Proud
of his success, he resolves to appear once more before
Tiffaphernes in all the glory of a conqueror. But the
satrap, apprehensive left the Lacedemonians flould com-
plain of his condu& to the Persian monarch, ordered
Alcibiades to be apprehended and conveyed to Sardis,
informing him at the fame time, that he had received

orders

orders fiom his master to make war on the Athenians.
Alcibiades, however, found means to escape from his
confinement, and to get on board of the Athenian fleet,
where he was quickly joined by Tberamenes, with
twenty ships; and soon after by Thrafybulus, with
twenty more. Finding himnfelf now at the head of a
powerful fleet, of no fewer than eighty vessels, he re-
solved to proceed to Cizicus to attack Mindarus, corn.
mander of the Peloponnesian fleet, and Pharnabazus,
who had joined him there. A heavy shower of rain,
attended with thunder, concealed his approach from the
enemy. As soon as it was fair, he suddenly advanced
to the attack with forty ships. The enemy, despising
the small number of his vessels, began the engagement
with great bravery; but on feeing the reft of his fleet
come up, they were seized with a panic, and fled.
Alcibiades availing himself of their confusion, landed
his troops, charged those of Pharnabazus, put them to
flight, and killed Mindarus with his own hand.

In Attica, Thrafylus fell upon the rear guard of the

Spartan army, which had been led up to the walls of
Athens by their king Agis, and defeated them. Then
he failed to Samos with fifty ships; and having taken
Colophon, advanced to Ephesus. But being repulsed
by Tiffaphernes, he returned on board of his fleet and
intercepted four Syracufan vessels. About the fame
time a battle happened between Tiffaphernes and Alci-
biades, in which the former was defeated.

By these exploits, Alcibiades rendered the Athenians

masters of the Hellespont. The Lacedemonians, in-
formed of this, sent ambassadors to Athens with pro-
pofals of peace. The wiser part of the citizens advised
their countrymen to embrace this opportunity of ma-
king peace; which, in the present poflure of their as-
fairs, must be greatly to their advantage. But this was
keenly opposed by those whose interest it was to continue
the war,

In

In the next campaign, Alcibiades, whom success con-

ftantly attended, resolved to add Chalcedon to his con-
quests. He accordingly laid siege to that town, and
obliged the Bythinians to deliver to him the provisions
they intended for the Chalcedonians. The inhabitants
attempted a sally, but were repulsed, and obliged, in
spite of the approach of Pharnabazus to their relief, to
surrender the town. The Athenians afterwards took
several other places.

After so many exploits, Alcibiades desired to expe-
rience the gratitude of his country; and for that pur-
pose set fail for Pyreus. The day of his arrival there
was the molt glorious of his life. All the people of A-
thens went out to meet him, and conduEed him in tri-
umph to the city. His fleet was loaded and ornamented
with the spoils of the enemy; was attended by a great
number of the {hips they had taken; and displayed, in

triumph, the colours of those they had funk and
407. deltroyed. He landed, amidit repeated shouts

of his fellow-citizens, who thronged about him to

welcome him home, regarding him as a fort of tutelar
deity, who had brought them back vitory in his train.
They gazed upon him therefore with admiration, re-
fleting on the miserable situation of the republic when
he undertook its defence; and the many important ser-
vices performed by him, by which he had rendered her
triumphant both at sea and land,

Then Alcibiades assembling the people, proceeded
to justify himself from the crime laid to his charge,
. nd imputed all his misfortunes to his bad fortune. The
Athenians, charmed with his eloquence, decreed him a
crown of gold; and by way of reparation of the ill
usage formerly received by him, they reflored to him his
eltate, and named him chief commander by sea and,
land. The poiulace, too, always prone to fall into ex-
tremes, began to talk of bestowing on him sovereign au-
?hority. ISut the principal citizens, to prevent the es,

feds

feds of their folly, caused a fleet to be equipped with
all possible diligence, and urged his departure. Alci.
biades, before setting out, resolved to celebrate the
Eleusinian myfleries.

The Athenians had been long obliged to condut

this procession by sea, because the Lacedemonians had
possession of the roads leading to Eleusis. But Alcibi.
ades resolved to have it performed in the usual manner;
and for that purpose posted troops along both fides of
the way, ready to repulse any attack of the enemy,
Thus protecing the priests and the initiated with his
soldiers, he condudted the procession in great order
and tolemnity all the way to Eleusis, and back again,
without any accident. By this he intended to wipe
out the suspicions of irreligion formerly entertained
againit him. The affection entertained for him by
the Athenians was so much increased by this acion,
that they would have cheerfully made him king. But
the principal citizens, not choofing to give Alcibiades
time to explain himself on that head, hastened his de.
parture, granting him every thing he desired. Accor-
dingly, he at last set fail towards Andros with a fleet
of 100oo flips.

The Lacedemonians, alarmed at the late successes of

the Athenians, thought it necessary to oppose one of
their best generals to Alcibiades, and therefore eleaed
Lysander chief commander of their fleet. Lysander,
although of noble birth, being lineally descended from the
HeraclidEe, was neverthelels educated with all the rigour
and severity of the Spartan discipline. He was brave,
artful, and insinuating; and to his ruling passion, am-
bition, could sacrifice every other pleasure or confide-
ration whatever.

About this time Darius, the Persian monarch, had

appointed the younget of his sons, Cyrus, to be gover-
nor of Sardis; and had advised him, on setting out for
his government, to support the Lacedemonians in all

events,

events, in opposition to the Athenians. This was very
different from the policy of Tiffiphernes, and the other
Persian governors; who, as we have seen before, made
it an invariable rule, to hold the balance even between
those two flates, and by assisting them alternately, as
their respeCtive necessities required, to enable them to
work out their mutual deftruftion.

Lysander soon put to sea, and direted his course to
Sardis; where, by means of his supple insinuating
behaviour, he soon pushed himself into favour with
Cyrus, to whom he complained of the partiality of
Tiffaphernes to the Athenians. Cyrus told him, that
he had orders from the king his father to assist the La-
cedemonians; and, for that purpose, had received from
him 500 talents of silver. Lysander then persuaded him
to augment the pay of the sailors to four oboli a day,
and to order all the arrears due them to be immediate-
ly paid up. This augmentation of pay greatly contri-
buted to weaken the Athenian fleet. For their sailors
tempted by the high pay, deserted to the Lacedemo-
nians. After having obtained these advantages from
Cyrus, and fixed him in the interests of his country,
Lylander returned to his fleet, in the neighbourhood
of Ephesus. That city was at this time plunged in in-
dolence and luxury; the Persian satraps usually making
it their winter residence. Lysander, therefore, labour-
ed to revive industry among the inhabitants ; and by a
skilful application of rewards, succeeded in making the
r.rts to flourish among them, and eftablilhed in their city
an arsenal for building galleys. This was one of the
principal causes of the subsequent aggrandiiement of
Ephesus.

Lysander, however, awed by Alcibiades, declined
coming to an engagement. But the Athenian general
having departed into Ionia to raise money, and having
commited the charge of his fleet to Antiochus, with
P0fitive orders to avoid a battle, his fubfftitute, desirous

to

to display his courage, failed with two galleys into the
harbour of Ephesus to brave the enemy. Lysander
immediately went in pursuit of him ; and the Atheni.
ans, at the fame time, advancing to protect their corn.
mander, the fleets on both fides fell in with each other
insensibly, and came to a general aftion. Lysander
gained a complete victory, and took fifteen Athenian
galleys.

When Alcibiades heard of this dififter, he resolved

to repair it; and assembling the remains of his fleet be.
fore Samos, offered battle to Lysander; which the lat.
ter, satisfied with his late advantage, thought proper to
decline. Thrafybulus, in the mean time, the declared
enemy of Alcibiades, availed himself of the late misfor.
tune to ruin his credit with the people with whom he
accused him of neglecing the public business, that he
might have leisure to indulge hirnfelf in his debaucheries.
Observe this linconftancy of this molt ungrateful and ca-
pricious people ! Believing those insinuations, they ac.
counted the loss of the battle under Antiochus criminal
in Alcibiades, though fought in contradiction to his ex-
press direEions. Such indeed was the opinion enter.
tained of his parts by the Athenians, that they imagined
no enterprise in which he was any ways concerned could
fail, unless by his own treachery. They therefore sus-
pected his fidelity; and Alicbiades, lately the idol of
his countrymen, was obliged to secure himself from
their resentment by a voluntary banishment into a di.
itriCt of the Chersonese.

Lysander, in the mean time, was employed in eRa.

blifhing aristocracy in all the towns he had subdued.
With a view to the accomplinhment of this ambitious
project he was now meditating, he singled out from the
chief men of each city those whom he discovered to
be of the most daring and resolute spirit, put the whole
power in their hands, enriched them by presents, and
by these means rendered them entirely devoted to is

intereS,

interests. His command being expired, Callicratidas
was appointed his successor; and the Athenians chose
Conon to supply the place of Alicbiades.

Callicratidas equalled Lysander in his military capa-

city, and was greatly his superior in probity and mag-
nanimity. He possessed all the ancient Spartan virtue
without its extravagancies, and was a declared enemy
of every species of low cunning or falsehood. Lyfan-
der, unable to disguise his jealousy on feeing him ar-
rive, behaved in the meanest manner imaginable, fend-
ing back to Sardis all the money that remained for the
pay of the troops, and telling Callicratidas, that he must
apply for more to the great king. To Callicratidas, a
man of a noble foul, and of the most elevated indepen-
dent spirit, it was the greatest hardship in the world to
be obliged to fawn and cringe to the deputies of the
Persian monarch for a supply of money. Compelled,
however, by neceflity, he at last condescended to go all
the way to Lydia, to apply to Cyrus. But being con-
flanty prevented, under one pretence or another, from
obtaining an audience, he at last departed, full of in-
dignation against those who were at first mean-fpirited
enough to pay court to the barbarians; and vowing to
use his utmost endeavours to effect a reconciliation among
the Greeks, that so they might be no longer under the
necessity of submitting to such baseness.

It was now the twenty-fixth year of the Peloponnesian
war. Conon having been pursued into the harbour of
Mytilene by Callicratidas, who there kept him blocked
up, gave notice of his danger to the Athenians, who
dispatched to his assistance a fleet of o galleys, which
was reinforced at Samos by 40 more, furnished by their
allies. Callicratidas falling with this fleet before Ar-
ginufae, off the promontory of Lesbos, made a vigorous
attack upon them, notwithflanding their superior num-
ber, and funk several of their flips. But being himself
"0posed by the galley of Pericles, son of the famous

Athenian

Athenian of the fame name, which he had pierced. with
the beak of his, and being unable to disengage him.
self from his antagonist, he was soon surrounded by fe.
veral other Athenian galleys, and in spite of the mot he-
roic bravery with which he defended himself, fell at last,
overpowered by numbers, though not without great
slaughter of the enemy. The Lacedemonians, difcou.
raged by the loss of their commander, gave way on the
right wing; and their left, after fighting some time
longer with great valour, fled likewise. The Athenians,
after there vicory, retired into the island, and their erea-
ed a trophy. Their loss in this engagement amount-
ed to 25 galleys; but that of their enemies to no fewer
than 70.

Plutarch, after beflowing the highest encomiums up-

on the virtues of Callicratidas, blames him for having
so imprudently hazarded an engagement; and, on that
occasion, observes how highly dangerous it is for a ge-
neral to give way to the impetuosity of his courage, as
he thereby not only endangers his own tingle life, but
likewise that of all under his command. The fame fen-
timent is adopted by Cicero, who, talking of those that,
from a false opinion of glory, choose to hazard the fate
of their country, rather than in any degree to fully tll(ir
own reputation, cites this very example of Callicratidas,
who, when exhorted to decline the engagement in
which he jell, answered, " That Sparta might get a
"new fleet in cafe this were destroyed, but that his
"flying would overwhelm him with everlasting dif
" grace."

The Athenian generals, in the mean time, gave or-

ders to Theramens and 'lhrafybulus, to carry home
the slain in o5 galleys, that they might be buried with
the accustomed ceremonies. But a violent tempe2 si-
pervening, prevented them from executing their orders.
The reft of the fleet proceeded towards Mitylene, to
diln.agage Conon,

The

The Athenians, among whom the rites of burial were

so ftricly observed, that they regarded the omission of
them as an inexpiable crime, grew furious, on hearing
that the citizens who had fallen in the late acion were
deprived of that so necessary solemnity; and though the
omission of it in the present cafe was unavoidable, they
nevertheless treated it as a capital offence, Thera-
menes became the accuser of the generals, though it
is inconceivable how he could undertake that charge,
and more especially how he pushed it with such cruel
obstinacy. When the Generals arrived at Athens, they
related all the circumstances of the cafe, and called up-
on every man who had been present to vouch the truth
of what they asserted. But the matter having been car-
ried before the senate, it was there determined, that it
flould be referred to the decision of the people, who
were ordered to report the opinion of each tribe di-
flindly; and if, upon the whole, the generals were
found guilty, they were to susser death. The famous
Socrates opposed this unjust sentence with all his might.
He himself undertook the defence of the accused, and
maintained, with invincible force of argument, that as
bygiving orders to carry off the dead bodies in order
to burial, they had discharged the duty incumbent on
them: and as the fupervening tempest had rendered it
impossible for those who had received those orders to
put them in execution, neither party was guilty of any
fault; and that, therefore, it would be the most gross
and cruel injustice, to put to death men who had so glo-
rioufly and successfully exerted themselves in the de-
fence of their country.

The accusers, however, had inflamed the resentment

of the people to such a pitch, that in spite of there re-
monstrances, they condemned fix of the ten generals to
death; and they suffered accordingly.-What an un-
rea'onable ungrateful people!-And how surprising,
that any man could be persuaded to command their

0 (,fleets
I~~~~~Q

fleets and armies!-Plato takes occasion from this
event, to maintain, that the populace is an inconstant,
ungrateful, cruel, jealous moniter, utterly incapable of
being guided by reason, a sentiment confirmed by the
universal experience of all ages, and of all nations.

The Peloponnesians, overwhelmed by their grievous

loss at Arginufte, sent to Sparta, to require the chief
command to be conferred on Lysander; which was im.
mediately granted. This choice gave great joy to those
who possessed the chief authority in the refpedive cities,
who being, as before observed, the creatures of Lyfan.
der, nothing could correspond better with their ambi.
tious views.

It was about this time that the younger Cyrus (so

called to distinguish him from Cyrus the Great, the
founder of the Persian empire) now grown prefumptu.
ous and vain by his great power, and the mean adula.
tion of his courtiers, wantonly put to death two noble
Persians, his own coufins-german, for no greater crime
than their omitting to cover their hands in his presence;
an aaion calculated to give us but an unfavourable opi-
nion of that prince's heart and understanding. But it
ihows us at the fame time, that prosperity can confound
the judgement even of some of the wisest of men, and
render them capable of the molt extravagant exceffis,
Darius, when informed of the tragical fate of his two
nephews, was much grieved; and confidering this ac-
tion of his Ion as an attack on his own authority, he
sent for him under the pretence of a desire to fee him,
as he was then sick. Cyrus, before his departure, tralif
mitted to Lysander large fums of money to maintain lli
fleet, and assured him, that rather than let him waft
money, he would supply him out of his own pocket.
He empowered him, at the fame time, to levy the revc
nues of the towns under his government, and promised
to bring a numerous naval reinforcement.--- Lyrinder

wa,.

was too wife not to avail himself fully of these favour.
able dispositions of Cyrus.

Lysander, full of the most sanguine expeEa-

tions, sets fail towards the Hellespont, lays siege 403.
to Lampfacus, takes it by assault, and abandons
it to pillage.--The Athenians, on hearing this, advance
with a fleet of i80 fail against the enemy, halt at a place
called ,Egos Potamos, opposite to Lampfacus, and make
dispositions for attacking the enemy next day. On this
occasion Lysander made use of itratagem, pretending
to decline the engagement; and contenting himself
with drawing up his galleys in battle array, in such a
situation that they could not be attacked, except at a
disadvantage. The Athenians, persuaded that through
fear he seriously avoided coming to ation, carelessly
landed from their flips in the evening; and embark-
ing again in the morning, offered battle afrefll. In this
manner they passed four days.

Alcibiades, who was then in exile, happening to be
in that part of the country, came up to the Athenian
commanders, and after representing to them the danger
of their situation on an inhospitable coait, without either
harbours or cities to which they might retire in cafe of
necessity, offered to co-operate with them, by falling
upon the enemy at land, with some Thracian troops
under his command. But the generals despised his ad-
vice, and refused, out of jealousy, to accept of his ser-
vice.

Lysander, in the mean while, was making prepara-
tions for attacking the Athenians, as loon as the soldiers
and mariners should, in their usual careless manner, leave
their ships. When the expected moment arrived, he
commanded his fleet to advance in great pomp. Conon,
one of the Athenian commanders, perceiving the enemy
approaching, cried aloud to his men to come on board.
But the soldiers being dispersed among the tents could
not obey. In this critical moment he resolved to 'ave

O z himnfe

himself by flight; and taking along with him nine gal-
leys, set fail for Cyprus. Lysander arriving in the mean
time, falls upon the ships that remained, cuts in pieces
those who were on board, as well as those who attempt
to come to their assistance; and then landing his men,
completes the destruction of those on mfore. In fine,
Lysander took poffefion of the greatest part of the fleet,
made 300ooo prisoners, took three of their commanders,
and plundered their camp. This terrible defeat redu-
ced the Athenians to the moss miserable situation they
had ever experienced, and determined the fate of the
Peloponnesian war, after twenty-feven years continu-
ance.

[his had been a very bloody war from the begin-

ing, and it continued so to the end. It was their fupe-
riority at sea that enabled the Athenians to support it for
so long a time, and contlantly to recover from their lofies
at land; and the Lacedemonians prevailed at latP, merely
by means of the immense fums furnished them by the
Persian monarch. The 3000 prisoners taken in the last
battle were, by the Peloponnesian council, condemned
to death, and were accordingly all murdered in cold
blood. Lysander visited the maritime towns, and chan-
ged their form of government, from democracy to ariflo-
cracy, bellowing the whole power in them on creatures
of his own, Wherever he found any Athenians, hc
commanded them, under pain of death, to retire to A-
thens; his plan being to reduce that city by famine.

We may easily conceive the terror and conlternatioll

occasioned by the news of the last defeat at Athens,
which now found itself without either army or fleet, on
the brink of being exposed to a siege, and of suffering all
the miseries of famine. The dread of these misfortunes
overwhelmed them with despair, In the mean time, how-
ever, they made the belt preparations in their power a-
gainll the siege, of which they had so certain a profpe.
-In efted, they soon found themselves besieged both by

Ica

sea and land. The kings of Sparta, Agis and Pausanias,
surrounded them with their army by land; and Lyfan-
der blocked up Pyreus with his fleet.

The Athenians, deprived of all further resources, and

labouring under the miseries of famine, sent deputies
to treat with Agis, requetfing only to be left in pofl'e-
sion of their city and harbour, and resigning every thing
else. Agis fends the deputies to Sparta, where the E-
phori insist on demolithing all the fortifications of their
city. In this melancholy situation, Theramenes offers
to go, and employ his influence with Lysander. Being
sent accordingly, he was induitriouily detained, for the
space of three months, by that crafty Spartan, who was
resolved to oblige the Athenians by famine to agree to
every particular that might be demanded. At last,
Theramenes, and the other amba'iadors, are again re-
ferred to the Ephori by Lysander, and make another
journey to Sparta, where a council is called to delibe-
rate on the fate of Athens. No less than the utter de-
firuEtion of that city is there talked of. The Thebans
particularly were of that opinion. But Lysander oppo-
fed it: and the wiser part of the assembly declared, that
they would not incur the infamy of extinguishing one
of the eyes of Greece, by deRroying a city, which had
rendered such signal services to the common cause.

After deliberating for three months, it was at last re-

f!uved to demolifli the fortifications of Pyreus, and the
long walls that communicated between that harbour and
the city; to leave the Athenians only twelve galleys ; to
deprive them of all the cities of which they had taken
poFffeion; to oblige them to engage in an offensive and
defensive alliance with the Lacedemonians ; and to serve
under them by sea and land. On these terms peace was
granted them. The deputies having returned to Athens,
and reported these resolutions, the Athenians, of whom
great numbers were daily periffling by famine, found
themselves under the hard necessity of agreeing to them

3 Q, 3 without;

without hesitation. In consequence of these conditions,

Lysander entering Pyreus, saw the fortifications
404. demolifled,. amidst the found of a variety of mu-

fical inftruments.-Thus ended the Pelopon.
nefian war.

The Athenians, by accepting the conditions dictated

to them by the Lacedemonians, had. in a manner, re-
signed themselves to the discretion of their enemies. Of
this they soon became very sensible. Lysander entered
their city, managed every thing according to his plea-
fare, obliged the people to abolish democracy, and eLE;.
blifh thirty Archons, who have been juitly distinguish.
ed in history by the name of " The thirty Tyrants."

From Athens Lysander proceeded to Samos, which

he soon reduced: and the other cities, on being inform-
ed of the fate of Athens, voluntarily opened their gates
to the victors. In each of those cities, Lysander put the
government into the hands of a decemvirate, composed,
for the greater part, of creatures of his own, entirely
devoted to his interest ; and, by that means, he acquired
a fort of sovereignty in the cities.

Resolved, at last, to return to Sparta, there to enjoy

the fruits of his success, he dispatched Gylippus before
him, with all the money amasscd by him in the course of
his last command, which is laid to have amounted to
15oo talents. Of this money, Gylippus is reported to
have stolen about a fifth part, by opening, in the night,
the bottoms of the bags in which it was contained. But
his diflonefty being discovered, he fled to avoid his me-
rited punishment, and became a voluntary exile fronm
Iis native country. On this occasion it was debated in
Sparta, whether it were not an infringement of the laws,
to admit this silver into the city. The wiser fort highly
blamed Lysander for introducing among them that
pernicious metal, which had always proved the bane
and corruption of mankind; and they presented very
strong remonfirances on the subjed to the Ephori, who

ordered

ordered the silver to be carried out of the city, and of
new enjoined the use of the ancient iron coin. But this
sentence was opposed by the friends of Lysander, who
proposed, as a conciliating expedient, that the silver
hlould not be used in ordinary currency, but be depofi-
ted in the public treasury, to be applied solely to the
service of the slate. Plutarch, however, ridicules this
expedient. It was not, fays he, gold and silver of
which Lycurgus was apprehensive ; but avarice, the con-
lequence of gold and silver.--- The event showed, that
the prohibition of using them commonly, had the effed
of making them to be more paflionately desired; and
the Lacedemonians becoming soon as sensible of the va-
lue of them as any of their neighbours, employed the
most tyrannical means to extort them from those under
their fubjetion, imposing a tribute on all the states that
were dependent on their authority.

Lysander, now in the zenith of his glory, eclipsed all

mankind in the ,eyes of the Greeks, who carried their
flattery so far as to eret altars to him: and the man
himself being naturally vain, ordered his own statue to
be cast in brass. Even the poets, encouraged by his
bounty, employed their talents to celebrate.his praise.

Eminent Writers, PhiloJophers, Artifs, &c.

Meton was a famous afsronomer, and the inventor of
the cycle made use of by the Greeks and Romans, for
calculating the times of new and full moon.

Anaxngoras was a native of Clazomene, and one of
the most diflinguifhed philosophers of antiquity. The
study of natural philosophy was his paflion ; to which,
that he might apply with the greater freedom, here-
nounced the large pofTefions transmitted him by his an-
ceftors, declined all public honours or employments,
and refused himself the conveniency of marriage. He
inflru&ed the great Pericles in his philosophy, and as-
fited him likewise in public affairs with his advice. The

Q 4. scholar

scholar is reproached for having negleCted' his matter,
when oppressed by want in his old age.--- His prin-
cipal residence was at Athens, where he taught for a
long while; but he ended his days at Lampfacus. When
on his deathbed, the chief persons of that town having
asked him, Whether he desired any thing to be done by
them, in honour of his memory, after his death ? he an.
fwered, that he had no other request to make, except
that the anniversary of his death might be established as
a holiday for the boys.

Empedocles, a Pythagorean philosopher, applied him.

self to reform the morals of his fellow-citizens, the in-
habitants of Agrigentum, who were remarkable for
their luxury and effeminacy. Having acquired great
authority among them, he made no other uie of it than
to establish good order. He was universally holden in
high esteem; and a poem of his, upon the moral duties
of mankind, had the honour to be rehearsed at the Olym-
pic Games. It is reported of him, that desiring to pass
for a god, he suddenly disappeared, by jumping into the
gulph of mount .Etna. But this is a fable; for, ac-
cording to the most credible authors, and Aristotle
among the relt, he died in the Peloponnese, in the year
of the world 3576.

Anacreon, the Lyric poet, was born at Teos a town

of Ionia. He was much esteemed by Polycrates tyrant
of Samos, in whose court he passed a considerable part
of his life. His poems contain, an exaa representation
of his life, where cafe and jollity shone throughout. He
spent his whole time, either over his bottle and in his
amours, or in composing his verses, of which the tender
passions were the only theme,

Pindar was another famous Lyric poet. His diflin-

guifling charateriftics are, grandeur, sublimity, and en-
thufiA-fm, When he has once taken his flight, he dif.
dains all subjection to ordinary rules, neglets the con-

estion

neetion and transition of common discourse, and soars,
like an eagle, into the regions of thunder and tempest.
It is no longer the language of men that he speaks, but
that which we imagine of the gods. But this disorder
conflitutes the chief beauty of the ode; the aim of
which is not to form our judgement, but to warm our
imagination. Pindar may be said to occupy a diflind
place among the poets, and to be entirely without a
rival; for, according to Horace, it is temerity to at-
tempt to emulate him. His odes display the utmost
sublimity and enthufiafin of which poetry is capable.
His sentiments are firong and striking, his language
pompous, and his versification rapid.

Efchylus was a famous tragic poet. Before discover-
ing his talents for tragedy, he had given proofs of his
bravery in the engagements of Marathon and Salamis.
He is confidered as the father of tragedy, of which he
had imbibed a jufi idea from the poems of Homer.
Under his hands it received an entire new form. He
confined the representation to a particular place, instead
of being ambulatory as before. He dressed his a&ors in
long robes, buskins, and maflks; which last disguise must
however have greatly diminished the force of the action.
He made choice of grand and interefling fubjeds; infused
life and spirit into the dialogue: dictated the language
of paifion; and excited terror and compafion. By in
troducing a chorus between the ats, he procured a fort
ofrelaxation to the audience. His language is pompous
and sublime; but sometimes obscure, and bordering on
bombast.

Sophocles was born at Colonna, a confider;,ble village
in Attica, and was a tragic poet likewise. While yet
but young, he was so sensible of his own merit, as
to attempt to rival Efchylus, and to flare with him the
applauie of the public. He carried his point on his first
essay, and came off the conqueror of his mailer. Es-
chylus survived his defeat but a ihort while; for ha,

ying

ving retired to Sicily, he died soon after. Sophocles re.
tained his genius, in all its vigour, to a very old age;
in the course of which he received the crown of victory,
no fewer than twenty times. Of all his works seven
tragedies have only reached us. He was more eloquent
and clear than Efchylus, and managed the passions with
greater art. In his pieces, terror and pity were more
skilfully produced, and affected the audience with more
lively impressions. The sweetness of his numbers pro-
cured him the appellation of The Bee. His excess of
joy, on account of the success of his last piece, occasion-
ed his death.

Euripides, another tragic poet, was born at Salamis,

fiourifhed much about the fame time with the former,
and was equally successful in the fame pursuit. He is
more laboured and more sententious than Sophocles,
The beautiful predominates in his pieces; which were
not admired in Attica only. At Syracuse, after the
defeat of the Athenians, some prisoners received their
liberty as a reward for having recited asew of his verles.
The admirable moral maxims with which his pieces a-
bound discover a great deal of the philosophical spirit, to
the study of which he had given much application.

Father Brumoy has been at great pains to point out

the charaeteriftical diftinltions of these three celebrated
poets. Efchylus, fays he, carried the language of tra-
gedy to a grandeur bordering on bombast. His style
is more pompous than even that of the Iliad.---So-
phocles hit upon the just theatrical grandeur. He
unites dignity and precision to his diCtion. His style is
noble and majeftic.-Tendernefs and elegance diftinguihn
the productions of Euripides ; but they are less nervous
and sublime than those of Sophocles.- The first is a
torrent that precipitates over rocks and through forefls.
The second is a pompous rapid river, whose waves roll a-
long with majesty and force. The third is a gentle fireal,
not always flowing in an even course, but conitantly

mneand ri:':

meandring through beautiful flowery meadows.-Shake.
fpeare possesses a great deal of the spirit of Efchylus and
Sophocles. The best of the other English tragic writers
bear a nearer resemblance to Euripides.

AriJlophanes. the comic poet, was cotemporary with

Socrates and Euripides. We have yet preserved to us
eleven of his comedies, in which he flands forth as a
censor of government. His elegance and delicacy of
expression, and particularly, that Attic salt, of which
the ancients were so fond, are most valued. He excelled
in the ridiculous, and amused the Athenians with his fa-
tirical jokes; but his buffoonry is often extremely gross,
and his obscenity still more bo.

Herodotus is called the father of hitfory, because he

is the most ancient author whole writings of that kind
have been handed down to posterity. He was a native
of Halicarnassus, a city of Caria; but having retired to
Samos, he there composed, in the Ionic dialect, his
history of the Greeks and Persians. He takes it up at
Cyrus, and carries it on to the battle of Mycale under
Xerxes, comprehending altogether a space of 120 years.
But he has intermingled withit that of several other na-
tions, particularly the Egyptians. His style is so flow-
ing and so pure, that his books, on being publicly read
at the Olympic Games, obtained the names of the Nine
Muses. It is true, that he is full of digreflions, and is
reproached for his credulity, and the pleasure he takes
in relating fables *. But it does not at all appear to have

bee n

- Here I cannot avoid taking notice of a very curious circum-
Rance mentioned by Herodotus, which, whatever other inference
tome readers may deduce from it, furnifies a firong proof of the
fidelity with which Herodotus reported what he heard. The passage
to which I allude occurs in his Euterpe, p. 1o4. of the 2d folio
edition of his History, by Stephanus. Hie is there relating the ac-
countts received by him from the Egyptian priests concerning the du-
rntion of their country. -Of this passage the meaning is in Engli'i

this

been his intention to confine himself to undoubtedcertain
falcs He had formed himself on the model of the firit
poets, and thought it sufficient if he kept within the
bounds of probability. It mutt be confefled, however,
that he always carefully distinguished between certainty,
probability, and fable. In his time flouriflted the molt
famrous poets; and the praises of Sophocles and Euri-
pides were every where resounded. Herodotus, on his

fide,

this: "That during the period assigned by the Egyptians for the
' duration of their country, they assured Herodotus, that four re-
' markable alterations had happened in the course of the fun, which
·' had rsen twice in the fame point where he was then setting, and

had set twice in the fame point where he was then rising."--

Herodotus reports this tradition, without intimating his own opinion
either as to the possibility or impossibility of what the Egyptians
afferted.-lt is apparent that the Egyptians themselves derived this
notion merely from tradition, without underlsanding the reason of
the phenomenon of which they spoke. For if they had compre-
hended the cause of the phenomenon, they mull have clearly under-
flood, that it furnished incontrovertible evidence of the duration of
their country from a period amazingly more remote than what they
assigned to it. In fadt, it is now well known and universally admit-
ted, that in a very long period of time, no less indeed than 25920
years, the phenomenon here aferibed to the fun adcually takes place,
in confcquence of a motion called by astronomers the pro,-ejon of the
equinoxcs. Thus, at the diltance of 12960 years from the present
time, the fun will appear to rife in the fame point of the heavens
where lie now sets, and to set where he now rifes; and in 12960
years more, or in the whole period of 25920 years, he will complete
his revolution, and rife and set exadaly where he rifes and sets at
present.

Hipparchus, on comparing an astronomical observation made by

him 146 years before Chri-l, with an observation made 147 years be-
fore his, by Timocharls and Ariftillus, found so striking a discrepancy
that ie was led to fufpef a peculiarity in the fun's apparent course.
which had not before been adverted to. Hipparchus's opinion, how.
aver, went no farther than suspicion. Ptolemy, of Pelufium, having
:epeated the fame observation about 300 years after Hipparchus, dil-
c'oveted, from the result of his observations, compared with the two
preceding obrervations, that Hipparchus's suspicion was well founded:
and posterior altronpomicl obfervationi afcertaiped the fat evenC t

fide, pursued a new path to the temple of fame; and
proposed to charm his countrymen with the beauty of
his prose. It is reported of Thucydides, that on hearing
the works of Herodotus read, he was so firuck with ad-
miration, that he sied tears of joy, and was seized with
a noble emulation to acquire reputation by the fame
means.

Thucydides was likewise a celebrated hiflorian. He

was a native of Athens. We have already seen, that
he was bred to the military life, and served as a soldier
in the Athenian armies. It was about the commence-
ment of the Peloponnesian war that he conceived the
design of writing his history. Of the events of that
war he had been an eye-witness till the eighth year of
its continuance; when, upon an accusation of having
failed to relieve Amphipolis he was lent into baniflh
ment. During the period of his disgrace, which lasted
twenty years, he composed his hilfory. He is said to
have spared no pains to obtain faithful and exaa ac-
counts of the moLt minute circumstances that occurred
in each campaign. He carried on his hiflory to the
twenty-firft year of that war; but we are indebted for
that of the remaining fix years of it to Theopompus and
Xenophon. He made use of his native Attic dialet,
not only as the moll pure. but likewise as the most ner-
vous and expressive. He distributed his hiltory into
years. The fuhjeac of this war is not indeed so interest-
ing as that of Herodotus, which defcrihed the united
efforts of all Greece against the formidable power of the
Persians, while that of Thucydides is confined to the
quarrels of the Grecian flates among themselves, in which
they exerted their utmost efforts to ruin one another.
But it was not the fault of the historian, that he was
witness only to such melancholy events. It is likewise
true, that this historian has not imitated Herodotus, by
interweaving episodes and digressions in his history; for
truth being his sole objet, he did not think himself

at

at liberty to mix it with fable. With respeCt to his
style, it is elevated, manly, and correct. His diction is
so close and nervous, that every word almost is a fen-
tence.

As the style of Herodotus is sweet and flowing, so

that of Thucydides has a great deal of precision and ve.
hemence. The former, according to Cicero, is likea
smooth river, rolling its waters along with ease and ma-
jelly; the latter, like an impetuous torrent, hurrying
on with rapidity and force.--His reasoning is strong
and profound; his reflections are just, and always sea.
fonable. Unprejudiced in favour of his native country,
one would imagine him to be es neither of the countries
whose adtions he describes; for never did historian
write less from prejudice or passion. His precision, it is
said, renders him often obscure; but this fault is over-
looked in favour of his veracity, there being no Greek
hiltorian more exat or more impartial.

He is further found fault with, for having put

into the mouths of his heroes, orations too finished
and regular, to have been produced in the hurry
and heat of acion. But they are so eloquent and cha-
raEteriftical, that we are at little pains in examining
minutely, whether they were spoken precisely in that
form or not.

Of Xenophon we lhall have occasion to speak at great

length in the body of our hiflory. He was born at
Athens. Having engaged when very young, in the
army of the younger Cyrus, the brother of Artaxerxes,
he had the honour of being the chief conductor of the
famous retreat of the io.ooo Greeks back to their na-
tive country. After his return he served as a soldier
till the time of Agefilaus, when he was banished by the
Athenians on an unjust suspicion of favouring the La-
cedemonians, because he always expressed a high opi-
nion of the Spartan laws. Xenophon having thereupon
retired to Scyltonte there composed his works name-

ly

ly, The Cyropedia, or, History of Cyrus the Great;
The Expedition, or, Retreat of the lbooo Greeks;
and, The Continuation of the History of Thucydides,
from the return of Alcibiades into Attica to the battle
of Mantinea, comprehending a space of forty-eight years.
These works display a vast extent of genius and learn-
ing; and clearly evince the writer to have been a flkilful
commander, a judicious philosopher, and an elegant hi-
florian. His ityle is so pure, so harmonious, and so
sweet, that he merited the appellation of the -Athenian
Bee: it is, at the fame time, wonderfully finple. But
notwithstanding this simplicity, he has mantained all
the hiltorical dignity. Cicero pronounces the eulogium
of this admirable writer in these five words: " Xeno-
"phontis voce mufas quasi locutas;" so many graces
did that great orator discover in the flyle of this au-
thor! It is a queflion among the learned, whether
his Cyropedeia ought to be looked upon as a real hi-
ltory, or only as philosophical romance. The latter
opinion is maintained by the ablest critics; and, indeed,
the arguments adduced by them appear so solid and
convincing, that we are surpriscd the matter should con-
tinue longer doubtful. He died at the age of ninety
years.

Isocrates, the celebrated orator, was a native of

Athens, and received his education under the greatest
masters. The weakness of his voice, and his natural
bashfulness, not permitting him to speak in public, he
applied himself at firit to private composition, choofing,
for his subjects, questions of polity and government.
He likewise composed pleadings for the use of others.
Afterwards he opened a school of eloquence, in which
the greatest orators of Greece were formed. The fuc-
cess of this establishment procured him both a high re-
putation and a great fortune; for he was attended by a
number of scholars, who rewarded his pains with
very handsome gratuities. H-e likewise received large

presents.

presents. Nicocles king of Cyprus, for one oration
that bears his name, gave him twenty talents. The
charaater of his tfyle has been excellently pointed out
by Cicero. " Isocrates's eloquence," fays he, "is
' sweet and agreeable, replete wirh ingenious argu-
"ments, and harmonious periods ;" but, in his opi.
nion, it is more proper for imaginary composition than
for real practice. He was the first that introduced into
the Greek language, numbers, cadence, and harmony.
He was extremely careful, perhaps too much so, about
the arrangement of his words. It must be confessed,
however, that the love of probity and virtue distinguishes
his orations, which are uniformly calculated to inspire
both princes and fubjets with truth, honour, and a love
for the public happiness. The grief which the loss of
the battle of Cheronea gave him, put a period to his life
in an extreme old age. His connecion with Philip
may be justified from his ignorance of his real charater.
Plutarch blames Isocrates for having consumed that
time, which he ought to have dedicated to the service
of the commonwealth, in arranging words and sentences.
But this criticism is rather too severe. Isocrates had by
no means received from nature talents proper for public
business. He was indeed the best rhetorician of his
time; but he was rather qualified for the college than
for the camp.

Of the orator Efchines we hlall have occasion to speak
more fully in the sequel.

Lysias, another famous orator, lhone at Athens in the

time of Socrates; and was so much interelted in the
fate of that wife man, that, upon his being brought to
trial, he insisted with him to make use of an oration
that he had comptoed for him with the utmost care and
ingenuity. He was always confidered as one of the
finest orators of Greece. Lysias, fays Cicero, wrote
with extreme elegance and precision; and Athens
might boast of poffeiing in him a perfect orator.

Jreg$~

ifeus, another orator, was a fcnolar of Lysias, and

imitated his mailer's flyle very exactly. His merit did
not appear till after the Peloponnesian war: and, in-
deed, his chief glory seems to arise from his having
taught the famous Demosthenes.

Phidias, the celebrated Athenian sculptor, was the

firlt that inspired the Greeks with a taste for beautiful
nature in statuary, and taught them to imitate it. By
the strength of his genius he had formed, in his ima-
gination, a model of ideal beauty, at which he con-
ftantly aimed. His chief merit lay in the propriety
and dignity with which he represented the gods. His
mailer-pieces were, ift, A flatue of Minerva of gold and
ivory, thirty-nine feet high, which was placed in the
temple of that goddess. 2d, Another of Olympian Jove,
accounted one of the seven wonders of the world, and
of which he is said to have taken the idea from Ho-
mer.-This work procured him an immortal fame: It
struck the fpecdators with aftonilliment. He excelled
likewise in painting, and drew at Athens the portrait of
the famous Pericles.

lMyron was another renowned Athenian sculptor.
His copper cow is looked upon as his master-piece.

Zeuxis, the famous painter, was a native of Hera-
clea. He excelled in colouring. It was he who paint-
ed some grapes so naturally, that upon the picture's be-
ing exposed in public, the birds came and pecked at
them. Transported with joy, he immediately challen-
ged Parrhafius, another celebrated painter, to produce
any of his works that was comparable to this. Par-
rhafius painted a piece, apparently covered with a kind
f flufl by way of curtain. " Come, draw that curtain,"
cried Zeuxis, " That we may fee this master-piece."
The piece was no other than the curtain itielf. Zeuxis
acknowledged himself surpassed; for, fays he, " I only
" deceived the birds; Parrhafius las deceived even
" me.w

R ParrhoJfis

Parrhafius was by birth an Ephesian, and the co-

temporary and rival of Zeuxis, and has been just men-
tioned. They two passed for the most skilful painters of
their time. Parrhafius excelled in design, in the just
ness of his proportions, in the airs of his heads, both
lively and languishing, and in the dignity of his faces.
His piEture of the people of Athens, expressive of
their good and bad qualities, acquired him great re-
putation.

Timanthus of Sicyon was another cotemporary of

Parrhafius. His distinguishing talent was invention,
and his master-piece the sacrifice of Iphigenia. In this
pi&ure, after exhibiting, in the face of the assistants,
the different degrees of affliction felt by each, being
unable to express that of Agamemnon, the father of
Iphigenia, he covers his face with a veil, leaving to the
imagination of the spectators to figure his distress. He
is said to have borrowed this idea from the Iphigenia
of Euripides; where the poet makes Agamemnon, on
feeing his daughter led on to be sacrificed, throw his
robe over his eyes.

THE

# BOOK III. Containing the History of the THIRD AGE of GREECE. From the conclusion of the Peloponnesian war to the death of Alexander the Great, a period of eighty-one years.

TH'E
SI I S T O R Y

O F
AN.CI ENT GREE CE.

B O O K II.
Containing the HIory of the T IH I R D A GE of

G R a E C E.

From the tonclz/ion of the P/aoponnefian war to the death
of Alexander the Great, a period of eighty-one years.

IN the beginning of this third age of Greece, we once
m Iore fee the Spartans become, by the event of the Pelo-
F ponnefian war, the leading people in Greece. TIjs
advantage they maintained for about thirty years, from
'!!e time of Lysander to that of Conon, who enabled
his own countrymen, as well as the other Greeks, to
!iake off the domineering yoke of Sparta.

It is in this third age that we must fix the point of
declension of the Grecian glory. We shall perceive,
that the ambition of extending their conquelts beyond
the limits of their own country, was the first cause of
he change of the national spirit of the Greeks. The
lunder of the wealthy Asiatic cities that fell into their
'alnds, produced the pailion of avarice: and their fre-

R - quent

# CHAP. I. Affairs of Greece, from the conclusion of the Peloponnesian war to the peace of Antalcides.

quent intercourse with the Persians, whose magnificence
excited their admiration, inspired them with the love of
luxury. By these means the Greeks degenerated from
their former virtue; and the arts, promoted by the fu.
perfluous calls of luxury and wealth, alone profited by
the change.

The mutual dissention of the fiates of Greece was an.

other cause of their ruin. The Persians, finding it im-
possible to subdue them by open force, attempted their
deftrudion, by fomenting among them discord and divi-
sion; and for that purpose, effeaually employed their
gold and silver, which, in all ages, and in all nations,
have been the bane of human virtue and felicity. By
loading with presents those who possessed the chief in.
fluence in the different governments, they succeeded in
arming againfl each other the two bravest states of
Greece, who thus exhausted their strength in domeflic
quarrels. The Persians, however, were not destined to
reap the fruit of their pernicious politics and corruption,
which eventually turned to the advantage of a power
with which Greece was more nearly connected. Philip,
King of Macedon, made great progress in subduing that
country; but its final fubjeEion was reserved to swell
the triumph of his son the illustrious Alexander.

C H A P. I
Affairs of Greece, from the conclufon of the Peloponnesian

-war to the peace of Antalcides.

T HE thirty archons, eftabliflhed by Lysander in
404. Athens, quickly gave way to their tyrannical in-

clinations; and to inforce their decrees, obtained
of Lysander an armed guard. This was the signal of

theii

their approaching tyranny. The richer citizens, and
those whose virtue and influence might be a bar to
their violent proceedings, were the first victims of
their cruelty.

Still more to overawe the people, and to prevent a

revolt, they armed 3000 of the citizens who were' the best
affected to their party.-Thefe availing themselves of
their power, to ruin and destroy their private enemies,
Athens immediately became one general scene of blood
and rapine. None durst oppose the pleasure of those
wicked men. Critias, of all the thirty the moit cruel
and the moss wicked, carried his oppression and injustice
to such an extreme, that Theramenes, the only one of
their number who was atuated with any regard for the
welfare of his country, was provoked to oppose the de-
fpotifmn of him and of his other colleagues. This drew
upon Theramenes the resentment of the tyrants; and
Critias accused him, before the senate, of disturbing the
public quiet. Theramenes managed his defence with
such force of argument, that Critias. fufpeeing he might
be acquitted, introduced into the senate some of his
most devoted creatures, who from time to- time indu-
ftrioufly exposed to the eyes of the judges the points of
the daggers, wherewith they were privately armed.
The judges, thus intimidated, condemned Theramenes
to death. Socrates alone, whose scholar he had been,
ventured to oppose this sentence, and went so far as to
attempt to hinder the guards from dragging Theramenes
from the altar; but he was obliged to yield to superior
force. He then exhorted the senators and people to
avenge themselves on their presumptuous oppressors.
Nothing but the merit of Socrates could have screened
him from the resentment of the tyrants, who discovered
no higher marks of their displeasure, than by prohibiting
'irm from inftruting the youth.

The fate of Theramenes was bewailed by every honest
Athenian, Xenophon has immortalised the intrepidity

R 3 with

with which that celebrated Athenian met death. He
tells us, that whten he had received and drunk the poison
with the most striking calmness and fortitude, he pour.
ed out the remains of it on the ground, in the manner
of the libations in sacrifices, with these words, " This
" for the virtuous Critias." Theramenes was well ac-
quainted with 'the science of government. But his zeal
in procuring the condemnation of the commanders who
gained the battle of Arginufie, remains an indelible blot
on his memory.

Let us fcr a moment cast our eyes on the affairs of

Persia. Darius Nothus died soon after the arrival of his
son Cyrus at court. Paryfatis, that young prince's mo-
ther, who was extremely fond of him, had exerted all
her influence with the late king, to persuade him to de-
clare Cyrus his successor in the kingdom, to the exclu.
sion of his eldest son Ariames. But Darius obstinately
refused to commit an aa of such injustice. The new
king, on his accession, assumed the name of Alrtaxerxes
Mnremon. Cyrus, grown desperate at feeing his brother
on the throne, vowed his defrution.-Of what crimes
is not the heart capable which is actuated by ambition
alone!

Artaxerxes getting notice of the design entertained

against his life by his brother, ordered him to be appre-
hended His life, however, was spared at the intercef,
'sion of his mother; and Artaxerxes, initead of disabling
Cyrus from creating further disturbance, was simple (or
perhaps generous) enough to reltore him to the govern-
ment of the provinces formerly in his poffeflion.

That ambitious prince immediately resolved to at-

tempt the dethronement of his brother. With that view
he employed Clearchus to raise an army of Greeks, un-
der the pretence of assisting the Lacedemonians in a
war they were meditating against Thrace: and to bind
Lysander still more closely to his interelts, he is said to
have made him a present of a galley 200 cubits long,

b uilt

built of ivory, ornamented with gold. Alcibiades, who
was at that time living in retirement in a remote cornet
of Phrygia, easily conje tured, he real destination of
Cyras's warlike preparations. As Artaxerxes might be
of great use to his affairs, Alcibiades formed the refolu-
tion of giving him intelligence of what was plotting a-
gainft him; and for that purpose travelled into the pro-
vince of Pharnabazus.-We shall by and by fee the con-
sequences of this unnatural projec of Cyrus.

In the mean time the unhappy Athenians, over-

whelmed by their miseries, began to cast their eyes up-
on Alcibiades for deliverance, and to concert measures
for bringing him home. But the tyrants getting notice
of their intentions, and dreading the embarraffinent that
might be thrown in the way of their projecs by a man
of such diftinguifiled parts and activity, signified to
Lysander, that it was necessary for the quiet and fecu-
rity of the government, so to dispose of Alcibiades, that
he might not have the power of creating them any di-
fturbance. In consequence of their renonftrances, Ly-
sander required Pharnabazus to deliver him up dead or
alive; and pressed his demand with the utmost eager-
ness, seeming to insist upon it as an eflential condition
of the alliance between the Lacedemonians and Per-
sians. Pharnabazus was mean-fpirited enough to gra-
tify Lysander, and gave the necessary orders for the
apprehension of Alcibiades. The guards sent to seize
hini food in fuich awe of him, that they had not cou-
rage to break into his house, to which therefore they
set fire. Alcibiades, after endeavouring in vain to exu
tinguill the flames, ruficed through thien fw-o.d in
hand. The barbarians, not daring even then to wait
his approach, retired before him, but at the fame time
discharged at him a flowver of darts, which killed him on
the spot.
. Thus perished, at the age of forty years, this extra-
ordinary man, at the very season that his countrymen

R 4 tsood

flood molt in need of his assistance. His character ex-
hibits a very singular assemblage of good and bad quali-
ties. He was, by turns, the dread and the scourge ot
his own country, and of the other states of Greece; and
experienced, through the whole course of his life, the
most extraordinary revolutions and caprices of fortune.
It is, on the whole, difficult to determine whether his
bess apparent dispositions deserve the names of virtues.
For his conduct discovers more art and address than
honour and integrity; more vanity and ambition than
real patriotism; his constant aim being to live in a dif-
tinguithed sphere. It was from private motives of am-
bition that he persuaded his countrymen to engage in
the Sicilian expedition, of which the miserable conclu-
sion is justly regarded as the commencement of their
ruin.

The Athenian tyrants no longer kept any measures.

Every day was marked with murders and imprison-
ments; and universal dejection prevailed; and no citizen
appeared hardy enough to attempt the deliverance of his
oppressed countrymen. Socrates alone laboured both by
his discourses and example to support the drooping fpi-
rits of the Athenians, and to prevent their giving way
entirely to difpair; behaving, on all occasions, with
wonderful constancy and resolution, and plainly show.
ing, that he flood in no fear of the tyrants.-What a
misfortune for those who occupy the forermoft fations in
life to be insensible to honour, and regardless of the o-
pinion entertained of them by the reft of mankind, and
of the judgement that shall be formed of them by po-
flerity; a disregard of reputation naturally producing
a disregard of virtue.- This is the reflection of
Diodorus Siculus upon the conducq of the thirty ty.
rants.

The molt considerable citizens of Athens, to avoid

the cruelty and oppression of those wicked men, aban-
doned their native city, and fettled in great numbers in

different

different parts of Greece. It will hardly be believed,
that the Lacedemonians, whose resentment might have
been fully gratified by the miseries already brought up-
on the Athenians, prohibited, on this occasion, the o-
therGreek cities from giving refuge to those unfortu-
nate exiles. l'his mean, cruel jealousy of the Lacede-
monians shocks us; and, instead of discovering any
trace of the ancient Spartan magnanimity, throws an
indelible (lain on the charadcer of their nation. Such is
the power of conquest and ambition, to corrupt the most
virtuous hearts. Two cities only, Megara and Thebes,
disregarded this ungenerous and inhumne injuncion,
and granted an asylum to such of the Athenians as im-
plored their protection.

We at present contemplate the Athenians almost o-

verwhelmed by their numberless sufferings ; but we fihall
by and by fee them rising above their misfortunes, and
in a manner returning to a new life. Thrafybulus will
immediately attract all the attention of the reader; be-
ing destined to restore Athens to her former splendor,
and to display in the fight of all Greece, how much e-
ven one man of virtue and magnanimity is able to per-
form. In a meeting of many of his fellow citizens, as-
fembled by Thrafybulus at Thebes, it was unanimously
resolved, to make one great effort to aflert the liberty
of their native country. Lysias the- celebrated orator,
who had been banished by the tyrants, levied 500 fol-
diers at his own expence. With this slender force
Thrafybulus boldly marches into Attica, and seizes Phi-
le, a irong fortress in the neighbourhood of Athens.
The tyrants haften to oppose him at the head of 3000
men, and give him battle; but their troops unable to
fuRain the impetuoufity of Thrafybulus's little army,
are repulsed, and retreat to Athens. Thrafl bulus ha-
ving received a reinforcement of 700 men, falls upon
the Spartan guard ported before Phile by the tyrants,
and cuts off the greatest part of them.

The

The tyrants alarmed, gave orders to mafiacre all the

fufpecCed Athenians who were able to bear arms, and
make proposals of accommodation to Thrafybulus. lie
reje&s their proposals; and having at last mtiftered upa
fiall army of about 1oo0 men, advances to Pyreuo, en.
gages the tyrants who had marched against him, and ob.
tains the vicory. In this battle fell the wicked Critias.
Thrafybulus calls aloud to the vanquished Athenians
who were flying, that it is against the tyrants alone he is
fighting, not againit his fellow-citizens ; and mildly up.
braids them for opposing those who were come to restore
them to their former liberty and independence. They
are so much affeCted by this harangue, that, entering the
city, they immediately depose the tyrants, and confer the
administration on ten of the principal citizens.

-But this decemvirate proved no better than their for.
ner masters; and confidering themselves as unfecure
while Thrafybulus held possession of Pyreus, they sent
to Sparta to crave frefl afliltance. Lysander is dispatch.
ed to their relief, who advances towards Pyreus with an
army of Peloponnesians, and blocks up the harbour.
Thrafybulus is soon reduced to great extremity for want
of provisions. But Pausanias, enraged at the long pro.
fperity of so wicked a man as Lysander, arrives with a
fresh body of troops, intending rather to favour the A.
thenians, than to reinforce Lysander. A s there vas a
great number of Athenians in Pyreus, Pausanias com-
mands them to retire home to the city ; and on their re.
fusing to comply, attacks them. A flharp conflit en-
sues, in which the Athenians are worsted, and obliged
to return to the city.

The Athenians, on being again upbraided by Thra.

fybulus, once more take courage, and re-eflablif1 the
popular government. The remains of the faCtion of the
tyrants withdrew to Eleusis; and attempt to rene\w
the public disturbance. The tyrants endeavoured in vail
to recover their authority. Being decoyed to an i1.

tervicw

terview, they are all sacrificed to the public resentment;
and Athens begins at last to enjoy peace and tranquil-
lity. But in this civil war, raised and fomented by the
wicked policy of Lysander, more Athenian citizens loft
their lives than in any ten years of the Peloponneiian
war.

The government of Athens is restored to its former

footing; the ordinary magistrates are created; and
Thrafybulus, frill more effectually to establish the quiet
of his country, engages the citizens solemnly to bind
-themselves by oath to lury all past injuries in oblivion.
This was an ation of the highest prudence; for as e-
very citizen was entitled by law to prosecute those who
had occasioned the slaughter of his relations in the late
bloody dissensions, the feeds of discord and hatred mufd
have fubfiled without end. This mutual amncfly, there-
fore, brought about by Thrafybulus, was the best and
readiest method of eftablilhing the public tranquillity.

The authority of Lysander had long ago arrived at

its height; and info!.nce and haughtiness, the usual
concomitants of superior power, were by him carried to
the most excessive pitch. Whoever incurred his dif-
pleasure, was sacrificed to his resentment; and to accom-
plifli his designs, he spared neither fraud nor cruelty.
Eight hundred of the principal inhabitants of Miletus
had been by his order put to death; and the Lacede-
monians were now degenerated to such a degree, that
they basely permitted one of their citizens to commit
such a monfirous ac of cruelty and injuflice with impu-
nity. But every thing has an end.

Pharnabazus, harassed by the continual pillage com-

mitted in his provinces by Lysander, sent deputies to
complain of him at Sparta. This procured a letter to
he sent him by the Ephori, commanding his return.
He was confounded at the order; but obeyed, and
pleaded his defence, before the senate. But not endu-
ring to live at Sparta in the undiftinguified Rtation of a

private

private citizen, he soon left the city, under the pretence
of making a journey to the temple of Jupiter Ammon,
to discharge a vow. As he held in dependance the
cities of Greece, by means of the government he had
set up in them, and of his partizans, to whom he had
committed all power, the kings of Sparta thought it ex-
pedient every where to re-establish democracy, and to
banish the creatures of Lysander. Getting notice of
these resolutions, and hearing at the fame time of the
endeavours of Thrafybulus to restore Athens to liberty,
he suddenly returned to Sparta, to persuade the Lace,
demonians to maintain the ariftocratical government in
Athens. But his attempts were fruitrated by the wis-
dom of Pausanias.

Let us turn our eyes for a moment from the affairs

of Greece to the operations of the younger Cy-
401. rus, in prosecution of the enterprise he had form-

ed of depriving his brother of his crown and life.

-A remarkable example of the power of ambition over
the human heart This unnatural attempt had for a
long while employed the eminent abilities received by
Cyrus from nature. He gave a most welcome recep-
- tion to all those who came from' his brother's court, and
put in practice every art to detach them from his inte-
refts. HIe even prevailed with the barbarians to sub.
mit to a regular warlike discipline. But his chief de-
pendence being on the valour of the Greeks, with whom
the maritime situation of his provinces rendered him
more particularly connected, he spared no pains to gain
their affection. He recruited his garrisons with the best
soldiers of the Peloponnese, and levied an army of no
fewer than io,ooo Greeks. In this he was much as-
sifted by Clearchus an exiled Spartan, to whom he had
granted an asylum at his court.

About the fame time several cities revolted from the
government of Tiffaphernes, and transferred their alle-

gialce

giance to Cyrus; who the better to disguise his inten-
tions, sent bitter complaints to his brother against that
governor. This behaviour had the desired effet, and
persuaded Artaxerxes, that Cyrus's preparations were
solely against Tiffaphernes, For that monarch was na-
turally of a mild, humane, generous disposition; quali-
ties incompatible with a suspicious temper, and apt to
lull the man that poieffes them into a state of too great
security.

Cyrus, besides, had at his brother's court partizans

devoted to his interest, who, by extolling continually
the admirable qualifications of Cyrus, and hinting the
neceflity of a powerful empire having at its head a man
of distinguished courage and abilities, were artfully
sowing the feeds of sedition and revolt. As Cyrus lay
under the greatest obligations to Clearchus, and en-
tertained a high opinion of his fidelity and understand-
ing, he communicated to him his whole design. He
possessed at the fame time such influence with the
Greeks, that the Lacedemonians commanded their fleet
immediately to join the forces of Cyrus, and implicitly
to obey his orders.

Besides the to,ooo Greeks, Cyrus had already levied

among the barbarians an army of oo,ooo0 men. Cle-
archus commanded the Grecian forces, composed of
Lacedemonians, Acheans, gBceotians, and Theffalians;
and the fleet, consisting of 60 vessels, was ordered to
fail along the coast, and to attend the army.--- The
famous Xenophon, then a very young man, accompa-
nied Cyrus in this expedition.

With these forces Cyrus quitted Sardis, and advanced
by hafly marches towards the upper provinces of Asia.
Tiffaphernes, at length acquainted with the real defli-
nation of Cyrus's expedition, posted to the Court of Ar-
taxerxes, and informed him of the danger wherewith he
was threatened. In consequence of this intelligence,
that monarch quickly assembled a numerous army,

Cyrus

Cyrus, in the mean time, ran a great hazard of being
flopped at the pass of Cilicia; out of which, however,
he was extricated by a singular piece of good fortune.
The Greek troops upon their arrival at Tarsus, begin-
ning to fufped that they were to be led against the Per-
fian monarch, refused to advance any farther; and it
was with great difficulty, and by means of an augmen-
tation of their pay, that. Clearchus appeared them, and
prevailed with them to proceed. Here 4ikewife Cyrus
explained to his other troops the real destination of his
expedition.

Cyrus having entered the province of Babylon, assem-

bled the Greek officers, and told them, that it was not
want of other troops that had induced him to employ
them, but a consciousness of their superior merit, which
rendered a finall number of them of much greater im-
portance than a multitude of barbarians. He ex.
horted them therefore to approve themselves worthy
the high opinion entertained of their condut and bra-
'very.

Artaxerxes, in the mean time, advanced at
40I, . the head of an immense army, amounting, as is

alledged, to I,0,00ooo men, commanded by Til-

faphernes, Gobrias, and Arbaces. Besides these, there
were in the army of Artaxerxes 1i5 chariots; while Cy-
rus, on the other hand, had no more than twenty. The
two armies met at a place called Cunaxa. Cyrus him-

ifelfdrew up his army in battle order, and took his own
post in the centre. On being intreated by Clearchus to
avoid the dangerous part of 'the engagement; "What
·' doff thou advise ?" replied the prince: "while I aim
"at a throne, wouldfl thou desire me to {how myfell
" unworthy of it ?"

A thick cloud of dust, about three o'clock afternoon,

announced the approach of the army of the king. His
foot were disposed in square columns; and in the front
;were ranged the chariots, armed with scythes. The

king

king himself was in the centre, surrounded by 6ooo
chosen horse. Cyrus discovered the utmost eagerness
andjoy. He had ordered Clearchus with the Greek
forces to advance to the centre. But. as soon as they
perceived the army of the king marching on in good
order, they struck their javelins againfl their flields,
and instantly ruffled forward to charge the barbarians,
who, unable to sustain their attack, gave ground and
fled.

While Cyrus beheld with pleasure the troops of his

brother flying before his Greeks, the person of the
king struck his view. Immediately, therefore, crying
out in a transport, " I fee him !' he obeys the dieates
of his fury; gallops up to him, followed by no more
than 600 horse; kills with his own hand the commander
of the king's guard; pierces through tho'e that were
polled before him ; at last reaches his brother, wounds
the horse on which he rode with a dart, and throws
him to the ground. Artaxerxes having mounted ano-
ther horse, Cyrus aims a second blow at him ; but is in
his turn struck with a javelin discharged at him by the
king, and is at the fame time overwhelmed by a shower
of darts from the king's attendants, which laid him
dead on the spot. Several of the principal- noblemen
who fought by his fide were slain: and Mezabates, by
the king's orders, cut off the head and right hand of
Cyrus.

A part of the prince's army hearing of his death, be-
take themselves to flight, and Tiffaphernes leads on the
reft oftheking's army against that part of Cyrus's which
still kept its ground. The Greeks open their ranks and
let him pats. Artaxerxes hearing that the Greeks had
defeated his left wing, rallies his troops, and advances
to attackthem,who were as yet ignorant of Cyrus's death.
The Greeks, apprehensive of being surrounded, place
themselves in such a situation as to have their rear fecur-
': by a river; and feeing the king approaching against

them,

them, boldly march up to charge him. But the bar.
barians gave ground as before, and disperse on all
fides.
. Thus fell the younger Cyrus a viaim to his extrava.
gant and criminal ambition. Xenophon has given a
finished piture of this prince. By his account, Cyrus
surpassed all those of his years in bodily exercises. He
fulfilled his engagements with the utmost punctuality
and honour. He rewarded good offices with uncom.
mon generosity and with singular prudence, always in
proportion to real merit, never by the influence of real fa-
vour: and he conferred an obligation with the befl
grace in the world. He appeared to be only so far de-
lighted with sovereignty as it enabled him to do good:
and no other ways exerted his great power than to ac.
complifh that end. By this behaviour he gained the
love and esteem both of the Greeks and of the barba-
rians. But it is remarkable, that Xenophon takes no-
tice only of the virtues of this prince, and is entirely si.
lent with refpea to his faults and vices; his unbounded
ambition particularly, which prompted him to rife in
arms against his brother, whom, if the event had cor-
responded with his intentions, he would have deprived
both of his crown and of his life.

When the Greeks heard of the death of Cy-
40o. rus, they were struck with consternation; and

inflead of pursuing the enemy, turned all their

thoughts to their own safety. But Artaxerxes having
summoned them to lay down their arms, received for
answer, That they would sooner die; That they were
ready, however, to serve him as allies: but that they
preferred liberty to life.

In the mean time, Ariens, general of the barbarians

in Cyrus's army, to whom the Greeks had offered the
crown of Persia, sent them word, that he was on the
point of returning to lonia ; and that if they had a mind
to accompany him, they must join him that night.

They

They accepted his invitation, and were all, except 300o
conducted that night into his camp by Clearchus. At
their first setting out they made forced marches; but
could not by all their diligence avoid the pursuit of the
king, who at last came up with them. The Greeks,
as soon as they perceived him, formed themselves in
battle order; and by their excellent disposition and in-
trepid appearance, so intimidated the king, that he dif-
patched messengers to them with friendly professions,
and to acquaint them, that they had orders to condut
them to certain villages, where they would be supplied
with plenty of provisions. rhe Greeks accepted the
offer, and passed three days in thofc villages.

Tiffaphernes, in the mean time, paid a visit to the

Greek commanders, by orders of the king; and in a
long harangue told them, that, pitying the hardflips
and dangers to which they were about to expose them-
selves, he had obtained permiflion from the Persian mo-
narch to condut them back to their own country.
Clearchus answered; That the Greeks had been led in-
to Persia by Cyrus, without being informed of his in-
tentions: That by his death their engagenents with
him were at an end: That they had by nro means un-
dertaken this expedition with a view of making war on
the Persian monarch, or of creating him any diflurb-
ance; and that all they requelted was a free paifage to
their native country. Tiffaphernes having departed to
report their answer to the king, returned the second
day after, and told them, that the king did not intend
to oppose their return; that he, TilIlphernes, would
lupp!y them with provisions; and as he was to set out
nmmediately for his own province, would accompany
them in their journey and for that purpose would
quickly join them.

lThe Greeks, after waiting for him twenty days, were

at length joined by him, and set out under his conduct.
But alter this Arieus and his forces pitch:ed their camp

S at

at some distance from that of the Greeks. This pro-
duced some suspicions in the latter, who nevertheless
continued their march. After pasing the Tigris by a
bridge of twenty-feven boats, they traversed the defarts
of Media, leaving the Tigris on their left. But in the
mean time the suspicions of the Greeks were daily in-
creasing. Clearchus therefore having desired a confe-
rence with Tiifaphernes, in order to come to an expla-
nation, took occasion to remind him of the solemnity of
the engagements he had come under to the Greeks.
The satrap, by the itrongeft professions of sincerity, and
the warmest appearances of friendship, effaced all his
suspicions. But these professions were intended to dif-
guise the most villainous perfidy.

As Clearchus no longer entertained any doubt of the

satrap's integrity and honour, he was prevailed upon,
together with the reft of the chief officers of the Greeks,
being four generals and twenty captains, to pay him a
visit. As soon as the four generals, Menon, Proxenes,
Agias, and Socrates, had entered the tent of Tifiapher.
nes, with Clearchus at their head, they were instantly
seized; and at the fame time the twenty captains, who
had remained without, were attacked and cut to pieces
by zoo Persian soldiers, privately posted there for that
special purpose. The five commanders were carried
before the king, and by his orders beheaded. A
shocking instance of cruel perfidy 1 Xenophon has gi-
ven us the charaters of those unfortunate command-
ers; of whonl Clearchus and Proxenes were the molt
diftinguimhed.

We may easily imagine the surprise of the Greeks at

the long absence of their commanders; and the confier-
nation occasioned among them by the news of their
fate. They no longer entertained any doubt that their
total deftru&ion was resolved on. They found them-
selves at the distance of 500 or 600 leagues from Greece;
hemmed in by a royal army; surrounded by mountains

anl.

and defarts; and with no guide to lead them through
the multitude of enemies that lay in their way.

In this general dejection, Xenophon, who had hi-

therto served only in the fiation of a cadet, displayed an
extraordinary firmness of foul. Assembling the remain-
ing officers, he told them that their courage was now
their only resource. He advised them to appoint new
officers to supply the places of those they had loft; to
burn their tents and baggage ; to begin their retreat
immediately; and to march in the form of a hollow
square, that so they might always be prepared to oppose
the enemy from whatever quarter they were attacked:
A surprising instance of what one man of genius and
resolution is capable of performing! 'The Greeks,
when on the point of dispersing, and falling into the
hands of their enemies, are laved by the wifdomn and
aEtivity of Xenophon, Perceiving that the expedient
proposed by him was the most eligible and safe they
could follow, they immediately embrace it, and name
new commanders.

Next morning, by the dawn, the troops being as-

fembled, Xenophon, to confirm their courage, made
them an harangue, wherein he intreated them to recal
to remembrance the famous days of Marathon, Ther-
mopylx, and Platea. when their ancestors, with armies
greatly more inferior to their enemies than they. were
to these by whom they were at prtfent opposed,. had
nevertheless remained vicorious; and to reft persuaded,
that the gods, the avengers of perfidy, would support
their defence. The words of Xenophon were applaud-
ed by the whole army, who unanimously approved of
his advice, and instantly put it in execution.

After continuing their journey for some days, con-

ftantly direEting their march towards the heads of the
great rivers till they found them fordable; they were at
last overtaken and harassed by the army of TifThphernes,

o10 had pursued them with all his forces. But the

4 a Greek

at some distance from that of the Greeks. This pro-
duced some suspicions in the latter, who nevertheless
continued their march. After passing the Tigris by a
bridge of twenty-feven boats, they traversed the defarts
of Media, leaving the Tigris on their left. But in the
meap time the suspicions of the Greeks were daily in-
creating. Clearchus therefore having desired a confe-
rence with Tiffaphernes, in order to come to an expla-
nation, took occasion to remind him of the solemnity of
the engagements he had come under to the Greeks.
The satrap, by the itrongeft professions of sincerity, and
the warmest appearances of friendship, effaced all his
suspicions. But these professions were intended to dif.
guise the most villainous perfidy.

As Clearchus no longer entertained any doubt of the

satrap's integrity and honour, he was prevailed upon,
together with the reft of the chief officers of the Greeks,
being four generals and twenty captains, to pay him a
visit. As soon as the four generals, Menon, Proxenes,
Agias, and Socrates, had entered the tent of Tiflapher.
nes, with Clearchus at their head, they were instantly
seized; and at the fame time the twenty captains, who
had remained without, were attacked and cut to pieces
by 2oo00 Persian soldiers, privately polled there for that
special purpose. The five commanders were carried
before the king, and by his orders beheaded. A
shocking instance of cruel perfidy ! Xenophon has gi-
ven us the charaaers of those unfortunate command-
ers; of whom Clearchus and Proxenes were the molf
distinguished.

We may easily imagine the surprise of the Greeks at

the long absence of their commanders; and the confler-
nation occasioned among them by the news of their
fate. They no longer entertained any doubt that their
total deftrution was resolved on. They found them-
selves at the distance of 500 or 600 leagues from Greece;
hemmed in by a royal army; surrounded by mountains

andl

and defarts; and with no guide to lead them through
the multitude of enemies that lay in their way.

In this general dejecion, Xenophon, who had hi-

therto served only in the station of a cadet, displayed an
extraordinary firmness of foul. Assembling the remain-
ing officers, he told them that their courage was now
their only resource. He advised them to appoint new
officers to supply the places of those they had loft; to
burntheir tents and baggage; to begin their retreat
immediately; and to march in the form of a hollow
square, that so they might always be prepared to oppose
the enemy from whatever quarter they were attacked:
A surprising instance of what one mnan of genius and
resolution is capable of performing! The Greeks,
when on the point of dispersing, and falling into the
hands of their enemies, are laved by the wifdoin and
aEtivity of Xenophon Perceiving that the expedient
proposed by him was the most eligible and safe they
could follow, they immediately embrace it, and name
new commanders.

Next morning, by the dawn, the troops being as-

fembled, Xenophon, to confirm their courage, made
them an harangue, wherein he intreated them to recal
to remembrance the famous days of Marathon, Ther-
mopyle, and Platea, when their ancestors, with armies
greatly more inferior to their enemies than they. were
to there by whom they were at prcfent opposed, had
nevertheless remained vicorious; and to reft persuaded,
that the gods, the avengers of perfidy, would support
their defence. The words of Xenophon were applaud-
ed by the whole army, who unanimously approved of
his advice, and inflantly put it in execution.

After continuing their journey for some days, con-
ftantly directing their march towards the heads of the
great rivers till they found them fordable; they were at
last overtaken and harassed by the army of Tiffphiernes,
who had pursued them with all his forces. But the

1J Greek

Greeks changing their order of march, repulsed his at-
tacks with very little loss on their own fide; and it
should seem that TifIaphernes very soon grew weary of
pursuing them, for after this time there is no further
mention made of him in the relation of Xenophon.

On their arrival at the river Tigris, finding it un-

fordable on account of its depth, they were obliged to
traverse the mountains of the Carduce, and forced to
dispute their passage with the inhabitants of those hills,
who had posted themselves on the higher grounds. It
cost them seven days to make good their passage, which
they at last effeced with much labour and fatigue, after
being obliged to abandon their beasts of burden, and
the prisoners they had taken in their march; and after
suffering a great deal from repeated attacks of the inha-
bitants of the country.

After crossing those mountains, they were flopped by

a very large river that ran along the foot of them, but
passed it at last with much difficulty. Then entering
the western quarter of Armenia, they forded the Tigris
at its source. Teribazus, the king of Persia's governor
in that province, permitted the Greeks to t!:ke what
provisions they thought proper; but at the fame time
privately resolved to lay an ambuscade for them in a
narrow defile, between some mountains through which
their road lay. The Greeks, getting notice of his de-,
sign, prevented him, by taking pofeffion of the pafl
before him, and beat off the soldiers sent against them.

After this, having crossed the Euphrates, they were

obliged to march through snow from five to fix feet deep.
This part of their journey was attended with great
hardships, and many of the soldiers periched by the fe-
verity of the cold and the great fatigue. After pafling
the snow, they came to certain villages, confifling ot
huts dug under ground, where they refted fevcral days.
Recommencing their journey, they soon arrived at the
river Araxes, cr Phases. This river being here un-

i~~~~1 s~~o~ibrdable,

fordable, they were obliged to march about through the
mountains, where they were opposed by the Phafians
and Chalybes, whom they forced at last to retire.

After passing through the country of the Chalybes,

they came to a very high mountain ; whence getting a
fight of the sea, they were seized with an excess of joy.
l'hey had still, however, the mountains of Colchis to
traverse, and to defend themselves against the barbarous
inhabitants. But by the skilful disposition of the army
by Xenophon, they opposed and dispersed those barba-
rians. Then falling down into the plain, they arrived
at certain villages, where they found great plenty of
provisions, and refted some days. In a few days more
they reached Trebizond, a Greek colony, where they
halted a month. Here they celebrated divers forts of
games with much joy, and paid the vows they had made
to the gods in cafe of their safe return.

After deliberating whether they should proceed from

this place to Greece by sea, they came to a resolution
to transport only their old and sickly men in that way,
because they could not find flipping sufficient to carry
the whole army. The reft continued their rout over
land. On arriving at Cerafus they reviewed their for-
ces, and found them to amount to 86oo infantry, out
of Io,ooo that had undertaken the retreat; but of their
horse only 40 remained. Coming to Cotyora, and be-
ing informed by the inhabitants, that if they proceeded
farther by land, they should meet with several rivers
and defiles very difficult to be passed, they accepted of
the fliips offered them by the Cotyoreans, which landed
them next day at Sinope, a Milesian colony in Paphla-
gonia. -

The soldiers feeing themselves now so near their na-

tive country, became desirous of obtaining some plun-
der before their arrival. With this view, they inform-
edl Xenophon of their intentions of creating a command-
er in chief; all their measures having been heitherto de-

S 3 termined

termined by the plurality of votes in a general council.
At the fame time, they intimated their intention of con-
ferring that honour on him. On this occasion, Xeno.
phon, sensible of their intention, and desirous to keep
himself disengaged from their scheme, represented to
them, that if they were resolved to create a commander
in chief, it was highly proper that a Lacedemonian
should fill that station, as that fate at present occupied
the foremost rank in Greece. But perceiving them to
be by no means satisfied with this reason, but, on the
contrary, obstinate in their choice of him, he was for-
ced at last to tell them, that he had consulted the gods
on the subjed, and found them averse to his underta-
king the command. This effeaually freed him from
further solicitation for the present; and the choice of
the Greeks next fell upon (hryfophorus, a Lacedemo-
nian.

The soldiers beginning to indulge their desire of

plunder, their new general interposed, and prohibited
them from plundering the G;reek colonies. This produ-
ced mutinies and discord in the army, and led them
under the necessity of dividing into three bodies; the
first of which, consisting of the Peloponnesian, to the
number of 4400 men, was commanded by Licon and
Callimachus; the second, confifing of 2 oo men, by
Chryfophorus; and the third, of the fame number, by
Xenophon. Having procured flipping from the inha-
bitants of Heraclea, they embarked at different times,
and landed at Chryfopolis. This being a very rich
town, the soldiers resolved to pillage it: But upon Xe-
nophon's representing to them, that by so doing they
should draw upon themselves the resentment of the La-
cedemonians, many of whom were fettled there, they
relinquished that design.

From Chryfopolis, therefore, they marched, under

the conduct of Xenophon, to Salmydeffa in Thrace,
upon a pressing invitation from Seuthes, the sovereign

-- 9
* * *.of

of that country who intreated their affiflance to reco-
ver his dominions; and the more efiEtually to prevail
with them to comply with his desire, promised them a
great reward. But after they had performed the ser-
vice for which he wanted them, he broke his word, and
refused to give them any thing; and though Xenophon
complained grievously of his injustice, he obtained no
redress. This Seuthes was an avaricious prince, entire-
ly influenced by a minitery,void of all faith and honesty,
whose only aim was to increase his own private for-
tune.

In the mean time, ambassadors from Sparta waited

on Xenophon, to inform him, that, at the earnest in-
treaty of the towns of lonia, which had embraced the
cause of the younger Cyrus, and, on, that account,
dreaded the resentment of Tiffaphernes, they had de-
clared war against Tiffaphernes and Pharnabazus, and
had already dispatched an army into lonia, under the
command of Thymbron, to protect that country from
being ravaged by the enemy. The Greeks, under the
command of Xenophon, hearing that the troops in that
expedition received very large pay, engaged themselves
in the fame service, with the content of their command-
er, who conduced them to Lampfacus by sea, their
number then amounting altogether to no more than
6000 men. From Lampfacus he proceeded to Perga-
mus, and from thence to Parthenia, which is account-
ed the period of this celebrated retreat. 'I'hymbron ha-
ving there joined him with his troops, led all his army
from that place against Tiffaphernes.

Thus ended the famous expedition of the ten thou-

sand; who, in spite of the numberless difficulties they
had to encounter at almost every ftep, performed in
the space of little more than four months, counting
from the period of the battle of Cunaxa to their arri-
val at Pergamus, a march of about o90o miles.: This
retreat, the molt extraordinary recorded in any history,

S 4 is

is extremely admired by the matters jn the art of war,
for the boldness of the undertaking, for the ikill with
which it was conducted, and for the successful event.
For in spite of the difficulties of every kind that seemed
to oppose their return, they were so lucky as to reach
their native country victorious.

To return to the progress of our hiftory.-The Lace-

demonians were now meditating the extention of their
conquests beyond the bounids of Greece. But before
entering upon that subjed, the order of time requires
us to mention the death of Socrates; an event famous
in hiflory on several accounts. It happened two years
after the expulsion of the tyrants, upon an accusation,
of not acknowledging the gods received and worship.
ped by the state; of introducing a new religion; and
of corrupting the minds of the youth. It were impro-
per hastily to slur over the fate of this celebrated philo-
fopher, and not to take particular notice of his very re.
markable charater, and of the principal circumstances
of his life.

Socrates was born at Athens in the year before

Christ 469. His father was a flatuary; a business to
which Socrates at first applied with success. But the
philosopher Criton having discovered his fine genius,
called him off from that employment, and engaged him
in the fiudy of philosophy; a name then confined to
the particular branch of it that treated of the heavenly
bodies. But Socrates being soon disgusted with this
study, as well on account of the difficulties attending it,
and the uncertainty of its conclusions, as of its final! u-
tility in human life, applied himself to another fort of
philosophy, namely, the knowledge of man. For this
purpose, he carefully fludied the passions, and laboured
to ascertain, on solid principles, the notions of good and
evil. Hence he is jufily regarded as the father of mo-
yal philosophy. That science was by him firipped of

the

the mystery and austerity in which it had been till then
involved; and he inculcated its precepts with candour,
simplicity, and precision.

His exterior accomplishments were very unfavour-

able, and promised nothing less than genius, or fupe-
rior fenfibility.-His method of arguing was very par-
ticular. He began with interrogating his adversary like
one that desired to be inftru&ed; from his answers he
deduced conclusions, the absurdity of which his adver-
fary was obliged to acknowledge; and in that manner
he drew him on from one absurdity to another, till he
brought him to acquiesce in the truth of the propofi-
tion he wanted to establish. His school gave birth to
several fees ; of which the most celebrated was that of
the Academicians. Xenophon, ArifRippus, and Plato,
were the most famous of his scholars, particularly the
last.

The business of philosophy by no means interfered

with his civil duties. He gave proof, on various occa-
sions, of his patriotifin and courage, and served in fe-
veral campaigns during the Peloponnesian war with dif-
tinguifhed bravery. The virtues that principally dif-
tinguifhed his private characer were, temperance, in-
tegrity, and a contempt of riches. On feeing any ex-
traordinary display of the means of luxury and magni-
ficence, he used to felicitate himself that he had no
occasion for such articles, and would exclaim, Of how
many things itand I in no need ! He inherited from his
father but a very fiender patrimony ; which he boon lofr,
by lending it to one of his friends, ulho was unable to
repay it. But his poverty was accounted by him rather
an honour than a disgrace; and he obflinately refuted
to accept of presents of money frequently offered him
by his friends.-Archelaus, King of MIacedonia, to in-
duce him to go and live with him, made him very mag-
nificent offers; which, however, Socrates rejected
without hesitation. His virtue was attended with no

tinau re

tinaure of austerity: On the contrary, he was remark.
ably cheerful; and in his conversation displayed all
that sweetness and affability that constitute the principal
charm of society.

Xenophon and Plato, both his scholars, are those

tvho furniih us with moft.of the particulars relating to
his person and disposition. His diitinguifhing 'charac-
teriftic was a perfet tranquillity of mind, which enabled
him to support, with patience, the most troublesome
accidents of life. Hle used to beg of those with whom
he usually conversed, to put him on his guard the mo.
ment they perceived in him the first emotions of anger;
and when they did so, he instantly resumed perfec
composure and complacency. His wife Xantippe, a
woman of the most whimsical and provoking temper,
afforded him sufficient opportunity of exercising his pa-C
tience, by the revilings and abuse with which she was
confsantly loading him.

He pretended to be accompanied by a genius or fa.

miliar spirit, that counselled and direEted him in all his
matters, and prevented him from undertaking any as.
fair that might turn to his difadvaritage. But this ge-
nius was certainly nothing else than the accurate dil-
cernment, and prudent foresight, bestowed on him by
nature, and improved by unremitting observation, which
enabled him to judge of the consequences of acions;
and which he ascribed to the suggestions of his fuperin-
tending genius, with a view, no doubt, to induce his
friends to hearken to his advice more readily and illm
plicity. It was his intimate knowledge of the human
heart and passions, aided by much experience in life,
that gave him this seeming spirit of prophecy; and as
he delivered his pretended oracles with a mysterious air,
and all the positiveness and enthusiasm of a man inspired,
it was generally believed, that his knowledge of futurity
was certainly suggested to him by a familiar spirit.
By the fame means it were no very difficult matter for

ever,

every wife and prudent man to play the prophet.-
Several other great men of antiquity, from the fame
motive, affected the fame character.

In: the mean time, the fame of the extraordinary
wisdom and virtue of Socrates quickly spread abroad,
and he was, by the Delphic oracle, declared the wisest
of men. This response was obtained by his scholar
Ctefiphon.-Socrates poffcffed, in a supreme degree,
the talent of reasoning. His principal employment
was the inftru&ion of the youth ; an object to which
he dedicated all his care and attention. He kept,
however, no fixed public fchlool ; but took every oppor-
tunity, without regarding times or places, of conveying
to them his precepts, and that in the most enticing and
agreeable manner. His lessons were' so universally re-
|lifhed, that the moment he appeared, whether in the
public assemblies, walks, or feasts, he was surrounded
jwith a throng of the moll illustrious scholars and hear-
ers. The young Athenians quitted even their pleasures
to liften to the discourses of Socrates; of which what
we have mentioned above of Alcibiades is a signal
proof.

His lessons were of the most important use to his
countrymen, to such of them particularly as aspired at
public enjoyments. He laboured chiefly to inculcate
temperance, continency, and the other virtues of pri-
vatelife, to inspire them with the principles of integrity
and justice, with love for their country, and with a high
idea of the power and goodness of God.-His discourse
with Euthydemus upon Providence, transmitted to us by
Xenophon, is, on several accounts, a piece of ineflimable
value; and clearly shows, that Socrates acknowledged
the universe to be the work of one sole Being, whofc
attributes were infinitely superior to those commonly
arcribed to the heathen deities. From his other dif-
courses, too, it is sufficiently apparent, that he secretly
Pntertained a thorough contempt for all the Pagan di-

vinities~

vinities, which he looked upon as the production of the
poets; and that he had arrived at the knowledge of one
true God.

It was a principal obje&' of Socrates's attention, to put

the youth on their guard against a:set of presumptuous
men, known by the appellation of ophJb/s, who assumed
the name of philosophers, and, in the eye of the world,
gave themselves airs of great importance, appearing al.
ways attended with a great number of scholars, to whom
they fold their, inftrutions at a very dear rate. They
pretended to be adepts in every science, and boasted
of being able to argue immediately, and without hefita.
tion, on any fubjeEt. Socrates laboured to discredit
those boasters in the opinion of his countrymen. lHe
induced them, by an appearance of extraordinary can.
dour, to answer his questions, which seemed to be very
simple ; and then, by his admirable {kill in dialelics,
he very soon confounded their reasoning. He likewise
industriously exposed the vices of thole quacks in science.
By these means, he so exasperated them, that they
united their endeavours to destroy him, and were very
aEtive in procuring his condemnation.

Long before his death, they had prevailed with Arito-

phanes the 'comic poet to revile him on the stage,
424. in his play of " The Clouds ;" wherein he introdu-

ced him talking impicufly and impertinently of the

gods. This was no doubt done with a view, both to
try the disposition of the people with refped to Socrates,
and at the fame time to render him ridiculous and hate-
ful in their opinion, that they might afterwards be the
more easily persuaded to promote the malicious attempts
of his enemies. But the war againit Syracuie, and the
subsequent misfortunes that came upon the Athenians,
suspended the execution of their greatest design.

The city, however, had no sooner recovered its tranl

quillity, than Melitus exhibited a formal accusation
against Socrates, consisting of the following heads: 1O,

q.h't

That Socrates rejeced the established divinities of his
country, and laboured to introduce new deities in their
place.-zdo, That he corrupted the youth, teaching
them to despise the fettled laws and order of the com-
monwealth; to be disobedient to their parents; and to
censure the government.

Such were the principal branches of the accusation

brought by Melitus against Socrates; confessedly fuffi-
cient, if proved, to infer a capital punifihment. But it
was easy for Socrates to refute them. For he had now
employed himself, for the space of forty years, in in-
ftrucing the youth in the fight of all his countrymen;
during which time no perion had ever observed any
circuinftance in his lessons, that could afford a handle
to such an accusation. His friends, however, exerted
themselves in his favour. The orator Lysias bellowed
great labour and employed all his art in composing a
pleading for him. But Socrates thinking it unsuitable
to his character, declined to make use of it. Nor would
his magnanimity permit him to descend to ac the part
of a suppliant, or to employ the means commonly prac-
tifed in those days, to incline the judges to pity; such as
parties coming before them with their wives and chil..
dren. He appeared before his judges with the modest
confidence inspired by innocence, and behaved in every
particular with the most friking magnanimity.

Plato has preserved to us, under the title of " The
Apology of Socrates," the chief arguments adduced
by him, in answer to the accusation of Melitus ; of which
we flall endeavour here to deliver the fubfiance. Imro,
He affirmed, that he had been oten n seen offering facri-
ices to the gods, both privately in his own family, and
publicly in the temple,-.2do, That in liflening to the
fuggeflions of a particular spirit, or divinity, he intro-
duced no novelty into religion: since all other men who
consult the flight of birds, and the appearance of the in-
trails of beasts, thereby flow their belief in divination,

.l.ndl

and a firm persuasion, that the gods do, in 'different
ways, discover their will and pleafure.-3tio, That so far
from employing himself about impious researches into
natural causes, the sole object of his study and initruc~
tions had been to fix the proper standard of manners,
and of the conduct of human life.-4to, That so far
from teaching dangerous doctrines to the youth, he call.
ed upon such of his scholars as happened to. be present, to
bear testimony, that he had uniformly and zealously en.
forced the praCtice of virtue, endeavouring on all occa.
sions to persuade them, that it was of infinitely more
importance to apply their care and attention about
their minds, and what passed within their breafds, than
about their bodies, or any temporal acquirements; that
wealth did not bestow virtue; but that virtue was the
surest road to wealth, as well as to every other valuable
enjoyment in life.-5to, That if his having ftldoi
aflifted at the public assemblies of the people, when de-
liberating on the affairs of the republic, were imputed
to him as a fault, he referred to his behaviour in the
different campaigns in which he had served, as fuffi-
cient demonstration of his zeal for the welfare of his
country; having bravely and faithfully maintained the
posts committed to him at Potidea, Amphipolis, ar.d De-
lium : and he put them in mind, that in the senate, he
had opposed to his utmost the sentence pronounced
against the ten commanders, after the engagement of
Arginufl. But he acknowledged, that the familiar
spirit which had attended him from his infancy, had
always restrained him from meddling with the political
business of the republic; and he expressed his belief, that
if he had despised its suggestions on that head, he should
long ago have forfeited his life; having observed, that
whoever is imprudent enough to oppose the will of a
whole people, when bent on committing injultice,
seldom does so with impunity.-Laftly, That his ne-
gleAing the arts commonly practised, to move the

compaifion

companion of the judges, was by no means an effect of
presumption, but proceeded from a persuasion of its be-
ing improper to attempt to procure an acquittal by such
expedients; because it is the duty of judges to do jutfice
by obeying the law, not to violate the law from mo-
tives of favour or compassion. That he had uniformly
taught, that not to account death an evil, was an effet
of virtue; and, at his age, it were highly improper to
belie the lessons he had so often given on the contempt
of death.' That he entertained a more thorough per-
suasion of the existence of a Deity than his accusers;
and, on the whole, that he referred his cause to the
gods, and to his judges.

Socrates pronounced this discourse with a firmness
and intrepidity worthy his greatness of foul; appearing
rather to dictate to his judges than to plead before
them. But his undaunted behaviour irritated the judges,
who would have been better pleated to fee him do
homage to their power by a timorous and submissive be-
haviour. By a plurality of voices, therefore, they de-
clared him guilty; but did not, by their first sentence,
determine the punifiment. In such a cafe, the criminal
had a privilege of choofing any one of the different
punifhmnents enacted for his offence, and was entitled to
require an alleviation even of that. But Socrates
thought it unworthy his character to take advantage of
this indulgence, though he had it in his power to insist
on being puniihed. either by imprisonment or a fine.
But to avail himself of this privilege might. lie said, be
interpreted to be an acknowledgement of guilt; and he
added, that if he were to choose the requittal lie thought
le merited, he should insist on being maintained, for the
remaining part of his life, in the Prytani;um, at the purb-
ic expence, since he had conftinitly employed hii.lielf
1n the service of his country, by inspiri:ng ;is fellow-
citizens with the love of virtue.
The judges, provoked at his indifference, condemnred

i him

him to die by drinking the juice of the hemlock. This
sentence did not at all shake the fortitude. of Socrates,
firmly persuaded that guilt is the only evil of which a
wife man has reason to be afraid; and choofing rather,
fays Quintilian, quietly to resign the few years of life he
had yet a probability of enjoying, than by a mean sub.
mififon, or pusillanimous conduct, to throw a blemifnl
on the glory of his palt life. " I am going" said he
to the judges, " by your sentence, to susser death, a
"punilhment denounced against me by nature at that
" instant of my coming into the world ; but my accu-
' sers are, by the sentence of truth, condemned to the
" flings and remorses of a guilty conscience.

Socrates spent the thirty days that intervened betwixt

his sentence and death in conversation with his friends;
and in spite of the painful expecation of the fatal mo-
ment, uniformly behaved with the fame calmness and
fortitude. The evening before his death, he gave a
stronger proof still of his magnanimity. For upon be-
ing informed by Crito, the most intimate of his friends,
that he had an opportunity of escaping from prison, with
the connivance of the jailor, who had been gained over
for the purpose, he absolutely refuifed to avail himself of
that expedient; telling him, that he esteemed hirilclf
happy to be deprived of a life which was beginning to be
a burthen to him .

Plato relates, at great length, the various motives

urged by Crito, to persuade hin to make use of the
means of prelerving his life, which the endeavours of
his friends had procured for him. He set before his eyes
the injustice of the sentence; and argued, that it was his
duty to preserve his countrymen from the guilt of put.
ting to death an innocent man; that his children flood
in need of his protection, &c. &c.-Socrates, in answer,
proved to him, that a man condemned to die, though
unjustly, is guilty of a crime, if he withdraw himself

from
He was then fixty-nine years old.

from the punithment inflicted on him by the laws and
judges of his country.-A doctrine, however, that will
find few partizans; for, in such a situation, the love of
life, firengthened by the idea of injustice, generally out-
weighs such refined confiderations.-HIe further de-
monfirated to him, that every unlawful act, be its mo-
tive or consequences ever so laudable, is criminal in him
that commits it, even though directed against those who
have injured him ; in other words, that it is a crime
to return evil for evil; but, with refpeEt to his own
particular cafe, he demanded what answer he could
make to the laws of his country, for flying from the
punilhment now by them imposed on him; against
which, even the plea of returning evil for evil would
not apply. This is heroism in all its purity. Crito,
unable to refute the arguments of Socrates, was obliged
to yield to inflexibility.

The day he was to fulffr arriving at last, was spent

by him, as usual, in conversation with his friends. The
immortality of the foul was that day the subjed upon
which they discoursed. The substance of their reason-
ing, on this point, is contained in the dialogue of Plato,
entitled Phedo. Socrates there adduces all the argu-
ments that, in his opinion, ethablifh the immortality of
the foul, and refutes those insisted on to maintain the
contrary doEtrine. He lhows, that the desire of death
entertained by a wife man, must principally arise from
his wilhing to enjoy the happiness awaiting him in ano-
ther life. But he argues, that as man is entirely de-
pendent on the will of that Supreme Being who has
created him, and placed him in the flation he here occu-
pies, he must not therefore quit it without the permission
and command of that Supreme Being.-He concludes
his reasoning on the immortality of the foul with this
argument, that, supposing the reasons urged in support
of each fide of this queflion to appear of equal weight,

T a

a wife man will embrace that conclusion which seems
to be attended with least hazard and most advantage.

Socrates next proceeds to deduce several confequen-

ces, on the supposition of the certainty of the immorta-
lity of the foul.-He thinks there must be a final judge-
ment of the virtuous and the wicked ;-that punish-
ments must be infliced on the latter;-an eternal
residence, full of happiness, appointed for the former;-
and a (tate of purification between the two, where those
who have been guilty of more heinous tranfgrefions
shall, for a time proportioned to their iniquities, susser
condign puniihmnent, and afterwards enter into happiness.

Cicero has described, with great elegance, the lofty

sentiments and magnanimous behaviour of Socrates at
his death. While he held the fatal cup in his hand, he
declared, thiat he confidered death, not as a puniflment
inflicted on him, but as a help furnished him of arriving
so much sooner at heaven. He gives it as his opinion,
that on the depaiture of our fouls from our bodies, there
are two pafages for conducting them to the places of
their deftinatin ; one leading to that state of purgatory
before mentioned, which receives those fouls that, du.
ring their residence on earth, have contaminated them-
selves with many great crimes; the other leading to the
happy abodes of the gods, which receives the fouls of
those who have lived virtuously in this world.

When Socrates had finished his dilcourfe, he bathed

hinfelf. His children being then brought to him, he
spoke with them a little, and then desired them to be
taken away. The hour appointed for drinking the hem-
lock being come, they brought him the cup, which he
received without the smallest emotion, and then addressed
a prayer to'the gods. It is highly reasonable, said he,
to offer my prayers to the gods on this occasion, and to
befeech:them to render my departure from earth, and my
last journey, happy. Then he drank off the poison with
aimaing tranquillity. Observing his friends, in this fatal

mo1ment

moment, weeping, and dissolved in tears, he reproved
them with great mildness; asking them, whether their
virtue had deserted them ? " for (added he) I have al-
"c ways heard, that it is our duty calmly to resign our
" breath, giving thanks to the gods." After walking
about a little while, perceiving the poison begin-
ning to work, he lay down on his couch, and a 400.
few moments after breathed his laft.--Cicero
declares, that he could never read the account of the
death of Socrates without fliedding tears.

Soon after his death, the Athenians were convinced

of his innocence, and confidered all the misfortunes that
afterwards besel the republic as a puniflhment for the
injustice of his condemnation. When the academy,
and the other places of the city where he had usually
taught, presented thenfelves to the view of his country-
men, they could not refrain from reflecting on the in-
gratitude and cruelty of their treatment of the man who
had done them such important fervices.-T1hey can-
celled the decree that had condemned him; put Melitus
to death ; banished his other accusers; and ereEted to
his memory a tfatue of brass, executed by the famous
Lysippus.

Evagoras, king of Salamis, the capital of Cyprus, de-
serves a place in the history of Greece. He was de-
scended of the ancient kings of that island; but a tyrant
had usurped their throne, and made it dependent on the
Persian power. Evagoras was born under the reign of
that tyrant. He had received from nature a very grace-
ful person; and, from his infancy, gave signs of the best
and most valuable talents of the mind When grown
up, he was in great danger of being murdered by the
tyrant; and was obliged, for safety, to retire from Sa-
lamis. But returning soon after, at the head of no
mole than fifty men, he dethroned the tyrant, and
mounted the throne hinfelf, with the approbation of his
iellow citizens. He immediately applied himself to raise

T 2 his

his finall kingdom to a flourifling condition; and made
it his chief study to rule with justice. He had already
acquired great reputation, when Conon, after the un-
fortunate engagement at Egos Potamos, chose his court
for an asylum, where he contracted a most intimate
friendflip with Evagoras.

On that occasion, Conon, commiserating the misfor.

tunes of his country, had the address to prevail with E-
vagoras to second his endeavours for her relief; and
they applied themselves to concert the most proper
means for weakening the power that then aspired to the
sovereignty of Greece. Evagoras perceiving, from his
itrict correspondence with the satrap of Asia, how
troublesome and disagreeable the daily exactions of the
Lacedemonians were become to the Persians, advised
them to make Conon commander of their fleet, and to
attack the Lacedemonians by sea.

Soon after, however, the affairs of Evagoras assumed

a very different appearance. For having attempted to
reduce the whole ifiand of Cyprus under his power, the
Cyprians implored afsiltance of the king of Persia, whose
interest it was to support their independency. The war
was, at first, carried on solely between Evagoras and
the islanders. But as soon as Artaxerxes Mnemon was
freed of his war with the Greeks, he turned his whole
force against Evagoras.

The Persian army consisted of 300,000 men, and

their fleet of 300 galleys; while Evagoras could hardly
nmu. r u!; 20,000 soldiers and 90 galleys. But notwith-
ftandiln, this vast inferiority in the number of his troops,
he made fnift to defend himself against his enemies.
H-e availed himself of every resource of military tkill;
and having, by means of his light frigates, funk and
destroyed the viCtualling transports of the Persian army,
he reduced them to great firaits for want of provisions.
Receiving from Achoris king of Eygpt a reinforcement
as 6o galleys, with some money and corn, he defeated

a

a detachment of the Persian land-forces, and soon after
obtained another victory at sea. But the Persian forces
being still extremely more numerous than his, soon
ruined his power, and laid siege to Salamis by sea and
land. Evagoras, feeing no profpea of ainy further re-
source, found himself under the necessity of suing for
peace; which was granted him, on the condition of his
confining his government to the city of Salamis alone,
and of paying an annual tribute.

His son Nicocles succeeded him. It was for this

young prince that the famous Isocrates composed the
oration, intitled Evagoras, from its being the elogiuni
of that king. In this piece, the Athenian orator pro-
poses Evagoras as the perfect model of a good king;
and labours to prove, that fine parts and magnanimity
are essential requisites to form a prince of that character.
He represents Evagoras as a man of an excellent under.
ianding; and he tells us, that, after arriving at the
throne, that prince dedicated much of his time to read-
ing; particularly to the reading of history: That he
applied himself carefully to Itudy the characters of men,
that he might know how to employ them according
to their particular talents: That he never resolved on
any undertaking, without the advice of those who were
most skilful in the particular business in agitation:
That he attentively examined the nature of every form
of government, to discover its peculiar excellency:
That he was a skilful politician, a brave commander,
and though of distinguished personal dignity, yet of a
mild and affable difpolition; an affeaionate parent, a
sincere and steady friend, and faithful to his engage-
ments: That, by means of these excellent qualities,
he gave a new form to the city of Salamis, and made
it the residence of the arts and sciences. The orator
concludes, with exhorting Nicocles to imitate the ex-
ample of his father.

Hiltory describes the reign of Nicocles as one of the

T 3 mot

most happy reigns; jultice and the public advantage
having been the objects of all his undertakings. Though,
at his accession to the throne, he found the funds of the
itate entirely exhausted, he would not impose any fe-
vere tax; but by ceconomy, and by retrenching unne.
ceffary expences, he fully discharged all the public debts.
He valued himself molt on his virtue in private life, and
fludied, above all things, to keep his p..flions in subjec.
tion. He used to exprcfs his surprise at the small regard
thown to the connection by marriage, whose righlts,
though the most sacred of all, are wantonly and fre-
quently violated, while the other engagements of society
are scrupulously maintained. Isocrates makes Nicocles
to express these sentiments. in an harangue addressed to
hiL people, wherein he explains to them the duty of
fu: jcts towards their sovereign. Isocrates afterwards
composed another oration for Nicocles, in which he
lays down excellent maxims on the art of government.
This oration is mofl worthy of being read. One should
be tempted to think, that the ingenious author of Tele-
machus had thence borrowed his observations on the duty
of a king. What is chiefly to be admired in this ora-
tion is, that it contains none of the mean, fulsome,
insipid flattery. with which works of that kind are com-
monly fluffed. His opinions are delivered with pre-
cifion; and the truth is nowhere obscured by artificial
turns of expression. We learn from Plutarch. that
Nicocles was so well pleated with the zeal, sincerity
and eloquence of isocrates, that he made him a present
of twenty talents *

About the time that Artaxerxes Mnemon concluded

the war against Evigoras, and another war againit the
Cadufians, appeared Datames, the mofi celebrated com-

mander

* In the year 390, the Gauls defeated the Romans in the

battle of Allia, and, pursuing their advantage, sacked and burnt
Ronle.

mander of his time. Cornelius Nepos, the writer of
his life, prefers to him, in his military capacity, of all
the barbarians, only Hamilcar and Hannibal. He was
the son of Camizares, a Carian by birth, and governor
of the province of Leucofyria, which lies between
Cilicia and Cappadocia. Datames succeeded his father
in that government. From the account of Datames
transmitted to us by the historian just cited, it appears,
the he was hardly ever surpassed in the art of war. He
seems to have been matter of every branch of it; brave
and intrepid,-flilful in itratagems,-fruitful in expe-
dients on the most embarrafling occafions,-artful and
quick in forming his plan of operations,-and ascive in
carrying it into execution.

Having been commiflioned to subdue Thius governor
of Paphlagonia, who had revolted against the king of
Persia, he not only avoided all the snares laid for him
by Thius, but even found means to take him alive, to-
gether with his wife and children.

As Artaxexes was very anxious to have Thius in

his power, Datames resolved to surprise him agreeably
with his prisoner. For this purpose he repaired private-
ly to court; and having dressed Thius (who was of a
gigantic stature, and had an ugly face, with a long
beard) very magnificently, and attired himself as a
hunter, armed with a club, he conduced his prisoner
along like some wild beast that he had caught, and in
that manner presented him to the king of Persia. The
whole city flocked to fee so extraordinary a fight. Ar-
taxerxes, delighted with the behaviour of Datames, and
discovering his singular merit, appointed him ,general
of a great army destined againit Egypt. But before his
departure on the Egyptian expedition, the king com-
manded him to endeavour to seize the person of Afpis
the commander of an army on tle frontiers of Cappado-
cia, who had revolted. In this conmiilion, dangerous

T4 as

as it was, he succeeded, made Afpis prisoner by fur-
prise, and carried him to Susa.

His extraordinary genius and valour created against

Datames several enemies, who calumniated him to Ar-
taxerxes, and rendered him fufpeaed. Datames re-
ceiving intelligence of the danger that threatened him,
quits abruptly the service of the king, retires with a
few troops, seizes on Paphlagonia, joins Ariobarzanes,
defeats the Pifidians, who had risen againit him, and
takes their camp. Artaxerxes, terrified at these ex.
ploits of Datames, sent against him into Cappadocia
an army of near 200,000 men, under the command of
Autophradates. Datames had hardly the twentieth
part of that number; but as he excelled in the art of
ranging an army, he disposed his men so skilfully, as
to prevent their being surrounded, and at the fame
time to render the far greater number of the enemy of
no use. By these means he put the royal army to flight,
with prodigious slaughter.

The Persian general was equally unsuccessful in feve-

ral lesser engagements that ensued; and at last he was
forced to make advances for an accommodation. Da-
tames, desirous of recovering the favour of Artaxerxes,
for whom he had always retained an affection, listened
to his proposals. But Artaxerxes, provoked at being
unable, with all his mighty forces, to reduce a petty
governor of a province, was base enough to employ
treachery to destroy him. Datames at firit was so
lucky as to escape several ambushes that were laid for
him. But Mithridates the son of Ariobarzanes, having
been corrupted by extravagant offers made him by Ar-
taxerxes, to free him of a man who had incurred his
inveterate hatred, by being able to refifi him, took ad-
vantage of a moment when Datames was alone and un-
armed in his company, to itab him with a sword.

Datames, to have arrived at as high a reputation as
any hero of antiquity, wanted nothing but a more con-

fpicuo'us

fpicucus Rage to aCt upon, and a poet or historian to
record his exploits. It is indeed surprising, that the his-
torians of those times have taken so little notice of a
man of such distinguished abilities. But in all proba-
bility this has been owing rather to ignorance than de-
sign. His merit and exploits deserved to have been
celebrated by a more copious hiflorian than Cornelius
Nepos. It is now time to resume the affairs of Greece.

We have already mentioned, that Thymbron was
dispatched by the Lacedemonians into lonia, to protect
the cities of that country from the resentment of Tif-
faphernes. But Thymbron being Ioon recalled, on ac-
count of some mifunderflanding, Dercillidas was sent
thither in his place; who taking the command of the
I army at Ephesus, marched into the province of Pharna-
bazus, where the greater part of the cities of .Atolia
opened their gates to him. He then concluded a truce
with Persia.

The histories of that time are full of the praises of the
prudence and heroism displayed by a lady of the name
of Mania, the widow of Zenis, who had governed EA-
tolia as deputy under Pharnabazus, to whom he ren-
dered signal services. Having loft her husband, Mania
waited on the satrap, and begged, with the greatest shew
of resolution, that he would intruf her with the power
enjoyed by her husband, promifng to serve him with
the fame zeal and fidelity. Her desire was granted; and
flie fulfilled her engagements most effe&ually; acting
on all occasions, with consummate prudence and refolu-
tion. She not only defended the places committed to
her charge, but conquered others; and not content with
making punCtual payment of the cuflomary tribute to
Pharnabazus, sent him magnificent presents besides.
She commanded her troops in person, and maintained
the most firia discipline in her army. By there means
she was of the greatest service to Pharnabazus, who on

that

that account held her in the highest esteem. This he.
roine perished by the daflardly treachery of her fon-in.
law Midias. That villain, fRung with the reproaches
thrown out against him for suffering a woman to com-
mand in his place, privately gained admittance into her
apartment, and murdered both her and her son. But
he did not long enjoy the fruits of his cruelty; for the
cities of ]Etolia were soon after subdued by Dercillidas,
and Midias falling into the hands of the conqueror, was
stripped of the wealth and power which he had so un.
justly usurped.

In the following campaign Dercillidas marched into

the Chersonese, and bellowed 4much pains on shutting
up the Isthmus, a neck of land about three miles broad,
For that purpose he employed all his soldiers in building
a strong wall, which secured the neighbouring cities
from the sudden incursions of the barbarians The La-
cedemonians, regarding themselves now as the protec.
tors and sovereigns of Greece, industriously laid hold of
every opportunity of displaying their superior power and
influence Taaking umbrage at the Eleans for entering
into an alliance with the Athenians and Argives, they
commanded them to relinquish the authority they had
assumed over certain towns originally independent; and
on their refuting to comply with this requisition, Agis
marched against them, with an intention of laying waste
their territory. The Eleans, apprehensive of his ma.
king himself master of their city, agreed to the condi-
tions prescribed.

In the mean time the famous Conon, who since the

engagement at _Egos Potamos had lived a voluntary ex-
ile in the island of Cyprus, in the hopes of restoring the
glory of his native country, which he was continually
meditating, determined at last to apply to the Persian
power for that purpose; and accordingly imparted his
design to Artaxerxes by letter. That monarch imme-
diately ordered 500 talents to be furnished to Conon for

fit.

fitting out a fleet, of which he at the fame time appoint-
ed him commander.

About this time 'iffaphernes and Pharnabazus, in
spite of the secret jealousy and hatred with which they
were animated against each other, united their forces
againit Dercillidas, and were on the point of giving him
a total defeat in Caria, when Tiffaphernes, who flood
in the greatest awe of the Greeks, proposed terms of
accommodation.

AT Sparta, upon the death of king Agis, Agefilaus
laid claim to the royal dignity, in preference to Leoty-
chides, the son of Agis's queen, whom he affirmed not
to have been begotten by Agis ; and who, notwithlland-
ing the dying acknowledgment of him by that king,
was generally reputed a bastard. On this account, A-
gefilaus, supported by Lysander, and other principal
Spartans, found little difficulty in obtaining himself to
be declared king, in preference to Leotychides.

Agefilaus, educated in all the ftridnefs of the Spar-
tan discipline, where he had learned obedience before
he came to exercise command, was by that means tem-
perate, mild, and popular, and soon acquired the as-
section of his countrymen. His diminutive fiature and
lameness were amply compensated by a fine face, ex-
traordinary vivacity, a bravery superior to all danger,
and singular knowledge in the art of war. Naturally
an enemy of flattery, he would not permit his picture to
be drawn; faying, that his exploits, if ever he should
perform any, would afford the bell and modl lasting
monuments to his memory. Being of a very complai-
sant and obliging disposition, even to his enemies, he
thereby obtained so high esteem and credit at Sparta,
that the Ephori thought it necessary to impose a fine up-
on him for having, as they said, acquired too great fa-
vour with his fellow-citizens: A sentence that bore a
Prong resemblance to the firange law of ostracism a-
"1og the Athenians. Though on becoming king he

succeeded

succeeded of course to the estate and effects of Agis,
Leotychides being declared a bastard, yet he shared
them all with him and his relations, who were very
poor; an action that rendered him still more highly
esteemed by the citizens. Never did a king possess such
absolute power at Sparta as Agefilaus possessed. This
was in a great measure the effef of the deference and
refpea paid by him to the Ephori, contrary to the cuf-
tom of his predecessors in the regal dignity; who, re-
garding the Ephori as their rivals in authority, took
every opportunity to treat them with difrefped.

The Lacedemonians hearing that the king of Persia

was equipping a fleet against them, ordered A-
396. gefilaus to carry the war into Asia; giving him

by way of assistance thirty Spartan officers, of

whom Lysander was one, together with an army of 2000
chosen Helots, and 6000 soldiers' furnirhed by their al-
lies. The fame of the retreat of the lo,ooo Greeks had
every where inspired a high opinion of the Grecian va-
lour, and gave the Greeks themselves additional con-
fidence in their own itrength. The Lacedemonians
therefore thought it incumbent upon them to deliver
their countrymen from their dependence on the barbarians.

Tiffaphernes not having completed his preparations

when he received information of the arrival of Agefi-
laus at Ephesus, had recourse to stratagem, and propo-
fed to Agefilaus, that if he would abifain from commit-
ting hostilities, the Persian monarch would permit all
the Greek cities in Asia to remain in the enjoyment of
their liberty. Agefilaus having agreed to this proposal,
a truce was concluded, and confirmed by the oaths of
both parties. But the satrap nevertheless proceeded
with his warlike preparations.

Agefilaus in the interval made.a tour through the

principal cities, with a view to redress grievances, and
so put the government on a proper footing. But he was
so piqued at the court every where paid to Lysander, as

the

the person to.whom the ruling men supposed themselves
chiefly to depend, that he could not help expressing his
displeasure on that head to Lysander; who, naturally
vain, and accustomed of a long while to receive univer-
fal refpet, paid little regard to the complaints of his
king. Agefilaus, provoked at his insolent behaviour,
affeaed to employ him in the lealt honourable pieces
of business. Lysander thereby becoming sensible, that
he had at last met with a man capable of humbling him,
contrived a pretence for returning to Sparta.

Full of resentment againit Agefilaus, he formed a
plan of opening a passage for himself to the throne. As
only two branches of the posterity of Hercules in Spar-
ta were underflood to have right to the regal dignity,
and as he himself was likewise believed to derive his de-
scent from the Herculean flock, he thought it would
be no difficult matter to prevail with the Spartans to
extend the exclusive right supposed to reside in the two
former branches to all the other descendents of Her-
cules; flattering himself, that if he were able to accom-
plilh that, no person would presume to compete with
himfeif for the crown. He had been conflantly medi-
tating this scheme since he had first arrived at the height
of his exorbitant power, which indeed was little infe-
rior to that of royalty itself, and he had put in pracice
several contrivances to procure from the Delphic priefi-
ess a declaration corresponding to his views. But his
whole plot for that purpose was frustrated, juft-as it was
on the point of being executed. For Silenus, the young
man, who was suddenly to appear and to announce him-
self to be the son of Apollo, was seized with fear, and
ran away. It was not discovered till after the death of
Lyfznder that he had been the author of this trick.

Tiffaphernes having at lalf assembled all his forces,
sent an insolent mefiige to Agefilaus, commanding him
to depart from Asia. The Spartan, incensed at the
perfidy of the satrap, made a feint of leading his army

towards

towards Caria. Tiflaphernes followed him. But Age.
filaus making a sudden turn, marched direcly into
Phrygia, took several cities, and acquired immense
plunder. After dividing the plunder among his officers
and soldiers, he retired to Ephesus for the winter; du-
ring which he obliged his men to pratife various ex.
ercifes, both to preserve them from disease, and to in-
ure them to the labours of war ; and, to promote emu-
lation, he distributed prizes among the most dexterous
and successful.

When ready to take the field, he propagated a report

of his intending to fall upon Lydia. Tiffaphernes be-
lieving this to be a stratagem, and that his real deftina-
tion.was against Caria, advanced towards that province.
But Agefilaus was as good as his word, and really march-
ed towards Lydia; into which he penetrated as far as
Sardis. where Tifiaphernes commonly resided and kept
his treasures. Thither the Sttrap hastened With his ca-
valry to oppose him. But Agefilaus knowing that his
infantry was left behind, gave him battle, put the bar-
barians to flight at the first onset, made a great flaugh-
ter, and plundered their camp.

This viaory of Agefilaus cost Tiffaphernes his life.

He was on that account accused to Artaxerxes of trea-
son; and Tithrauflus was dispatched to seize him. Ti-
thrauftus having taken the proper measures for execu-
ting his commiflion, surprised Tiffaphernes while ba.
thing, cut off his head and sent it to the king. After
this Tithraultus made Agefilaus many magnificent pre-
sents in the name of his master, accompanied with pro-
pofals of peace; by which the Persian monarch promi-
fed to grant entire liberty to the Greek cities of Asia,
on condition of Agefilaus returning home. Agefilaus,
however, refused to come to any final resolution without
the approbation of the Ephori. But till that fliould ar-
rive, he, in complaisance to Tithrauflus, who had de-
livered the Greeks from such an inveterate enemy zs

Tiffaphernes,

Tiffaphernes, agreed to lead his army into Phrygia, on
receiving thirty talents to defray the expences of his
journey thither.

Agefilaus soon after received orders from Sparta, to
take the supreme command of their fleet as well as of
their army ; a charge never before intrusted with any
one man. Agefiluas immediately issued orders to the
inhabitants of the islands to furniih him with ten ships,
of which he gave the immediate commarnd to Pifunder
his father-in-law, an ambitious man, much inferior in
parts to Conon, and by no means fit for so high a charge.
.--lhus Agefilaus committed a fault too common a-
mong men in power, who often sacrifice the good of
their country to the aggrandizement of their private
families and connections.

Agefilaus having marched into Phrygia, where Phar-
nabazus commanded, levied heavy contributions, and
by that means got possession of vait wealth. Phurna-
bazus feeing his province on the point of being entirely
ruined, desired to come to an agreement with Agefilaus,
and for that purpose proposed a conference. This in-
terview afforded a striking contrast between the luxuri-
ous pomp of Persia and the modest simplicity of Sparta.
The satrap behaved to Agefilaus in the nmof refpedtful
manner, and complained of the devastation committed
in his country in such gentle and pathetic terms, that
Agefilaus was moved by his complaints, and pro:mised
to leave his province.

While Agefilaus thus spread terror through the pro-
vinces of Asia, the fame of his bravery and moderation
attraEted universal admiration. It was a very singular
scene to fee a man of a despicable figure, and poorly
attended, addressed in the mofl humble terms by the
lieutenants of the great King, and dictating his pleasure
to them with a very laconic and absolute tone.-The
neighbouring fiates, perceiving the admirable effcts of
the wife regulations eltablifled by Agefilaus in the

other

other cities, vied with one another to procure his pa-
tronage; and his army increased so salt, that all Aria
seemed desirous to put itself under his command. Age-
filaus in the mean time resolved to attack the Persian
monarch in the heart of his dominions, that he might
mzake him feel the Grecian power even on his throne,
and disable him from giving Q3reece any disturbance for
the future.

Artaserxes, alarmed at the progress of Agefi-
395. lans, finding all his efforts to oblige him to leave

Asia ineffec'u;il. resolved to create a diversion

to the Lacedemonian arms, by promoting againit them
a confederacy among the other itates of Greece, whom
he knew, on the most authentic information, to be ex-
tremely uneasy and impatient under their fubje&ion to
Sparta. Timocrates was charged with the execution of
this scheme. To accelerate its fucccfs, fifty talents of
money were delivered to him, with which he was to
endeavour to bribe the leading men in each city, that they
might instigate their countrymen to take arms against
the Lacedeinonians; who indeed, by their overbearing
behaviour, had but too well disposed the other flates,
whom they treated more like subjeCts than equals, to
embrace such a measure. Timocrates, therefore, met
with all the fucccfs in his negociations that he could have
desired; and the Thebans were the firlt who resolved to
a2fert their independency.

The Athenians very soon joined the Thebans. Over-

looking allformer fubjecs of displeasure received by them
from that state, they embraced this opportunity of re
covering from their long humiliation, and, by the per-
suasion of Thrafybulus, granted the assistance demanded.
On the other hand. Conon, who was in high favour at
the Persian court, used all his influence to obtain an ar-
mament for the relief of his countrymen, and was ex-
tremely aaive in promoting the confederacy against

Sparta.

Sparta. An opportunity of coming to an open rupture
soon presented itself, A dispute having ariten between
the Phocians and Locrians, about the property of a
finall piece of ground, the Spartans, already displeased
with the Locrians, resolved to support the Phocians;
and for that purpose, ordered Pausanias to march and
join Lysander, who was then in Bceotia with a few
troops. But the Thebans, to prevent this junction,
made a brave attack upon the troops under Lysander,
obtained a complete vi&ory, and killed Lysander him-
self in the battle.

Thus fell that renowned Greek, who raised his native
city Sparta to a degree of power she had never known
before, and entirely ruined that of Athens. It was
matter of general surprise, that he left no wealth behind
him, confidering the vast influence he had enjoyed, and
the many opportunities of amafing riches that had been
in his power. This contempt of wealth reflected honour
on his memory, and plainly sowed, that ambition was
his sole motive of action. The exce's of this paflion,
however, obscured the splendour of his extraordinary
parts; for he must be allowed to have been an intrepid
and skilful commander, a consummate politician, and
of very artful address, in managing the different tem.
pers of men. He had, by these means, rendered him-
ielfas absolute in Sparta as in the cities of Asia. To
his partizans and favourites his generosity was bound-
less, and his partiality excessive. He not only support-
ed, but even co-operated with them in all their private
ichelnes, however base, unwarrantable, or unjust; em-
ploying in their behalf every species of villainy, and
infliting without remorse the most barbarous cruelties.
lo his enemies his resentment was implacable, never
terminating but with their deaths. Fraud and cruelty
formed the mons striking features in his charater. Vain,
even to insolence, he desired to at on all occasions
without controul, Accordingly, we have seen him en-

1 - deavouring,

deavouring, to the utmost of his power, to eclipse even
his king and matter Agefilaus. We have likewise seen
him discover the meanetl jealousy to Callicratidas, whom,
by the basest of artifices, he endeavoured to throw into
an embarrassment that might fully his glory.--He was
the worst enemy that ever Athens felt; and by eftablifli-
ing there the thirty tyrants, he was to her what Sylla
after him was to Rome.-His tyranny and oppression
rendered Sparta odious to her neighbours.

When Pausanias returned to Sparta, he was accused

of mifcondua in the late expedition; and, though one
of the two Spartan kings, was condemned to susser
death. But he avoided the cruelty of his countrymen
by flight.

Let us now look after Agefilaus. In the midst of his

preparations for leading his army into Persia, he recei-
ved a letter from the Ephori, commanding him. to re-
turn to Laconia; for, by this time, Greece was all in
arms. Agefilaus immediately wrote them an account of
his former operations, and informed them of the favour-
able disposition of his affairs for attacking the king of
Persia; but assured them, that since they thought his
presence at home necessary, he was resolved to obey
them without delay.

Hiltorians have, with great justice, applauded the re-

fpeA shown, on this occasion, by Agefilaus to the ma-
giftrates of his country ; in obedience to whom, he
sopt short in the midst of his successful exploits, which,
in all probability, must have eventually subverted the
Persian empire. By this behaviour, he undoubtedly
discovered a very uncommon greatness of foul, and jus-
tified the faying of Pausanias, of whom we have been
just speaking, " That at Sparta the laws governed the
" men, and not the men the laws."-What a lesson for
the members of some modern governments !

Before Agefilaus reached Sparta, his countrymen, at-
tacked from every quarter, had several very severe

hlocks

fiocks to sustain. The Afhenians marched against
them, followed by the Bceotians, Corinthians, and The-
bans, forming altogether an army of 20,000 men.
The Spartans with an army of about 14,0c0 men, of
whom the greater part was furnifled by their allies,
met the enemy near Lycion. The engagement was
long and obflinate. But the Spartan valour prevailed
at lafr, and snatched the viEtory from the Athenians,
who, though deserted by their allies, kept their ground
to the last.

While affairs were thus proceeding at land,

an important engagement happened at sea. Co- 394.
non, with a fleet of loo ships furnilhed him by
Artaxerxes, setting fail towards the Chersonese with an
intention to attack the Lacedemonian fleet, confiffing of
120 Ihips, fell in with the latter near Cnidos, a city of
Caria in Asia Minor. The Lacedemonians, who were
commanded by Pifander, gained some advantages at
first. But victory soon changed fides. The Lacede-
monians were beaten and put to flight; and Pifander,
after exerting the utmost valour, fell at last fighting
bravely. Conon remained victorious, and took fifty of
the Lacedemonian galleys. From that day forwards,
the naval power of the Lacedemonians was continually
on the decline.

It is remarked, that the ruin of the two dtaies'of Athens
and Sparta was alternately occasioned by their haughity
behaviour during their prosperity; the Lacedemoniuns
having neglected to profit both by former experience,
and by the firiking example lately set before their eyes
by the Athenians.

Jult as Agefilaus was on the point of arriving

at Sparta, he received a mefilge from the Ephori, 394.
intreating him to march, with all haste, into
3Beotia, where the army of the Lacedemonians and Or-
choinenians on one fide, and that of the Thebans and
Argives on the other, lay in fight of each other in the

U 2 plains

plains of Cheronea.-Agefilaus arrived in time enough
to take the command of the Lacedemonians, just as
they were on the point of engaging. Xenophon, who
was present at this battle, fays, that of all the battles
which had till now happened in his time, this was fought
with the most desperate fury.

The Thebans were thrown into disorder, and Agefil

laus attempted to cut off their retreat. But they imme-
diately drew up their foot in a square column, the front
of which baffled all the efforts of the Lacedemonians to
break them. The engagement was very bloody.-A.
gefilaus exerted prodigies of valour; received several
wounds; and mufl certainly have been either killed or
taken, had he not been rescued by fifty young Spartans,
who that day fought by his fide. The Lacedemonians,
at length, finding it impossible to break the Thebans,
opened their rariks to let them pass, and then attacked
them in the rear. But the latter, proud of having hi-
therto repulsed the enemy, retreated very leisurely, and
in good order, fighting all the while.-Agefilaus, though
wounded, refused to retire from the field of battle,
till he had seen the dead carried off on their shields.
Next day, he ere&ed a trophy as a monument of his
victory.

At Sparta he was received with transports of joy. Un-

tainted with the luxury and pomp of the country whence
he was just returned, he retained his former simplicity
both in his person and family; preferred the temperate
austere life of the Spartans to the delicate luxurious
manners of the Barbarians; and, inltead of the haughti-
ness and presumption of a viaorious commander, dif-
played the most humble modesty of a private citizen.

On hearing the power of the Persian monarch highly

extolled, and that prince himself honoured with the title
of Great King; " in what refpe& (said Agefilaus) is he
"c greater than I, if he be not more virtuous ?"--He
set a higher value on the exercises that Itrengthen the

body,

body, and inure it to labour and fatigue, than on the
horse and chariot races at the Olympic games, which,
he said, were not a proof of bravery, but of riches.-
Having found, among the papers of Lysander, the de-
tail of his plot against the two Spartan kings, he resolved
to lay it before the citizens. But he was dissuaded from
this ftep by a prudent man of his acquaintance, who
advised him to let Lysander rftt in his grave, and to
bury along with him a very artful discourse found by
Agefilaus, which Lysander was to have addrefled to the
Spartans.

Agefilaus soon after marched away with his land-

forces, and laid siege to Corinth by land, while his
brother Teleutius blocked it up by sea.

In the mean time, Conon, after his vitory at Cnidos,
obtained of Pharnabazus fifty talents, to restore Pyreus
to its former situation. He was likewise continued in
the command of the fleet. After ravaging the coasts of
Laconia, he returned to Athens, and was there received
with the highest marks of joy. The consciousness of
being the restorer of the power of his country, and of
having rebuilt the walls of his native city, muff un-
doubtedly have afforded him the most sincere pleasure.
-It is remarkable, that the city of Athens should be in
a manner rebuilt at the expence of the fame Persians
who had formerly reduced it to aflies.

Conon, after having restored Athens to its former

situation, aind by that means enabled it to repel the at-
tacks of it; enemies, sacrificed a hecatomb to the gods.

The grief and rage of the Lacedenonians, at feeing
their ancient rival raised, as it were, out of her ruins,
and restored to a condition of being still formidable to
them, are inexpressible. They foresaw, that their so-
vereignty over the reft of Greece was on the brink of an-
nihilation. They therefore immediately resolved to vent
their resentment upon Conon the chief cause of this re-
volution; and, for that purpose, dispatched Antalcides

U 3 te

to Teribazus, governor of Sardis, with proposals of
peace with the Persian monarch. The Athenians sent
deputies on their part likewise, to prevent the success of
the Lacedemonian negociations. But their endeavours
were unsuccessful, and Conon was the victim of the in-
finuations instilled into the Persian satrap by Antalcides,
who accused him of having applied the money of the
king to the re-establishment of Athens; and of having
formed a plan of detaching MEtolia and lonia from their
dependence on Persia. The better to incline Artaxer-
xes to peace, the Spartans were mean spirited enough,
once more to subjet to his power all the Greek cities
in Asia, for whose liberty Agefilaus had so gloriously
fought.

We are not told by what means Teribazus was in-

duced to believe the accusations of Antalcides against
Conon. It is certain, however, that he caused that
iiluitrious Athenian to be apprehended, and that he
furnilced the Lacedemonians with considerable fums of
money. But he declined to conclude the peace without
the approbation of his master.

-Historians are not agreed about the fate of Conon.

Some of them allege, that he was conducted to Susa,
and there beheaded by order of the Pertian monarch.
'They further fay, that he entertained dangerous designs
against the Persian power, after having received so great
nffiftance from it; that he had formed a scheme of ma-
king himself mailer of some of their cities; and, under
the pretence of relieving them from the tyranny of
Sparta, intended to fubjecl them to the power of Athens.
Xenophon's silence about the fate of Conon, leaves
room to fufpeCi, that he may have escaped from his con-
fInement. It is certain, however, that we hear no more
of that celebrated commander, who had become the
terror of Spa;ita, and had so effectually humbled their
pride, tlat to acconplifhl his defirucion they descendcd

to

to the meanest submissions, and to a most disgraceful
peace.

When the other tfates of Greece were informed of

the peace concluded between the Lacedemonians and
the Persian monarch, they were seized with the highest
indignation; and, in the firlf emotions of their palion,
resolved to rejeEt it. But, on cooler reflection, they
perceived, that their domestic diflentions had disabled
them from maintaining a war with the Persians; and
that, therefore, it was more prudent to acquiesce in the
treaty. In the mean time, mutual hostilities were car-
ried on between the Spartans and Athenians; and a
dreadful mafiacre happened at Corinth, by the initiga-
tion of the Spartans, who, taking advantage of the di-
visions prevailing in that city, contrived to get a body
of troops introduced into it ; and having spirited up the
inhabitants to murder one another, their troops, in the
tumult, cut to pieces a great number of the Argives
and Boeotians.

At Ihodes, a dissension arose, in which the Athe-

nians were consequentially interefled. One half of the
inhabitants having declared for democracy, and the
other for aristocracy ; the latter applied for support to
the Lacedemonians, who accordingly sent them Teleu-
tius with twenty ihips. By this affiflance, ariltocracy
was eflablifled. The Athenians, to whom the fove-
reignty of the fland was underflood to belong, in like
manner sent thither Thrafybulus; who having, in his
wvay, levied some tribute in the island of Afpendos, the
natives, provoked by the harsh treatment of the soldiers,
joined in an insurrection, and murdered Thrafybulus in
his tent. Thus perilhed that illufirious Athenian,
whose zeal and bravery had restored his country to
liberty and whose magnanimous behaviour, at that
critical period, intitles him to a place among the greatell
men of these times.

'.he Athenians, at this time, entertained the moR:

TJ 4 sanguine

sanguine expetations from the extraordinary merit of
Iphicrates, who, at twenty years of age, appeared to be
a perfec master in the art of war.-The troops left by
Agefilaus at Lefchea, having been dispersed by that
commander, the Spartans found it expedient to make
peace with the Bceotians.

Iphicrates being likewise sent to keep in obedience

the towns. reduced by Thrafybulus in his expedition to
Rhodes, which were all situated along the coafis of the
Hellespont, and had, on occasion of the late misfortunes
of the republic, embraced the party of Sparta, laid an
ambush for the Sparta Anaxibias, and defeated him.

The Eginetae, about the fame time, made an incur-

sion into Attica, at the instigation of the Spartans who
supported them. But they were opposed by Chabrias,
and totally routed. The Spartans, however, taking ad-
vantage of the absence of that commander from Athens,
sent Teleutis against Pyreus, who entered it by fur-
prise in the night, took several {hips, destroyed some
others,' and created a great deal of confusion and terror
among the inhabitants of Athens.

The Athenians and Spartans, weary of exert-
387. ing their utmost efforts to accomplish their mu-

tual deftruEion, were at length constrained to

make peace with each other, and with Persia; which,
by their jealousies and dissensions, was now become the
umpire of Greece. The terms of this peace, as dica-
ted by the Persian satrap, Teribazus, governor of Sar-
dis, upon the suggestion, indeed, of the Lacedemo-
alians, were to this effect: T'hat all the Greek cities in
nfia flould be again fuhjeEted to the Persian govern-
ment ; that the Athenians lould retain their jurifdic-
tion over Lemnos ; and that the reft of Greece should
be free.

Such was the peace of Antalcides, so called from the

Lacedemonian of that name, who was the principal au-
thor cos it, by commiiiion from the state of Sparta, in-

t.igatdc.

Rtigated thereto by their jealousy of the rising power of
Athens. In obeying the injunctions of his constituents
on this occasion, Antalcides was more than ordinarily
zealous, from his personal animosity against Agefilaus,
who was totally averse to that infamous negociation, by
which the liberty and independency of the Greek cities
of Asia, in whose defence he had lately performed such
glorious exploits, were so shamefully sacrificed.

How disgraceful to the Greeks the contrast between
this peace, by which Persia deprived them at once of
their power in Asia Minor, and obliged them to aban-
don their countrymen there established, and that made
sixty years before with Artaxerxes Longimanus, by the
Athenian 'Cimon ! Greece, then victorious, not only vin-
dicated its own liberty, but gave law to the Persians.
The cause of the difference, however, is fufficientlv
apparent. It arose from the mutual quarrels of the states
of Greece, of which the Persian monarchs skilfully
availed themfelves.-Befides, the Greeks were no longer
afuated by their former spirit of independency. Their
ancestors uniformly despised the gold, and rejeEted the
bribes of the Persians. Now they were no longer
proof against these temptations, but basely proftituted
themselves to the vilest corruption.-lnftead of uniting
againfi the common enemy, they foolishly valued them-
selves on their superiority over each other, and ex-
hauffed their force in intestine dissensions. The con-
sequence was, their being obliged to make use of the
meanest flattery to the Kings of Persia, in order to obtain
from them supplies of troops and money.

C H A P.

# CHAP. II. Affairs of Greece, from the peace of Antalcides, to the conclusion of the war of the Allies.

C H A P. II.
ffgairs of Greece, from the peace of 4ntalcides, to the con.

clificn of the war of the Allies.

IHE differences among the Rates of Greece were

by no means extinguiflled by this peace of Antalcides.
We shall still fee hostilities carried on, not very in.
tere(ting indeed in themselves, but of much importance
in their consequences.

The peace of Antalcides having greatly increased the

power of the Lacedemonians the authors of it, had
provoked against them all the other fRates of Greece.
For by that peace the Thebans were obliged to with-
draw the garrisons they held in the towns of Bceotia, as
were the Corinthians theirs from Argos. This was an
effet of one maxim of the ancient Spartan policy that
itill prevailed in full vigour, namely, to keep down by
every means the power of fucl states as were at the time
unable to make refitance.

From the fame motive, upon complaints being made

to them by deputies from the towns of Acanthus and
Apollonia, of the too great incrcafe of the power of
Olynthus, they declared war against the Olynthians, and
sent an army against that city, under the command of
two brothers, Endamidas and Phebidas. The firit made
himself maiter of the town of Potidea, then in alliance
with the Olynthians. The other ,marched to Thebes;
where finding the inhabitants divided into two factions,
the one contending for oligarchy; and the other for de-
mocracy, he took advantage of their divisions, and pre-
vailed on Leontidas, the head of the former, which fa-
voured Sparta, to put hin in pofleflion of the citadel.
This daring exploit excited an universal hatred againll
the Lacedemonians, who, with a view of softening

matters,

inatters, deposed and laid a fine upon Phebidas. But,
by a contradiction, dishonourable to the Spartan justice,
they kept poiTeffion of the citadel; thus punishing the
criminal, but approving of the crime.

About the fame time Leontidas, one of the Theban

generals, arrested and imprisoned in the citadel Ifine-
nius, another of their generals, who had declared for
the popular government. The reft of that faction, to
the number of more than four hundred men, among
whom was the famous Pelopidas, alarmed at this vio-
lence, fled to Athens. But Epaminondas living then in
a private station, entirely employed in the fludy of phi-
lofophy, remained at Thebes. The enterprise of Phe-
bidas had already occasioned loud complaints; but the
Spartans carried their injustice to a greater length flill,
by fending commiflioners to Thebes, who condemned
Ifmenius to death. The Spartan Senate must undoubtedly
have been greatly degenerated, before it could attempt
such open ads of violence and injustice.

The following year the Olynthians cut in pieces a
part of the Spartan army, and among the reft their ge-
neral Telentius. But this disaster served only to exa-
perate the Spartans still more, who redoubled their es-
forts to reduce the city of Olynthus, which its inhabi.
tants defended till reduced to the last extremities by fa-
mine. The prosperity of Sparta had never arrived at
such a pitch before; but they held in fubjeltion the
mnot: powerful cities of Greece, and punilhed severely
those who attempted to flake off their yoke. The Athe-
nians were too cautious to oppose them. But this pro-
fperity being founded on injuflice, could be but of short
duration. Two illuitrious citizens of Thebes were de-
ftined to interrupt its course.

Pelopidas, the first of these, was very rich. But
though a youngmian, he applied his wealth to the no,
blelt of purpoles, that of aflilting persons of worth op-
pressed by want; and inflead of following the pleafu-

rable

C H A P. II.
4ffairs of Greece, from the peace of Antalcides, to the con-

clfJicn of the war of the Allies.

Ti HE differences among the fates of Greece were
by no means extinguished by this peace of Antalcides.
We lhall frill fee hoffilities carried on, not very in-
terelting indeed in themselves, but of much importance
in their consequences.

The peace of Antalcides having greatly increased the

power of the Lacedemonians the authors of it, had
provoked against them all the other Rates of Greece.
For by that peace the Thebans were obliged to with-
draw the garrisons they held in the towns of Bceotia, as
were the Corinthians theirs from Argos. This was an
effet of one maxim of the ancient Spartan policy that
still prevailed in full vigour, namely, to keep down by
every means the power of such fiates as were at the time
unable to make refiltance.

From the fame motive, upon complaints being made

to them by deputies from the towns of Acanthus and
Apollonia, of the too great incrcafe of the power of
Olynthus, they declared war against the Olynthians, and
sent an army against that city, under the command of
two brothers, Endamidas and Phebidas. The first made
hiinfelf malter of the town of Potidea, then in alliance
with the Olynthians. The other marched to Thebes;
where finding the inhabitants divided into two facions,
the one contending for oligarchy; and the other for de-
mocracy, he took advantage of their divisions, and pre-
vailed on Leontidas, the head of the former, which fa-
voured Spartas to put him in possession of the citadel.
This daring exploit excited an universal hatred againIt
the Lacedemonians, who, with a view of softening

matters,

matters, deposed and laid a fine upon Phebidas. But,
by a contradiction, diflonourable to the Spartan julfice,
they kept polEffion of the citadel; thus punillhiig the
criminal, but approving of the crime.

About the fame time Leontidas, one of the Theban

generals, arrested and imprisoned in the citadel Ifme-
nius, another of their generals, who had declared for
the popular government. The reft of that faction, to
the number of more than four hundred men, among
whom was the famous Pelopidas, alarmed at this vio-
lence, fled to Athens. But Epaminondas living then in
a private station, entirely employed in the fludy of phi-
lofophy, remained at Thebes. The enterprise of Phe-
bidas had already occasioned loud complaints; but the
Spartans carried their injustice to a greater length still
by fending commifioners to Thebes, who condemned
Ifienius to death. The Spartan Senate must undoubtedly
have been greatly degenerated, before it could attempt
such open acs of violence and injustice.

The following year the Olynthians cut in pieces a
part of the Spartan army, and among the reft their ge-
neral Telentius. But this disaster served only to exaf-
perate the Spartans still more, who redoubled their es-
forts to reduce the city of Olynthus, which its inhabi.
tants defended till reduced to the lait extremities by fa-
mine. The prosperity of Sparta had never arrived at
such a pitch before; but they held in subjection the
most powerful cities of Greece, and punilhed severely
those who attempted to'flake off their yoke. The Athe-
nians were too cautious to oppose them. But this pro-
fperity being founded on injustice, could be but of short
duration. Two illufirious citizens of Thebes were de-
itined to interrupt its course.

Pelopidas, the first of these, was very ricks. But
though a young-inan, he applied his wealth to the no-
blelt of purposes, that of aflilting persons of worth op-
prfefed by want; and inflead of following the pleaifu

rable

rable diflipated life, commonly pursued by young men
of fortune, placed his whole delight in bodily exercises
and the use of arms. The other, Epaminondas, was, on
the contrary, poor. But he enjoyed such perfec con-
tentment in his situation, that he never would accept of
the pecuniary assistance repeatedly offered him by his
friend Pelopidas. He was besides endued with the
most valuable qualifications; being a man of an ex-
cellent underfianding, and of indefatigable activity; a
brave and skilful commander; extremely addicted to
the study of philosophy ; and entertaining an utter ab-
horrence to every kind offalfehood, in so much that he
was never guilty of an untruth even in jell.

But the most extraordinary circumitance in the cha-

raaers ofthofe two great men, was the intimate friend-
ship that, in spite of their very different situations in
point of fortune, and their as different taftes of pleasure,
subsisted between them, without ever being affected by
the fialleft spark of jealousy. This was owing to their
connection being founded on virtue, untindured with
ambition or felf-intereft. The sole aim of both was the
glory and haippinefs of their country.

The Lacedemonians in the mean time were using their

power frill more and more presumptuously. They gave
the Athenians a very sensible proof of their domineering
spirit, by commanding them to withdraw their protec-
tion from the four hundred Thebans, who, upon being
banilhed by a public decree of their native country, had
taken refuge at Athens. The Athenians, however, had
too much humanity to adopt so violent and feyere a mea-
sure against so great a number of Theban citizens;
more especially as these very men had contributed the
most to the restoration of the popular government, of
which the Athenians were at that time enjoying the
advantages. Pelopidas, full of courage, and solely in-
tent on the glory of his country, exhorted his fellow-
sufferers in baniihment to take up arms for aflerting the

liberty

liberty of their native country; an object to which every
danger or other personal consideration ought to submit.
He found all their dispositions consonant to his own. E-
paminondas, on his part, in like manner animated the
Theban youth to throw off the Spartan yoke. The ba-
nified Thebans having accordingly concerted the plan
of their enterprise, communicated it to their friends at
Thebes. Twelve of them, with Pelopidas at their head,
dressed like hunters, entered the city at night, and met
by appointment in the house of Charon, one of the chief
men in Thebes. Philidas, secretary to the principal ma-
giftrates, being in the plot, had that day invited them,
with a view to prevent their getting notice of what was
going on, to a grand entertainment. But in the height
of their festivity a meflenger arrived from Athens, bring-
ing a packet containing a circumifantial account of the
conspiracy. Archias, who was already pretty far ad-
vanced in his cups, on receiving the packet, cried out
laughing, " Serious affairs for to-morrow ;" and, putting
it unopened under his pillow, continued the repast.

The conspirators, in the mean time, having divided

themselves into two parties, one led on by Pelopidas,
directed its course to the house of Leontides ;who being
awakened by the noise, bravely opposes the conspirators,
sword in hand, and wounds ieveral of them, but un-
able to futfain so unequal a combat, is at last slain. The
other party marches against Archias, rushes armed into
the hall where the magiitrates were feasting, and easily
overcomes them, already overpowered with wine. They
next break open the prisons, proclaim liberty, seize
what weapons they can find, and arm all they meet.
Epaminondas joins them at the head of a numerous
band of youth, and incites them to proceed with all
possible diligence. In these circumstances the other in-
habitants, ignorant of what is passing, are seized with
the utmost consternation. The Lacedemonian garrison,
confiting of 1500 men, unacquainted with the small

number

number of the conspirators, shut themselves up in the
citadel, and fend to demand succours from Sparta.

Next day Epaminondas and Pelopidas, at the head of

the conspirators, assemble the people, inform them of
.what had happened, and exhort them to itand up for
the liberty of their country. The assembly proclaims
them the restorers of their freedom, and loads them
with universal applause.

The reft of the banished Thebans quickly arrive, and

are soon followed by 500ooo foot and 500 horse, sent by
the Athenians under the conduct of Demophon. Several
bodies of troops from the towns of Boeotia likewise come
to their assistance; so that all their forces united, amount-
ed to 12,000 men. 'hey immediately lay siege to the
citadel; and the garrison, being obliged for want of pro.
visions to capitulate, is permitted to march away. A
reinforcement that had been dispatched from Sparta
arrived too late; and the Spartans, in resentment, put
to death the two officers who had capitulated.

This exploit, one of the most remarkable perhaps

that ever was executed by surprise, acquired immortal
glory to Pelopidas.

The Lacedemonians now meditated nothing but re.

venge against Pelopidas and the 'lhebans; for the exe.
cution of which, their king, Cleombrotus, led an army
into Boeotia. But the operations of the campaign were
confined to some ravages of the country. The Athe-
nians, in the mean time, dreading the resentment of
the Spartans, renounced the league they had made
with the Thebans, and persecuted either by imprison-
ment or banishment such of their citizens as favoured
their cause.

But Pelopidas contrived a tfratagem for producing a

quarrel between the Athenians and Spartans. Of cOn-
cert with Gorgidas, he prevailed on the Spartan Spho-
drias, the commander of a body of troops at Thelpia,
dellined to support the Bceotians who might incline to

revolt

revolt. against the Thebans, to seize Pireus. Sphodrias,
being an ambitious vain man, readily undertook the
enterprise, although the extreme injustice of it was ap-
parent. But not having properly concerted his mea-
fures, his intentions were discovered, and his design
miscarried. The Athenians complained loudly of this
attempt at Sparta ; but the son of Sphodrias employed
his interest so effecually with Agefilaus in his father's
favour, that he procured his acquittal. '1 he Athenians
were so provoked at this sentence, that they instantly re-
newed their alliance with the Thebans.

Much about the fame time several other cities revolt-
ed from the Spartans; who, to crown their misfor-
tunes, loft a great part of their army ini-the expedition
against Boeotia. The famous Athenian, Chabrias, who,
on account of his singular military Ikill, was confidered
as the only. commander fit to oppose Agefilaus, diitin-
guiied himself highly on that occasion. Having drawn
up his troops after a new method, he boldly offered
battle to the Spartan; who, though he had an army
of no fewer than t8,ooc men, was so struck with the
excellent order of that of Chabrias, that he durst not
venture a battle.

Chabrias gave as striking proofs of his conduc and
bravery at tea as he he had done at land. He defeated
Pollis, who intended to have intercepted some ships
bound to Athens with corn; and he conduEted the
fPips into Pireus. Having afterwards laid siege to
Naxus, he beat the Spartans, who came to relieve the
place, and dispersed their fleet. The Spartans loft
in this ation thirty-two. fiips, and the Athenians
eighteen. Chabrias, loaded with spoils, entered Pireus
in triumph.

The Athenians, encouraged by the success, equipped
a fleet offixty fail; of which they gave the command to
Timotheus, the son of the famous Conon, who per-

fetly

feely maintained the reputation of his father. After
laying waste Laconia, he made himself master of, Cor-
cyro, and defeated the Lacedemonian fleet, command.
ed by Mnafippus, who was killed in the engagement.
The Spartans begged affifance from Dionysius the ty.
rant of Syracuse to retake this place, and obtained from
him a reinforcement of ten galleys. They were never-
thelefs attacked by the Athenian fleet under Iphicrates,
who had succeeded Timotheus in the command, and
were all taken. Then the Spartans ordered Agefilaus
to march against the Thebans. But he performed no
decisive action, having only gained over them a few in-
considerable advantages. The war, however, proceeded
very warmly between those two states, every day pro.
ducing some new action, in which the Thebans, being
for the most part successful, thence acquired additional
courage. This was the obje& Pelopidas had in view;
who before he chore to hazard a general battle, desired
to accustom his fellow-citizens to fighting. Agefilaus
happening to be wounded in one of those fidrmifhes,
was rallied on the occasion by his friends, who told him,
that this was certainly the reward the Thebans intended
him for having taught them the art of war.

Pelopidas having fallen in with the enemy near Te-

gyra, attaked them without hesitation, though amount-
ing to thrice the number of his men. For he had the
fullest confidence in a small corps of infantry, which
consisted of no more than 300 men, and was called the
facredband, or troop of friends, being wholly composed
of the bravest and best disciplined soldiers, united by
so close a friendship, that every one of them was re-
solved to spend the lafl drop of his blood in defence of
his companion. The Theban horse began the attack.
The first ihock was very terrible; in the feccnd, the
Lacedemonian general fell. His men, disheartened by
his death, opened their ranks to let the Theban
horse pass. But Pelopidas instantly advancing with his

sacred

sacred band, completed their disorder, and made so
great a slaughter, that the survivors took to flight in the
utmost confusion. Pelopidas derived vaif glory from
this battle of Tegyra. Till then the Lacedemonians,
while superior in numbers, had never been beaten; but
now the Thebans deprived them of that honour.

While thus the dissentions of the Greeks continued

without intermission, Artaxerxes, King of Persia, being
at war with Egypt, had occasion for a reinforcement of
troops. To obtain these, he dispatched ambassadors in-
to Greece, to renew the peace of Antalcides, and to
endeavour, if possible, to get every separate city pla-
ced in a state of absolute independence. He acording-
ly procured commissioners to be appointed for this pur-
pose by the consent of them all, Thebes having agreed
to the measure with much relu dance. Artaserxes, in
the mean time, engaged in his service 20,o00 Greeks,
and demanded Iphicrates for their general. His expe-
dition, however, having been badly concerted, proved
unsuccessful.

Several cities of the Peloponnese, eager to enjoy the
liberty procured them by Artaxerxes's negociation, ex-
pelled the governors imposed upon them by Sparta;
who, having rendered themselves odious by their tyranny,
were treated with great severity. But at length the
Athenians, by the means of Iphicrates, succeeded in
appeasing those commotions.

At this time there was a profpecd of feeing universal
tranquillity restored in Greece. The Lacedemonians
had, in a great measure, renounced that superiority which
hley had so long alfected over the other states ; at least
they ceased to exercise it; and the Athenians having
no other objec in view than to restrain the exorbitant
pretensions of the Lacedemonians, applied themselves
to repair their losses. But this desirable prospect soon
vaniilhed; for the Thebans, become presumptuous by

sX their

their late fuccets, declared war against the inhabitants
of Platea; and having taken both that town and 'hes-
pia, entirely demolished the former. This daring ex-
ploit so provoked the Athenians, that they immediately
broke their alliance with them, and this rupture became
a fresh source of war.

It was at first proposed to terminate all differences by

negociation. But the Thebans, whose natural obRfina-
cy was increased by their late success, thinking them.
selves treated with an unbecoming affectation of fupe-
riority, returned a haughty answer to the proposals of
the Athenians, and refused to treat. Pelopidas was
not a little instrumental in promoting the ambitious
views of his countrymen: a work in which he was sup.
ported both by the council and arms of one of the
greatest men that Greece ever produced, namely, Epa-
minondas; whose merit, though then living in a private
Rtation, solely occupied with the study of philosophy,
was soon discovered by the Thebans, who, forcing him
from his obscurity, placed him at the head of their
army.

In these circumstances, Agefilaus having declared to

the Thebans, that if they had a mind to be compre-
hended in the treaty, they must previously restore to
liberty the towns of Boeotia. Epaminondas answered,
That with this they were ready to comply, provided the
Spartans would set them the example, whose preten-
sions to superiority over Laconia were no better founded
than those of his countrymen over Bcotia. Agefilaus,
provoked at this. answer, which plainly showed that the
Thebans affeced an equality with the Spartans, struck
their name out of the treaty, and concluded the peace
wxith the other states without them. This was equiva-
lent to a positive declaration of war.

Cleombrotus, accordingly, received orders from the

Ephori to march into Boeotia at the head of 10,000
foot and i ooo horse. That king flattered himself, that

the

the Thebans, deferred by their allies, were unable to
oppose him.' The Spartans at the fame time convened
the forces of their allies; who joined them more from
neceflity than inclination. The Thebans, on the other
hand, were somewhat uneasy on feeing themfelvcs ob-
liged to support the controversy by themselves alone;
their forces altogether amounting to but 6o00 men,
while their enemies had no fewer than 24 ooo. But to
supply the odds, Epaminondas and Pelopidas fought for
the Thebans. As soon as Cleombrotus arrived on the
frontiers of Boeotia, he summoned the Thebans to re-
build the cities of Platea and Thefpia, and to set the
other towns at liberty. Epaminondas made answer,
That the Thebans did not think thenfelves accountable
to any person for their conduct. After such an answer,
arms alone could decide the controversy.

The two armies having met in the plains of

Leudtra, Epaminondas immediately offered battle. 37r.
The view of an army so much superior in num-
bers as that of Cleombrorus, was sufficient to difcou-
rage the bravest soldiers; more especially as Archida-
mus, the son of Agefilaus, had lately reinforced it with
aconfiderable body of troops levied in Laconia. But
this great superiority of the enemy in point of numbers,
had no other effect upon the Theban army than to in-
spire them with the hopes of a victory so much the
more glorious in proportion as it was difficult. Epami-
nondas drew up his army in an order of battle altoge-
ther unknown before, of which the invention and con-
duct were entirely his own.

Cleombrotus had ranged his army in the form of the
old Grecian phalanx, having his horse distributed in
squadrons along the firfl line of the right wing, where
he himself commanded. Epaminondas hoped to con-
quer the Lacedemonians, by throwing them into difor-
der and contfernation, either by the death or capture of
their general. As therefore it was the left wing of the

X 2 Thebas.

Theban army which must attack the quarter where he
fought, Epaminondas posted there his heavy-armed foot
and the bravest of his men; and before his first line he
drew up the few horse he had, to make head against
those of the enemy. As he knew with what ardour the
Thebans made their first attack, he did not doubt that
they would break the Lacedemonians.

One difficulty only remained, but which, to a less

able general, might have proved unsurmountable, name-
ly, to prevent his troops from being surrounded when
they charged. For this purpose, Epaminondas ranged
his right wing, with which he intended only to make a
ihew of engaging, in such a manner as to have only fix
men deep, while each rank of his left, on which the
whole weight of the battle was to fall, was no less than
fifty deep. Then he suddenly extended his front so as
to flank Cleombrotus, hoping, by that means, to pro.
voke him to advance to secure his flank, and so to de-
tach himself from the main body of his army.

The battle was begun by the cavalry. But those of

the Lacedemonians were soon repulsed; and falling
back on the infantry, disordered the foremost ranks.
Cleombrotus, in the mean time, perceiving Epaminon-
das's apparent design to flank him, changed his order
of battle, intending, in like manner, to extend the front
of his right wing, with a view to surround Epaminon-
das. This movement decided the fate of the engage-
ment. Pelopidas, who at the head of the sacred band
covered Epaminondas's flank and attentively observed
every thing that paifed, perceiving the disorder occa.
sioned in the Lacedemonian army by the change in its
disposition, initantly makes a vigorous charge upon
them, breaks through them before they could form
their ranks, and throws them into confusion.

Epaminondas, at the fame time, leads on his phalanx

to the attack. By his skilful conduct, he had already
rendered the advantage on his own fide too great to per-

mit

mit the vidory to remain long in suspense. The Lace-
demonians, on. the other hand, fought as usual with
incredible bravery. Wherever the danger was great-
eft, thither their bravest soldiers and best officers ran in
crowds. They formed a circle round Cleombrotus,
whom they defend with their launces and swords; and
covering him with their bucklers, they sustain for a long
while the impetuosity of the Thebans, who aim at him
alone. His son Cleonymus, together with his belt
officers and soldiers, having breathed their last at his
feet, the Thebans at length cut a lane to him, sword
in hand; and he himself, covered with his own blood,
and that of his generous defenders, falls dead at last on
the field of battle.

The heat of the battle now rages around the body of

the king; where the Lacedemonians, instigated with
fury and despair, exert their utmost efforts to revenge
the death of their general and king; and for a long
time spread a'dreadful laughter around: but being now
deprived of their commander, they soon fall into difor-
der, and began to lose courage. The Thebans, on the
other hand, fighting under the conduet of Epaminon-
das, who Ikilfully managed their ardour, and repaired
their broken ranks, at length, after the most vigorous
and obstinate dispute, secured the victory on their fide.
Epaminondas, observing that the violent resistance of
the Lacedemonians proceeded from their desire to carry
off the body of Cleombrotus, thought it was better to
accomplish the total defeat of their army, than to contend
with them for so poor a consolation. Wheeling off
therefore to attack the other wing, which was already
weakned by the loss of several of its officers, he cut
the greatest part of it in pieces, and put the reft to
flight. Pelopidas is attended with the fame success
wherever he fights; and the Lacedemonians, broken
and disordered on all fides, give ground, quit the field
Qs battle, and retreat, with the sole glory of having re-

X 3 fcued

fcued the body of Cleombrotus from the hands of the
enemy.

The goodness of the Theban horse contributed great-

ly to the obtaining of this victory. They began the at.
tack, and defeated those of the Lacedemonians, after a
feeble resistance. At this period, indeed, the Spartan
cavalry was of little account, being composed of the
horses kept in the time of peace by the richer fort of
citizens for pleasure and convenience; which, on the
breaking out of a war, were mounted by soldiers, alto.
gether unacquainted with the discipline requisite in a
body of horse. The Theban cavalry, on the contrary,
,were excellent, and had already distinguished themselves
in the battles of Thefpia and Orchomenus, of which
they had acquired all the glory.

The loss of the Thebans amounted only to 300 men,

while the Lacedemonians left on the field of battle no
fewer than 4000 killed, and in that number looo Spar-
tans, the flower and hope of their nation. Till now
there had never happened among the Greeks so bloody
an engagement, the greatet slaughter, on former occa-
sions, seldom exceeding 50o men.

Epaminondas gave himself up with all the fondness of

the most zealous citizen to the joy of having so corn-
pletely defeated the mortal enemies of his country. The
first transport of his joy was so great, that he could not
restrain himself from exulting on account of so much
glory and good fortune. But his philosophy soon got
the better of his vanity; though at the fame time he
freely indulged sentiments of a more rational and just
delight. For when the highest commendations were be-
flowed upon him on account of his success in this ac-
tion, he discovered little sensibility to the praises lavished
on himself, but declared, " That his joy arose princi-
c pally from the thoughts of the pleasure which his fa-

L' ther and mother would feel from the news of his fuc-

£; ces.

" cess." A striking instance of his goodness of heart,
and of his tender affection for those who had given him
being.

The news of this vi&ory produced at Sparta a beha-

viour extremely opposite to what might have been rea-
fonably expected. But in that extraordinary slate, hu-
manity itself was sacrificed to the love of their country.
The parents of those that were slain, congratulated with
one another with the highest appearance of joy and fa-
tisfaaion; while those who expeEted the return of their
relations discovered the deepest dejecion. This is not.
furpriflng when we refled on the punishment inflided
by the laws of Sparta on those who fled in battle. The
most mortifying dishonours of every kind were heaped
upon them; every body was permitted to trike and
abuse them; they durst not come abroad, except in
dirty ragged garments; and all perobns were prohibited
from forming any connedion with them by marriage or
otherwise. So necefiary did they think it to puniih
cowardice.

The Spartans had still further reason to be disquieted,
on hearing that the Thebans were preparing to enter
the Peloponnese. Agefilaus was then the only man ca-
pable of delivering his countrymen from their extreme
distress. He applied himself therefore to relfore their
courage; and his first care was, to preserve for the pub-
lic service those who having fled in the lads engagement,
were on that account disqualified from serving in any
military employment afterwards, but who were too
numerous to be fubjeded to all the rigour of the law.
He therefore procured in favour of the fugitives a
suspension of the penal laws jufi mentioned. Then he'
made an irruption into the territory of the Mantineans,
which he laid waste. But he carefully avoided an en-
gagement.

The Thebans, on the other hand, desiring to profit
by their vidory, sent to beg assistance of the Athenians.

X .4 But

But that itate did not think it proper to coimply with their
request; ,for, being desirous that the power of Greece
should remain properly balanced, they thought it molt
advisable to continue quiet, and for that purpose renew-
ed the treaty with the other states. The Thebans,
however, perfifled in their oppoSition; and being joined
by the Eleans, Argives, Arcadians, and even some of
the inhabitants of Laconia, whose views and interests
were the fame with their own, they formed a league,
whereby it was agreed, that each of those states should
have liberty to govern itself by its own laws.

This new form of government introduced among the

Arcadians facion and discord, the usual concomitants
of sudden political alterations. The Argives in particu-
lar were diftrated by the most grievous dissentions. For
their nobles, by the infligation of the orators who ap-
plied their eloquence on this occasion to the purpole of
stirring up-difcord and iedition, having entered into the
resolution of aboliihing democracy, the people, getting
notice of their design, murdered one half of the conili-
rators, and had the other formally condemned and exe-
cuted, the orators themselves being comprehended in
this catatrophe.

In the mean time several itates of Greece, namely,

the Phoceans, Locrians, and Eubeans, acceded to the
Theban. league, on pretence of afliling the Arcadians;
and marched into the Pelgponnefe. Their forces alto-
gether amounted to 40,00o, and when united with those
of the Thebans, compoted an army of 60,o00 men.
This army, under the command of Epaminondas and
Pelopidas, entered Laconia, where it laid every thing
watfe with fire and sword; and advancing to the very
confines of Sparta, created in that city incredible con-
iternation. Plutarch observes, that in the space of 6oo
years, during which the Dorians had now poffefl ed the
territory of Lacedemon, no enemy had ever before dared
to invade their territories.

^Damlnoda.;

Epaminondas having made good his passage over the

Eurotas with the loss of a great many men, penetrated
as far as the suburbs. The Spartans, who had never
before seen an enemy at their gates, became furious at
the fight; and desired instantly to be led against the in-
vaders, that they might either repulse them, or die on
the spot. It was with the greatest difficulty that they were
refrained from putting their purpose in execution by
Agefilaus, who, amidst this storm that threatened his
country with utter ruin, resolved to ad entirely on the
defensive, by all means to avoid a general engagement,
and to confine himself to the defence of the town. This
condut excited the murmurs of his fellow-citizens, who
beleld with horror all the country around them in
flames. But by his firmness and prudence he maintain-
ed his authority in all its vigour, and succeeded in calm-
ing their tempers. On this occasion he purposed to re-
store the Helots to liberty, and to make them. soldiers.
Six thousand of them were accordingly inlifled.

The Thebans in the mean time endeavoured to bring
the enemy to a regular action. But Agefilaus having
very different intentions, potted his army. on an emi-
nence within the town, and befllowed his chief attention
on keeping all the pnffages strongly and carefully guard-
ed. Then the Thebans attempted an attack, but were
repulsed, and many of them slain by a party of 300
Spartans, who sallied out upon them from an ambuf-
cade. The heroic behaviour too of Ifcholas made them
sensible how dear it mull cost them to take Sparta.
That brave Spartan, who may be juilly compared on
this occcafion with the famous Leonidas, by whom the
whole Persian army was for a while flopt at the pass of
Thermopylae, had been appointed to the command of
a finall party that defended an important post. But
perceiving that he mufl be overpowered by the enemy,
he sent away the younger soldiers, and at the head
of the remaininder, sacrificed his own life along with

thofi

those of hi..generous followers in the service of his
country.

Epaminondas finding all his endeavours to draw Age-

filaus out of the town ineffetual, thought it necessary
to retreat : not as is supposed from a despair of being
able, with a little patience, to reduce Sparta, then in a
very defenceless situation, but from an apprehension of
exciting againit his country the jealousy of the relf of
the Greeks. He contented himself therefore with ha-
ving humbled the Spartan pride, and with having obliged
them to make use of a more modest tone of speech with
their neighbours.

The Thebans retired into Arcadia; where it was re-

solved, in consequence of the advice of Epaminondas
and the consent of their allies, to re-eitablifh in their
ancient possessions the posterity of the Meflenians, who
had been 30o years before expelled the Peloponnese by
the Spartans, and were at this time dispersed over the
island of Sicily. The Meffenians joyfully embraced the
first invitation; and, after dividing their territory, re-
ceived from the allies a formidable body of troops for
their immediate defence. The loss of this country, the
most fruitful in Greece, was severely felt by the Lace-
demonians.

Epaminondas and Pelopidas, on their return to The-

bes, instead of receiving the thanks and applause they
so well deserved at the hands of their countrymen, were
judicially cited to answer for the crime of having retain-
ed the command of the army four months longer than
the time allowed by law.-A law rigorously observed in
the larger republics, from an apprehension, left tome
man, invested with so high an authority, might be
tempted to use it to the subversion of the liberty of his
country.-They were, therefore, thrown into prison,
and an accusation was exhibited against them; for, as
usual, their distinguished merit had procured them many
nnemies. Pelopidas managed his defence like a man

apprehensive

apprehensive of the whimsical inconstancy and ingrati-
tude inherent in the dilpofition of every people under a
republican form of government. But Epaminondas,
whose refpeEable appearancce corresponded perfe:tly
with the .greatness of his ations, pleaded his caufo with
a confidence that aitonifhed the hearers. Without de-
scending to a diret justification of his conduct, he re-
called to their remembrance all his exploits, and the
services he had performed for his country; and declared,
that he would lay down his life with pleasure, if his
countrymen would express in his sentence, that his ha-
ving overthrown their enemies in the field of Leuctra
without their consent, was the crime for which he sus-
sered. The manner of this defence reflored the The-
bans to their right reason, and they unanimously ac-
quitted Epaminondas, upon whoYn this trial only refiec.
ted additional glory.

As for the Spartans, their late humiliation, and the
continual alarms to which they were exposed, produced
a change in their difpofitions.-They began to murmur
against the government; the city was diftrated by
factions; and nothing went on but cabals and confpi-
racies. These intestine disbrders afforded great oppor-
tunity to Agefilaus to display both his patience and his
prudence. Having gained over the Ephori to his fide,
and having discovered some of those conspiracies, he put
leveral of the principal ringleaders to immediate death,
and made it capital for any person to be engaged in the
like for the future. After having by thele means rc-
itored tranquillity and order in Sparta, he began to look
abroad for afliftance among the neighbouring flates'
and he was lucky enough to prevail with the Corinthians
tb furnish him with some auxiliary forces

Things begin now to wear a different appearance in
Greece. We shall immediately fee those haughty Spar-
tans descending to implore assistance of the fame Athe-

nialns

nians, on whom they had lately inflicted all the mischiefs
in their power, and whose utter ruin they would have
joyfully accomplished.- At this time, however, they
found themselves under the neceflity of fending an em-
baffy to Athens, to explain the extremity to which they
were reduced, and to endeavour to convince the Athe.
nians how much it was their interest to join with them,
and to flop the career of the ambitious Thebans, who
seemed desirous of reducing all Greece under their sub.
jeaion.

This occasion furnishes us with a firiking instance of

the generosity of the Athenians, as well as of their just
discernment of the general interest of Greece. For
though the misfortunes brought upon them by the La.
cedemonians were frefl in their remembrance, they ne-
verthelefs resolved at once to furnish them with imme-
diate afsiltance; and at the fame time they brought
about a confederacy with several other states to oppose
the Thebans. They refused, however, to take any part
in this war, except upon conditon that they were allow-
ed to a& in it on an equal footing with the Lacedemo.
nians, and to exercise the chief command alternately
with them, at the rate of four days at a time each. As
this was by no means a proper season for Sparta to talk
of her superiority, the conditions proposed by the Athe-
nians were agreed to without hesitation.

The Spartans supported in this manner by their allies,

were for tome time in a situation to flop the progress of
the opposite confederacy. But soon after, the Arca-
dians took from them Pallenum in Laconia, put the
garrison to the sword, and efleted a junction with the
Eleans, Argives, and Thebans. The Athenians then
thought it neceflary to oppose to Epaminondas their
countryman Chabrias, whose troops, when united with
those of the Spartans, composed altogether an army of
22,000 men. Epaminondas, in the mean time, intend-
ing to penetrate into the Peloponnese, advanced to the

isthmus,

isthmus, which he found defended by a firongwall. But
discovering one part of it weaker than the reft, he opened
himself a passage through it after a very warm engage-
ment. Then he advanced into the country, deflroying
every thing with fire and sword; and having reduced
Sicyon, he laid siege to Corinth. But Chabrias arriving
in the mean time, put a flop to his success, frustrated
all the future attempts of the Thebans, and at length
obliged them to depart out of the Peloponnese. Epa-
minondas, on his return to Thebes, experienced once
more the ingratitude of his countrymen, who accused
him of partiality to the Spartans, and under that pre-
tence deprived him of the command.

The news of the battle of Leutra had by this time

reached the extremities of Asia, and the success of Epa-
minondas began to give umbrage to the Persian mo-
narch Artaxerxes; to whom an embassy having been
dispatched by the Lacedemonians, the Thebans likewise
thought it necessary to fend thither Pelopidas upon their
part.-That illustrious Theban was gazed upon with
admiration at the court of Persia, where his truly hereic
character quickly dilplayed itself, particularly in the eyes
of the king, with whom he became a great favourite.
Pelopidas soon convinced that prince that it was his in-
terest to protect the Thebans, more especially as they
had never fought against the Persians, and were the
only people of Greece now capable of holding the ba-
lance even between Sparta and Athens. He further re-
presented, that all his countrymen required was, that
Messene flould be maintained in the pofleffion of its
liberty; that the Athenians should be obliged to with-
draw their garrisons from the towns of Boeotia; and
that the Thebans fiould-be accounted allies of the great
king. Thuc the negociations of the Laceclemonians at
the court of Persia wete in a great measure rendered in-
effectual; for they were able to obtain nothing more
than 2000 mercenaries with money for their pay. They

procured

procured about the fame time such another reinforce.
ment from Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily.

The war till went on between the ltates of Greece.

Archidamus, the son of Agefilaus, having received in.
telligence that the Meffenians were opposing the march
of the Lacedemonian auxiliaries from Sicily, marched to
their relief, engaged the Arcadians and Argives, and
obtained a signal victory, with the loss, as is pretended,
of but a single man. The news of this victory occasioned
much joy at Sparta, and revived their drooping spirits;
for their defeat at Leutra had asseted them to such a
degree, that we are told their men were ashamed to look
their women in the face.

Pelopidas, on the other hand, by his skill in the art

of negociation, daily procured fresh reinforcements to
the Theban power. Having acquired the confidence
of the prince of Macedon, he was, by the mutual
content of Perdiccas and Ptolemy the sons of Amyntas,
chosen umpire to decide the dispute that had arisen be-
tween them about their succession to that kingdom.-
Pelopidas accordingly pronounced his sentence; and to
insure the execution of it, carried along with him to
Thebes, by way of hostage, a third son of Amyntas
called Philip, who became afterwards the famous king
of Macedon of that name.

A formidable power, in the mean time, flarted up in

Thessaly. Alexander of Pheroa having affailinated Poli-
phrion the general of the Theffalians, rendered himself
mafler of the whole of that country, and with an army of
2,00oo. veteran soldiers made war all around him with
uninterrupted success. The Theffalians implored de-
liverance from their miseries of the Thebans, who sent
Pelopidas to their relief. The Theban general very
soon reduced Lariffa, obliged Alexander to sue for
peace, and attempted,, by moderation and indulgence,
to inspire that prince with sentiments of justice and hu-
manity, But the excess of debauchery into which he

had

had plunged himself, and his cruel disposition, frustrated
all the endeavours of Pelopidas.

Pelopidas having been recalled into Macedonia, on

occasion of fresh troubles that had broken out there on
the death of Perdiccas (who had fallen in battle), and
which were chiefly occasioned by Ptolemy's attempting
to mount the throne, raised an army of mercenaries in
haste, and marched againfl Ptolemy. Though Ptolemy
had found means to corrupt many of Pelopidas's fol-
diers; yet, as he stood much in awe of him, he came
before him in a fubmiflive manner, and made him the
most specious promises. Pelopidas thereupon, at the
lead of a few Thefialian troops, marched into Pharfalia,
with an intention to chaflife those' mercenary soldiers
by whom he had been abandoned. Alexander of Pherne
happening then to be in that neighbourhood with a great
army, Pelopidas resolved to wait upon him as ambafia-
dor of the Thebans. But Alexander, feeing him sien-
derly attended, caused him to be seized, contrary to the
law of nations; and having conducted him to Pherze,
threw him into prison. Pelopidas, though in irons, a-
Itonifhed the tyrant by his firmness and resolution; and,
upon hearing of his cruelty to the citizens, of whom he
was daily putting some to death, he boldly threatened to
punish him for his wickednels, if ever he escaped out of
his hands. While that illustrious Theban continued
under the most rigorous confinement, Thebe, the ty-
rant's wife, who had likewise abundant reason of dif-
:atisfadion with her husband, on account of his infa-
Inous debauchery, paid a visit to Pelopidas, and could
not refrain from bursting into tears on feeing his dif-
mal situation.

When. the Thebans heard of the unjust seizure of

Pelopidas, they immediately sent an army against the
tyrant. But through the unfkilfulnefs of its comman-
ders this army made but little progtefs, and was con.
tinually harrafled by Alexander. Epaminondas happen-

ing:

ing-to serve in this expedition in the Ration of a private
officer, was intreated by the soldiers to undertake the
chief command. Overlooking, therefore, the ungrate-
ful treatment received by him from his fellow-citizens,
and fludying nothing but the glory and happiness of his
country, he complied with their earnest solicitations.
The soldiers, inspired with extraordinary courage, on
feeing themselves conduted by so fiilful a general, grew
impatient to come to ation. But Epaminondas, appre.
henfive for the life of Pelopidas, which was entirely in
the tyrant's power, protracted the war, and satisfied
himfelfwith holding Alexander in awe. He even liiten-
ed with mildness to the ambassadors sent by the tyrant to.
plead his justification, and in every thing managed him
with consummate prudence, making him sensible, at the
fame time,'that it was in his power to chiRfife him when-
ever he thought it convenient. He kept him therefore
in perpetual alarm; but offered him a truce of thirty
days, on condition of his setting Pelopidas at liberty.
To this Alexander having consented, Epaminondas re-
turned to Thebes, happy at having delivered his friend
out of the hands of so cruel an enemy.

Alexander soon gave way to his perverse dirpofition;

and by his tyranny and oppression obliged several cities
to implore relief of the Thebans, who, at their earnef
desire sent Pelopidas to their assistance. But an eclipse
that intervened, prevented many Thebans from accom-
panying him; and not daring to contradict their ridi-
culous superstition, he was obliged to depart with an
escort of only 300 horse. He was incited in this enter-
prise, both by his resentment against the tyrant for ha-
ving so cruelly and perfidiously detained him in prison;
and likewise by a desire of ihowing that the hebans
were able to overthrow tyranny; while their enemies,
the Lacedemonians, were reduced to the necellity of
begging assistance from the tyrant Dionysius.

Pelopidas with his 300 horse, upon being joined by

70'0

7000 men, sent him from Thessaly, marched and pitched
his camp at Cynocephalus, a place surrounded with
high hills. Alexander, who had an army of 20,000
men, on being informed of the great inferiority of the
enemy in point of numbers, marched to give them
battle. Pelopidas's cavalry broke those of the tyrant at
the firfl charge. But the infantry of the latter, which
were potled upon the heigths, pouring down upon the
Theffalians, obliged them to give ground. Pelopidas
gallopped up with his cavalry to their relief, rallied
them, and put the enemy to flight. Encouraged by
this success, and initigated by resentment against A-
lexander, he advanced up to the tyrant, whom he hap-
pened to perceive, and, by name, challenged him to
tingle combat; but without effect; for Alexander re-
tired behind his men. Pelopidas, blinded by his fury,
and not reflecing on the danger to which he exposed
himself, nor the duty of his rank, ruffes upon the
party that surrounded the tyrant, and cuts down 364.
all that oppose his passage. But he is instantly over-
whelmed by a flower of darts, is thrown from his horse,
and transfixed with javelins. The Theffalian horsemen
gallop up to his affiitance, but find him expiring. The
Thebans, on hearing the news, are inspired with the
greatest fury; and falling with impetuosity on the main
body of the enemy cut in pieces 3o00 men.

The soldiers were all penetrated with inconsolable

grief for the loss of their general, whom, with tears in
their eyes, they proclaimed to have been their father
and deliverer. In token of their sorrow, they cut off the
hair of their own heads, and the manes of their horefes,
and slut themselves up in their tents, abstaining from
every kind of nourishment. The magistrates and people
of the towns through which his body was carried, came
to meet the procession, bringing crowns and trophies.
The Theffalians and Thebans contended for the honour
of burying him. But the moving arguments employed

Y by

by the former prevailed with the Thebans to yield them
that last mournful office.

The friendship of Epaminondas and Pelopidas had

been of long continuance, and had been maintained
with perfect intimacy and sincerity. Their unanimity
insured the success of all their undertakings; for the
public welfare being the sole object of both, entirely
prevented the groveling passions of envy and jealousy
from obtaining any footing in their breafls. Epami-
nondas's contempt of wealth excited the admiration of
Pelopidas, who grew desirous of imitating the plain
frugal life of his friend. But his application to the bufi.
ness of the slate made him negligent about his own
private fortune, which, by that means, suffered con.
fiderably. Pelopidas was active, brave, and persevering;
was esteemed and beloved by the people, and always
possessed the greatest influence in the administration.
He aimed at nothing less than rendering the Thebans
the foremolt people in Greece,

The Thebans, not satisfied with mourning the death

of Pelopidas, resolved to revenge it. Having with this
view united their forces with those of the Theffalians,
they dispersed the remains of Alexander's army, obliged
him to give up all the places he had taken, and to swear
obedience to the Theban commands. That tyrant ha-
ving rendered himself detestable by his debauchery and
cruelty, perished seven years after this period by the
hands of his wife and her brothers.

The Thebans, in the mean time, were solely intent

on profiting by the dissentions of the other states to aug-
ment their own power. But their success had now a-
larmed the reft of Greece, which was all in motion. A
dispute that arose between the Arcadians and Mantine-
ans, furnished them with a pretence for again entering
the Peloponnese in arms. They accused the Arcadians
of an intention to join the Spartan confederacy; and,
though the Arcadians denied the accusation in the

ftropgeft

firongeft terms, yet Epaminondas told them, with a
tone of authority, that he would judge of their sincerity
in the Peloponnese. This convinced them that a storm
was preparing againit them. They therefore made ap-
plication to the Athenians and Spartans for assistance,
and both those itates concluded with them an offensive
and defensive alliance.

Epaminondas, at the head of the Boeotians, and a

body of Theffalian cavalry. having again marched into
the Peloponnese, Tegea, and a part of Arcadia, decla-
red in his favour. The Spartans hearing of the motions
of the Thebans, assembled their troops at Mantinea,
which they fortified. Epaminondas was then medita-
ting a bold exploit, capable of ruining the Lacedemoni-
ans for ever. It was no other than to push forwards with
his army dire&ly to Sparta, which he hoped to surprise, in
the absence of their troops which had marched for Manti-
nea. With this view he instantly put his army in mo-
tion. But Agefilaus, who was then on his march to Man-
tinea, getting notice of his intention, posted back with
such expedition to Sparta, that he found himself in a si-
tuation to receive the Thebans; the few inhabitants who
had remained at home disposing themselves in the best
manner they could along the different quarters of the
town. Epaminondas, however, though dilcovered, re-
solved to alarm the Spartans; and, for that purpole,
attacked the town, and penetrated as far as the market-
place. Agefilaus fufrained his attacks with wonderful
coolness and pretence of mind; and, though far ad-
vanced in years, exerted prodigies of personal valour,
freely exposing his life in defence of his country. In
this, indeed, he was admirably well seconded by his son
Archidainus, who commanded the youth, and fliowed
limifelf worthy such a father: For having crofled the
Eurotas, and taken possession of an eminence, he thence
made a furious charge upon the Thebans, and put
them to flight.

Y Tt

It was on this occasion that Ifadas, the son of Phebi-

das, a young Spartan of large stature and great strength,
distinguished himself by an exertion of extraordinary
bravery. Happening to be at home when the Thebans
broke into the town, and being suddenly alarmed at the
noile of armour, he inltantly seizes a spear in one hand,
and a sword in the other, and runs out to oppose the
enemy, stark naked as he was at the time. He ruihes
forward where the danger was greatest, deals death
around him with every blow, and overthrows all that
oppose him, without receiving any wound himself.
The Ephori decreed him a chaplet as the reward of his
valour; but, at the fame time, laid a fine of iooo
drachmas upon him, as a punishment for having exposed
himself without armour.

Epaminondas finding more resistance than he had

expected, drew off his army from before Sparta, and
marched towards Mantinea, to which he resolved to lay
siege. That place happened then to be quite defenceless;
the allies, who had at first assembled there, having re-
turned home to take care of their harvest. But, in the
mean time, 6000 Athenians, under the command of
Ilegilochus, passed the sea to join the allies at Mantinea,
and arrived in time to save the place. Falling in with
the Thebans, they immediately gave them battle; which,
though sharp, was but of short duration: For the The.
bans, finding their projeE disappointed, thought it pru.
dent to retreat.

The Theban general, provoked at having failed in

these two last attempts, and fearing to forfeit the confi-
dence of his allies on that account, resolved to come to
a general engagement, which might at once render him
master of the Peloponnese.

The Theban army, comprehending their allies
363. the Arcadians and Argives, amounted to 30,000

foot and 3000 horse. That of the Lacedemo-
nians, joined with the Athenian troops and those of

their

their other allies, amounted to no more than 20oooo
foot and 2000 horse. The latter had but few flingers and
archers who, besides, were not very expert. The
Thebans, on the contrary, had a great number, who
had come to their assistance all the way from the bor-
ders of Thessaly, and excelled in the use of the fling
and dart. Epaminondas was well persuaded, that by
gaining this battle, he should assure to Thebes a fuperi-
ority over the reft of Greece.

In the opinion of the greaten matters in the art of

war, the arrangement of the Theban army in this en-
gagement, which was fought on the plains of Mantinea,
was as skilful as it was singular. Epaminondas, though
superior in the number of his men, omitted nothing that
might contribute to the success of the battle. Never did
he employ more art to deceive the enemy, and to con-
ceal from them his intended order of fight, that so he
might attack them with the double advantage of their
disorder, and his own superior ikill.

The Lacedemonian army was encamped at the foot

of Mount Parthemus; and that of the Thebans, on the
declivity of the fame hill, Epaminondas, without re-
garding the order of the enemy, whom he did not
doubt of disconcerting by the singularity of his attack,
formed his men before moving from the place of en-
campment. On his left wing, which was destined to
charge the Licedemonians themselves, he potted his
Thebans and Arcadians, being the flower of his army:
the Argives compoled his right; the Eubceans, Sicyo-
nians, and Locrians, occupied his centre; and the ca-
valry was disposed along the wings.

After informing every corps of the order in which it

was to fight, he inflantly changed his disposition, put
his army in motion, and, in a moment, gave it such a
novement as indicated an intention to march. He ad-
vanced, indeed, towards the enemy; but, from the dif-
position of his troops, they were convinced that he meant

Y 2 to

to decamp. Still more to deceive them, after continu.
ing his march for some time, he halted on an eminence,
and caused all his infantry to ground their arms. This be-
haviour persuaded the Lacedemonians, that Epaminon-
das intended to pitch his camp. Their officers were the
first deceived, and accordingly quitted their stations; the
soldiers, after their example, left their ranks; and thus
the whole Lacedemonian army, which had till then
continued in battle array, dispersed all over their camp.

This was the effect that Epaminondas had foreseen

and expeced. As soon as he perceived the Lacedemo-
nians in the disorder of an army quietly retiring to
their quarters, from a belief that there was nothing
more to be feared, he commands his men to recover
their arms, and advances quickly to the attack. The
enemy, in amazement, run in haste to recover their
ranks, and form with all possible expedition. They
think of nothing now but to aa on the defensive, Epa-
minondas's troops being already formed, while they
were hardly begun to make their disposition. Notwith-
flanding their surprise, however, they threw themselves
into the form of a phalanx. The Athenian horse took
post on one wing; the Lacedemonian on the other.
Their precipitation produced confusion; and, on view-
ing the excellent order of the Theban army, they could
exped nothing but a certain defeat.

One part of the Theban horse had already placed

themselves in front of that of the Athenians, to overawe
them, and to prevent them from attacking their infantry
in flank. The reft opposed the Lacedemonian cavalry.
Epaminondas had intermingled among his horse small
parties of excellent Theffalian flingers and archers, a
precaution which the Lacedemonians had negleted.
As soon as his cavalry had taken their station, Epami.
mondas, who had till now led on his army in the form
of a phalanx, with a single line, suddenly ordered the
extremity of his right wing to halt; and, at the fame

time,

time, advanced briskly with the left wing in an angular
form; with the point of which, as with the beak of a
galley, to use Xenophon's expression, he charged the
centre of the enemy.

He had had the precaution to place in this wing his

choicest troops, which were besides sustained by those
of the other wing ; the left extremity of which extended
to the formidable point in which he now advanced,
His intention was to bear down the centre of the Lace-
demonians, and then to charge them in flank to right
and left, when, after being thus divided, they might be
the more easily overpowered.

The trumpets having founded the charge, the armies,

as usual, set up loud shouts. The engagement was be-
gun by the Lacedemonian horse; which being much in-
ferior to those of the Thebans, were broken at the first
onset, and put to flight, after making a poor resistance.
The centre of the enemy was likewise borne down, as
Epaminondas had foreseen. But this disadvantage, far
from discouraging the Lacedemonians, rather animated
them to exert prodigies of valour, to repair their loss.

Never, fays Diodorus Siculus, had the Greeks fought
against one another with such numerous armies; never
were they commanded by more ftilful generals; never
had they discovered more firmness valour, and intre-
pidity. They all entertained the fame indifference for
life, the fame desire of glory, the fame love for their
country. This battle was now to decide, in the fight
of all Greece in arms whether Thebes, constantly vic-
torious through the whole course of this war; or Sparta,
illustrious by its triumphs for ages preceding it, should
enjoy the superiority over the reft of their countrymen.
From all these motives united, the two parties disputed
the vitory with the most obstinate bravery.

The foot of both armies made the first attack with
their lances. These being soon broken, they betook

Y 4 thenfelves

themselves to their swords. Then the adion became
one of the most bloody that had ever been known;
and the earth was loon covered with the dead and
wounded, and drenched with blood. But in spite of all
the precautions used by Epaminondas for securing the
victory on his fide, it still remained doubtful; and he
now saw, that a desperate effort was necessary to insure
the success of his wisest measures.

In this decisive moment, Epaminondas, still further to

animate his men, thought it necessary to aa the part of
a brave soldier rather than that of a cautious general.
Assembling therefore a chosen band of his braveit The-
bans, he exhorts them to follow the example he is now
EO show them, and then rushes impetuously upon the
Lacedemonians, determined to sacrifice his life, if he
can thereby decide the fate of the engagement. Fol-
lowed by his troop of Thebans, he drives all before
him, and cuts a lane throw the enemy. The Lacede-
monians in the centre begin to stagger, by and by give
ground, and at last retire from the field of battle. Epa-
minondas pursued them, and made such a slaughter,
that the ground where he and his troops fought, was,
by the account of Diodorus Siculus, covered with heaps
of Lacedemonians.

To render the victory complete, it was now only ne-

ceffary to recal the viCtorious Thebans from the pursuit
of those that fled, and tolead them against the wings of
the Lacedemonian army, which still kept their ground.
But such valour and prudence aie seldom united. Epa-
minondas, impelled by the ardour of his courage, was
no longer matter of himself, and teemed resolved not to
let a single Lacedemonian escape. Having advanced
imprudently into the midst of them, without refle&ing
that his brave troops was every moment diminishing, he
found himself at length almo!t alone, surrounded by a
crowd of Lacedemonians. This brave man, then, col-
leting all his firength, supports, with a truly heroic

bravery,

bravery, the unequal combat, and wards off, with his
buckler, the showers of darts poured upon him from
every quarter. But while he is thus intent on defend-
ing hinfelf, an officer makes a push at him with his
lance, and plunges it into his breast. The wood having
broken, the iron ituck fast in the wound, and Epami-
nondas falls half dead to the ground. The news is im-
mediately spread through both armies. The Thebans,
furious for the loss of their general, ran to the spot
where he lay wounded, and bear down all before them.
A {hocking slaughter prevails round the body of Epami-
nondas, both parties fighting with the most furious ob-
flinacy to get the possession of it. The Thebans, how-
ever, prevail at last, and carry off their commander,
though almost without life. Their fury redoubles at
the fight; and they vent it upon the Lacedemonians,
who now began to fly on all fides. But the Theban
commanders, confidering that viEtory had hitherto de-
clared in their favour, and being unwilling to hazard
their good fortune any further, caused the retreat to be
founded.

When the Thebans were retired to their camp, the
physicians on examining Epaminondas's wound, judged
it to be mortal; and gave it as their opinion, that he
must soon die unless the iron were drawn from his
breast, and that it was probable he might expire under
the operation. Epaminondas heard them with the
greatest calmness; and perceiving that his last hour was
at hand, called for his armour bearer, and asked him
whether his shield was safe ? The man answering that
it was; and having flown it to him, a smile of joy im-
mediately overspread the face of Epaminondas; who ta-
king hold of his Ihield, embraced it, faysJuftin, as the
companion of his labours and of his glory. He next
inquired, which of the armies had remained the con-
queror; and, on being assured that the Lacedemonians
had quitted the field of battle, " Then (fays he), I have

" lived

' lived long enough, since I die with the honour of
"having never been beaten."

After faying this, he desired the Physicians to pull

the iron from his breast. As it was not doubted that
he would die under the operation, the hearts of all pre-
sent were penetrated with extreme sorrow. In the
midst of this general dejection, one of his most intimate
friends could not refrain himself from bursting out into
the following exclamation; " Q Epaminondas! you
" die (cried he), you die, without leaving us even the
"hope of ever feeing you revive in any of your pofte-
" rity, for you leave no children behind you." " You
"are mistaken (replied Epaminondas calmly), I leave
' behind me two immortal daughters, the victory of
" Leucira and that of Mantinea." The physicians ha-
ving then, with much difficulty, extrated the iron from
his breast, he fainted away. Some historians tell, that
he drew it from the wound with his own hand. What-
ever may be in that, he expired a few moments after,
as if in the arms of vitory, with a smile of joy and fa-
tisfaation diffused over his countenance.

Cicero regards Epaminondas as the completeft cha-

racters of Greece. The advantages bestowed on him by
nature, were improved by the admirable education gi.
ven him by his father, who entertained so firong a pas-
sion for the arts and sciences, that, in the pursuit of them,
he spent all his fortune. Epaminondas, naturally of a
philosophical genius, preferred the good education given
himh by his father to the greatest estate he could have
left him. Master of his passions, and fond of tempe-
rance and simplicity, he lived happy in a state of the
narrowest mediocrity. The honour of his country was
the motive of his whole conduct; and his time was en-
tirely employed about the public welfare and the im-
provement of his underitanding. Though naturally ad-
dieted to the military life, he had studied the theory,
before he chose to venture on the practice of war. His

order

order of battle at Leudra and Mantinea, procured him
the characer of the most complete master of tacics of
his time. That of Mantinea, in particular, was account-
ed the malter-piece of this accomplished commander.

His countrymen, who till his time had been buried

in indolence and a total ignorance of the art of war,
stood in need of such a master. By his care and applica-
tion, he at once made them a nation of soldiers, and
put them in a capacity of disputing the superiority of
Greece with the people by whom that superiority was
poffflfed. Pelopidas, it is true, had the honour of be-
ginning the work; but that of carrying it to its perfec-
tion belonged to Epaminondas alone. In the battle of
Leuara, the Thebans, unassisted by any allies, humbled
the pride of Sparta. Epaminondas, in every encounter,
discomfited those celebrated Spartans, so renowned in
all histories, and gave irreparable blows to their power.
He u{ed, in jest, to fay, that he had taught them to
lengthen their monosyllables; alluding to their laconic
answers, the overbearing tone of which had so much
disgusted the other tfates. His integrity was without
example. He not only himself rejected, with indigna-
tion, a large fum of money offered by the Persians to
corrupt his integrity, but even obliged Micithus to re-
turn the money received by him for making the pro-
pofal. In a word, he was not only a skilful commander,
a profound ftatefinan, and a man of learning and science,
but his virtue in private life refleted additional lustre
on all thole other flining qualifications.

The views and hopes of the Thebans were buried in
Epaminondas's grave. Their thoughts were now entire-
ly turned to peace; and as their enemies were fill more
exhausted by the war than they, the terms of accom-
modation proposed were very honourable for the The-
bans. It was agreed, that each party should retain
what it had won. The Lacedemonians alone, by the
persuasion of Agefilaus, refused to accede to the treaty,

under

under pretence that it comprehended the inhabitants of
Messene. They preferred war, therefore, in the hopes
of recovering that country. Agefilaus was much bla-
med on this occasion, for persuading his countrymen to
persist in a ruinous war, rather than to embrace so fa-
vourable an opportunity of procuring an advantageous
peace; and he was looked upon as an obstinate man,
who preferred the pleasure of commanding an army to
the happiness and quiet of his country.

At this time Tachos King of Egypt being
362. threatened with an invasion from the Persian mo-

narch, sent to request the assistance of a body

of troops from the Lacedemonians, with Agefilaus for
their commander. His request was complied with ; and
the world was surprised to fee a king of Sparta, at such
an advanced period of life, spent in continual action
and fatigue, submit to serve under a foreign prince.
The event afforded him abundant cause to repent of his
imprudence. The Egyptians, prepossessed with a high
opinion of Agefilaus, from his great reputation as a
most skilful general, had figured to themselves a king
of a noble striking appearance. They were, therefore,
exceedingly surprised to find him an old man, of a de.
fpicable figure, and in a very homely dress; and could
hardly refrain from insulting him. He expecEed to
have had the sole direction of the war. But he got the
command only of the mercenaries, that of the navy be-
ing committed to the Athenian Chabrias, and the king
retaining to himself the supreme direction both of the
army and of the fleet.

Tachos, disregarding the advice of Agefilaus not to

advance too far from his own frontiers, resolved to
march into Phenicia. Agefilaus, provoked at this ftep of
the king, joined a faction of the Egyptians who had
revolted against him in his absence, and had advanced
Netenabus to the throne. Plutarch boldly treats this
behaviour of Agefilaus as downright perfidy and treason.

But

But the Lacedemonians, from -their violent attachment
to their native country, seldom failed to sacrifice honour
and good faith to what they imagined might redound
to its advantage. To Agefilaus, therefore, it was
sufficient reason to prefer the useful to the honourable;
that he believed the fide he embraced might better
promote the glory of Sparta, or that the king for
whom he declared was more attached to Greece; ob-
jets that in a Grecian breast outweighed every other
consideration.

The prince of the city of Mendes having appeared as
a third competitor for the crown, in opposition to Nec-
tenabus, Agefilaus advised to fight him immediately.
But Nedenabus was of a different opinion; of which,
however, he had soon reason to repent. After having
learned, by experience that Agefilaus was in the right,
he thought proper to follow his counsel. Agefilaus
thereupon defeated his opponent, and made him prisoner.
-Having, at length, secured Neatenabus on the throne,
he set fail for Lacedemon; but being driven by con-
trary winds on that part of the coast of Africa called the
harbour of Menelaus, he there fell sick, and breathed his
last, at the age of 84 years. His body was carried to
Sparta, and his son Archidamus succeeded him in the
kingdom.

Agefilaus forms one of the most conspicuous and in-

teresting characters exhibited in the history of Greece,
as much on account of his personal qualities as of the
very important tranfadions in which he was conltantly
engaged. Though nature had loaded him with a deform-
ed and ungraceful person, yet his wit and spirit procu-
red him universal esteem and admiration. Bred a plain
Spartan, he preserved on the throne, even to a degree
of affectation, the ancient Spartan simplicity and aufte-
rity of life. He always behaved as the molt zealous
proteEtor of the laws, to which he himself paid the most
exat and perfea obedience. This part of his character

excites

excites the highest admiration. The deference and re-
fpee shown by him on all occasions to the Ephori and
senate, was at once magnanimous and political, as it fe-
cured to him their confidence and support in all his un-
dertakings, He possessed every qualification of the most
skilful general; aAive, brave, fruitful in Stratagems,
cool and intrepid in ation. In private life his charac-
ter was extremely amiable. He was so fond of his chil-
dren, that he sometimes joined with them even in their
amusements. He was likewise a most affectionate and
warm friend.-In his old age he became haughty, im-
perious, and more restless than ever, breathing nothing
but war; and he is reproached with having sacrificed
the repose and welfare of his country to his hatred of
the Meffenians and Thebans. His eulogium is written
in the most masterly manner by Xenophon.

About this time died Artaxerxes Mnemon,
357. king of Persia, in an advanced age, and borne

down with sorrow at the conspiracies formed a-

gainft his life by his own children, who were become
impatient to possess his throne. Ochus, the most wicked
of his sons, having procured the affaflination of his two
brothers, succeeded Artaxerxes in the kingdom. This
Ochus was the worst prince of his race, and rendered
himself infamous by his cruelty; for he put to death,
without any scruple, all the princes and princesses of his
blood, and all others who gave him the least uneasiness.
Ochus, on receiving some cause of discontent from Ar-
tabazus governor of one of the provinces of Asia, sent
against him an army of 62,000 men. But the Athe-
nian Chares, whom the f.itrap had prevailed on to as-
sift him, entirely routed his army with a small fleet and
some Greek soldiers. The Athenians, intimidated
by the threats of Ochus, recalled Chares. Artabazus,
to supply the place of Chares, obtained of the Theb-ns
a reinforcement of 5000 men, commanded by Pamme-
nes, and with their afiftance beat the army of Ochus a

feconl

second time. But that prince having prevailed on the
Thebans, by means of a large furn of money, to with-
draw theirtroops likewise, Artab zus found himlelf un-
able to make head againtt him iny longer, and there-
fore took refuge with Philip king of Macedon.

This year war broke out again between the Athe-

nians and their allies; the islands of Chios Cos, Rhodes,
and the city of Byzantium, having entered into a cn-
federacy to render themselves independent of Athens.
To reduce those revolters to obedience, required the mos
powerful forces, and the belt generals the Athenians then
possessed. On this occasion Chabrias, Iphicrates, and
Timotheus acquired great glory. According to Cor-
nelius Nepos, these were the last Athenian commandes
whose names deserve to be perpetuated in hiflory.

The war on the part of the Athenians began with the

siege of Chios, which was quickly relieved by the allies.
There Chares commanded the army, and Chabrias the
fleet. Chabrias forced his passage into the harbour;
but being deserted by the other galleys, whole com-
manders were afraid to follow him, his own was fur-
rounded, and pierced through and through. He ne-
verthelels obflinately refused to quit his ihip and save
himifelf by fwimlming, as he might have done, and there-
fore perished along with her. Chabrias had formerly
acquired a high reputation, and especially when he was
sent to the relief of the Thebans against the Spartans.
In an action that happened on that occasion, feeing him-
self abandoned by his allies, he ordered his soldiers to
close their ranks, and slooping down to the ground on
one knee, to cover themselves with their fhiclds, and to
extend their spears. In this singular position he sustain-
ed the attack of the enemy, who found it impoflible to
break his ranks. On that account the Athenians ere&-
ed a statue to his memory, in the posture in which he
then fought.

Chares succeeded Chabrias in the command of the

fleet.

fleet. But the Athenians finding their enterprise againit
Chios proceeding but slowly, relinquished it altogether;
and at the fame time fitted out a second fleet of 60 gal.
leys, which they put under the command of Iphicrates,
and of Timotheus the son of the famous Conon. The
Athenians, by laying siege to Byzantium, obliged the
allies to relinquish that of Samos, which they had un-
dertaken about the fame time, and to fly to the relief
of Byzantium. A violent tempest coming on just as
they were on the point of engaging, Chares, naturally
a presumptuous man, insisted, notwithstanding, that
they should attack the enemy, contrary to the opinion
both of Iphicrates and Timotheus, who would by no
means consent to hazard a battle in such circumstances.
Chares, provoked at their refusal, sent letters to Athens,
in which he complained loudly of his colleagues; and
his powerful faaion in the city did not fail to support
his complaints. The Athenians having brought lphi.
crates and Timotheus to trial, imposed a fine of Ioo ta-
lents on Timotheus, who, on a former occasion, had
gained to his countrymen, from its enemies, no less a
fum than I200 talents, without reserving the smallest
part of it for himself. This is a remarkable inflance of
the ingratitude of the giddy worthless mob that governed
Athens.

Timotheus, provoked at so unjust a treatment, reti-

red to Chalcidas, where he ended his days a few years
after. It is remarked of this illustrious Athenians, that
it was he who completely retfored to his countrymen
their superiority at sea; a revolution indeed which his
father had begun. Timotheus was betides, a man of
great learning, and distinguished himself no less by his
eloquence than by his itrong and just taste for the
iciences. The uninterrupted success that attended hlin
in all his enterprises, drew upon him much envy, antd
gave occasion to a piece of painting, in which 'Iimo-
theus was represented asleep, with Fortune at his fide,

taking

taking towns with a. net. Timotheus, piqued at this
insult, maintained, that his success was chiefly owing to
his abilities: And as for the pi&ture, he observed,
with a great deal of wit, " If 1 take towns while ajleep,
" what might I not perform if awake ?" It appears,
however, from what we have just now related, that For-
tune wearied at last of lavishing her favonrs upon
him.

Iphicrates being likewise called to stand trial, and not

thinking it sufficient to depend entirely upon the force
of arguments, introduced into the assembly a number
of young men armed with daggers; of which they took
care now and then to discover the points to the view of
the judges. This new method of pleading his defence
produced all the intended effect. The judges were in-
timidated, and acquitted Iphicrates. The fickle difpo-
fition of the people of Athens, who always behaved with
the highest ingratitude to their best generals, may, in
a great measure, excuse this singular stratagem. This
capricious ungrateful condua is likewise assigned as one
of the principal causes of the ruin of their republic;
those men who were possessed of abilities to serve the
state, being often obliged to provide for their personal
security by a voluntary exile; by which means Athens
could no longer find generals to command its armies.

To return to Iphicrates.-That brave man had parti-
cularly distinguished himself, when very young, in a sea-
fight; and his merit soon procured him the honour of
the chief command. No Greek general ever under-
stood the military art better than he. He was extreme-
ly rigorous in inforcing a flri& discipline among his
troops, by which he had made them so expert at every
kind of evolution, that instantly on perceiving the pro-
per signal, they performed the motion required. These
troops were diftinguifled from the reft by the name of
Iphicratians. He invented a more convenient fort of
arms and cloathing for the soldiers, particularly by

Z lengthening

lengthening their spears and swords. In a word, he be-
flowed so much attention on the mofl minute particular
relating to the business of war, that he feerned to have
been expressly formed by nature for the profession of
arms. He was endued with such strength of body, that
once in a fea-engagment he seized his antagonist in his
arms, and carried him, armed as he was, into his own
flip. He is said to have been of mean extraction. But
his sentiments were far from discovering any tincture of
a low birth. Never indeed did any man possess a more
lofty foul; and his son Meniftheus thought himself more
honoured by being descended of such a father, than by
having a princess, the daughter of Cotys king of Thrace,
for his mother. Iphicrates, on being upbraided with
the meanness of his birth, by one who was descended
of Harmodius, answered, " It is true the nobility of my
" family begins in myself, while that of yours ends in
" you."

Chares, after having accomplished the disgrace of

his colleagues, soon made it evident how unworthy he
was to supply their place. Being as avaricious as vain,
he suffered himself to be corrupted by Artabazus satrap
of Asia Minor, then warmly pressed by the Persian mo-
narch, and was luckly enough to relieve him from the
danger wherewith he was threatened, On that occasion
he was accused of having abandoned the service of the
republic, but had interest enough to screen him from
the punishment he deserved. The Athenians, dreading
the resentment of the king of Persia, beftirred them-
selves to bring about a general peace, to which they had
been long exhorted by the excellent orations of liocra-
tes; who, recalling to their remembrance the glorious
days of Athens, when their ancestors sacrificed every
consideration to the mantaining of the liberties of Greece,
-represented to them, that the real greatness of a state
consists not in the extent of its conquests, which it can
never effect without some degree of injustice, but in

wifely

# CHAP. III. Transactions in Greece, from the conclusion of the war of the Allies to the death of Philip King of Macedon.

wifely governing its fubjets, and by justice and mode-
ration making itself to be beloved by its neighbours.
This war, after continuing three years, was at length
terminated by a peace; of which the chief condition
was, that Rhodes, Byzantium, Chios, and Cos, Ihould
enjoy perfect liberty.

C H A P. III.
rran/falions in Greece, from the conclusion of the war of

the Allies to the death of Philip King of Macedon.

T IHE Athenians, now finding themselves in security
and leisure by the peace just concluded, gave a loose
to their pleasures, and particularly to their inclination
for public shows and diversions, which they carried
to the highest pitch of extravagence. Pericles had been
very instrumental in inspiring them with this tafe, prin-
cipally from political motives, to please and to amuse
his restless countrymen, that he might acquire their as-
feetion, and divert them from caballing again:ri his ad-
ministration; and partly from a natural elegance of
mind, which rendered him partial to an amusement at
once the most rational, ingenious, and instructive, that
ever was devised. But the incomparable dramatic pie-
ces which graced the Attic stage had at length so be-
witched the imaginations of that lively people, that they
became fond of them even to folly; and to the gratifi-
cation of their theatrical talke they sacrificed the glory
and business of the slate. The poets and comedians be-
came the idols of the people ; and by engrossing the
whole public attention, made those who had exposed
their lives for the interest of the commonwealth to be
quite overlooked. The public money was lavished away
upon buffoons and fingers ; and the annual expence of
the theatre alone exceeded that of an ordinary campaign.

Z ~ To

To support those foolish extravagancies, they appropria.
ted the funds set apart for the exigencies of the state,
prohibiting at the fame time, under pain of death, every
person from proposing any other application of those
funds. A people so obitinately blind to its most important
interests deserved to be chastised for its folly, by beco-
ming a prey to some of its more virtuous neighbours.

While the Athenians, and after their example most

of the other Greeks, gave thernfelves up in this manner
to luxury and pleasure, the Macedonians, till then an
obscure nation, formed a design of profiting by their
lethargy, and meditated the conquest of their country.
They had been always regarded as barbarians by the
Greeks, who continued to give them that appellation
till they had carried their vicorious arms into Asia. The
descendents of Caranus, the first king of Macedonia of
whom we have any knowledge, had reigned without
interruption in that kingdom down to the period of
which we now speak.

We have mentioned above, that Perdiccas, the son of

Amyntas, having mounted the throne, a dispute on that
head had arisen between him and his brother Ptolemy,
which by mutual content was referred to the judgement
of Pelopidas. The matter was by Pelopidas decided in
favour of Perdiccas: and the more effectually to en-
force his decision, Pelopidas carried along with him to
Thebes Philip the third son of Amyntas, then a boy
about ten years old. This happened about the year be-
fore Christ 373.

Philip received his education in the family of Epami.

nondas; and, to the misfortune of Greece, profited but
too well by the lessons of that great mailer in the art of
war. From the manner in which he opened his way to
the throne, he soon displayed a genius capable of the
greatest undertakings.

He had remained now ten years at Thebes, when le
got notice that Perdiccas was slain in a battle with the

Illyrians

Illyrians, and had left behind him an only son, Amyn-
tas, yet an infant. An ambitious mind has its attention
constantly fixed upon the means that may conduc to its
objec. Philip withdraws in secret from Thebes, ar-
rives in Macedonia, obtains himself to be declared tutor
to his nephew, and in that quality assumes the govern.
ment of the kingdom. The Macedonians having been
lately worfled in war, were now surrounded with ene-
mies, who were making dispositions to profit by their
misfortunes. Philip therefore immediately applied him.
self to reanimate their courage, to gain the affection of
the people, and to discipline the troops. The
Macedonians, full of admiration of his great 360.
qualities, deposed his nephew, and advanced
him to the throne. Philip, then about twenty-four years
of age, hastened to fulfil the public expectations. The
talent of speaking, which he already possessed in an e-
minent degree, gained him universal confidence and as-
fedtion.

His firfi care was the restoration of military discipline,
a point upon which he lhowed himself extremely severe.
But at the fame time, to induce the soldiers to serve
with greater zeal, he treated them in other refpets
with singular kindness and diftinaion, usually calling
them by the flattering name of companions. It was
Philip who instituted the Macedonian phalanx, a batta-
lion in the form of a long square, having Iooo men in
front, with 16 in depth, all armed with spears about
twenty-three feet long. This phalanx presented an im-
penetrable rampart, and marched so close as to be, able
to sustain the most violent shocks of an enemy, and at
the fame time to bear down every thing that opposed
iit. The famous Roman, Paulus IEmilius, who in his
[battle with Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, was
ioppofed by such a phalanx, declared, that he had ne-
ver seen any appearance more capable of striking ter-
ror, and had even trembled at it himself. But as this

Z 3 body

body was under a necessity of moving altogether, its
Arength consisting entirely in its union, it always re-
quired a plain field to aCt on, otherwise it was po longer
invincible.

To secure himself on the throne, Philip's chief care

was to remove his competitors out of the way, to ex-
tinguifh domestic fations, and to subdue his enemies by
repeated vicories. Overawed at this time by the Athe.
nian power, he endeavoured to negociate a treaty with
them, and succeeded. But this treaty was of ihort con-
tinuance, as we ihall by and by fee.--- To return to
Athens.

In that city a man began about this time to appear,

whose extraordinary merit was soon to make a great si.
gure in the affairs of Greece. By the extent of his ge.
nius, and the power of his eloquence, he was destined
often to frustrate the designs of Philip, and to be a con-
tinual check upon all his enterprises. This was the fa-
mous Demosthenes. It is proper for a moment to fix'
our particular attention on this wonderful man.

He was born at Athens in the year before Christ

382, two years after Philip, of a father by trade a
blacksmith, but one of the most considerable in his pro.
feflion. He was left an orphan very young. Hap-
pening to be a witness of the applause bestowed on the
orator Calliftratus, he conceived a violent desire to ac-
quire glory by the fame means, and dedicated himnfelf
entirely to the fudy of rhetoric. His voice was weak,
and his articulation confuted, stammering, and indi-
ftinc. He had a disagreeable tone of declamation;
and a person void of all those exterior advantages,
which are calculated to prepossess the favour of an au-
dience, and which pave, as it were, the way to per-
suasion. Those imperfecions would have prevented
any other person from pursuing the career of public
speaking. But Demosthenes resolved to exeit his ut-
most efforts to overcome them; and for that purpose

empDloyed

employed the most painful expedients; sometimes de-
claiming while climbing up steep places, in order to
strengthen his voice; and sometimes profiting by the
advice and example of the principal comedians of his
time, from whom he learned the graces of aaion.

It is true, that in other refpets he had received from

nature some of the happiest dispositions for a public
speaker. He possessed an accurate taste for all the refine-
ments of the Greek language, amazing talents for com-
position, and extraordinary ingenuity in argument;
-qualities indeed that like most others natural to man
may be extremely improved by exercise, and which the
uncommon application of Demosthenes carried to their
highest pitch. Of this his admirable orations exhibit
the most complete proof.

It was not long before he reaped the fruit of his ob-

flinate application. The fame of his eloquence drew
people from the extremities of Greece to hear him;
and he soon flood unrivalled among his own country-
men. His eloquence was serious and correct; but withal
sublime, bold, and impetuous. His orations abound
with metaphors and allusions. He invokes the gods,
the stars, the manes of those who fell at Marathon and
Salamis. But the force of his aaion constituted his
chief charaderiftic. The times required such an orator.
The Athenians, absorbed in the most supine indolence,
and consuming their time in private contests and jealou-
fies, required the itrongeft and most striking figures of
rhetoric to rouse them from their lethargy, and to open
their eyes to the dangers by which they were threatened.
The arguments of Demosthenes made the deeper inm-
pression, as an ardent zeal for the welfare of his coun-
try, and a perfect disinterestedness, were well known
to be the motives and principles upon which he aaEtd.
Demades and his other rivals used to tell him, by way of
reproach, that his discourses smelled of the oil and lamp.
But Demosthenes very properly replied, That it were

Z 4 difrefpetful

body was under a necessity of moving altogether, its
irrength consisting entirely in its union, it always re-
quired a plain field to at on, otherwise it was no longer
invincible.

To secure himself on the throne, Philip's chief care

was to remove his competitors out of the way, to ex-
tinguifh domestic factions, and to subdue his enemies by
repeated victories. Overawed at this time by the Athe-
nian power, he endeavoured to negociate a treaty with
them, and succeeded. But this treaty was of short con-
tinuance, as we shall by and by fee.- To return to
Athens.

In that city a man began about this time to appear,

whose extraordinary merit was soon to make a great si-
gure in the affairs of Greece. By the extent of his ge.
nius, and the power of his eloquence, he was destined
often to frustrate the designs of Philip, and to be a con-
tinual check upon all his enterprises. This was the fa-
mous Demosthenes. It is proper for a moment to fix
our particular attention on this wonderful man.

He was born at Athens in the year before Christ

382, two years after Philip, of a father by trade a
blacksmith, but one of the most considerable in his pro.
session. He was left an orphan very young. Hap-
pening to be a witness of the applause bestowed on the
orator Calliftratus, he conceived a violent desire to ac-
quire glory by the fame means, and dedicated hinfelf
entirely to the study of rhetoric. His voice was weak,
and his articulation confused, itammering, and indi-
tinc&. He had a disagreeable tone of declamation;
and a person void ot all those exterior advantages,
which are calculated to prepossess the favour of an au-
dience, and which pave, as it were, the way to per-
suasion. Those imperfecions would have prevented
any other person from pursuing the career of public
speaking. But Demosthenes resolved to exeit his ut-
nmot efforts to overcome them; and for that purpose

employed

employed the most painful expedients; sometimes de-
claiming while climbing up steep places, in order to
firengthen his voice; and sometimes profiting by the
advice and example of the principal comedians of his
time, from whom he learned the graces of aAion.

It is true, that in other respects he had received from

nature some of the happiest dispositions for a public
speaker. He possessed an accurate taste for all the refine-
ments of the Greek language, amazing talents for com-
position, and extraordinary ingenuity in argument;
-qualities indeed that like most others natural to man
may be extremely improved by exercise, and which the
uncommon application of Demosthenes carried to their
highest pitch. Of this his admirable orations exhibit
the most complete proof.

It was not long before he reaped the fruit of his ob-

flinate application. The fame of his eloquence drew
people from the extremities of Greece to hear him;
and he soon flood unrivalled among his own country-
men. His eloquence was serious and correct ; but withal
sublime, bold, and impetuous. His orations abound
with metaphors and allusions. He invokes the gods,
the stars, the manes of those who fell at Marathon and
Salamis. But the force of his action conflituted his
chief charateriftic. The times required such an orator.
The Athenians, absorbed in the most supine indolence,
and consuming their time in private contests and jealou-
fies, required the firongefl and most firiking figures of
rhetoric to rouse them from their lethargy, and to open
their eyes to the dangers by which they were threatened.
The arguments of Demosthenes made the deeper im-
pression, as an ardent zeal for the welfare of his coun-
try, and a perfect disinterestedness, were well known
to be the motives and principles upon which he acted.
Demades and his other rivals used to tell him, by way of
reproach, that his discourses smelled of the oil and lamp.
But Demosthenes very properly replied, That it were

Z 4 disrespectful

body was under a neceflity of moving altogether, its
itrength consisting entirely in its union, it always re-
quired a plain field to act on, otherwise it was Po longer
invincible.

To secure himself on the throne, Philip's chief care

was to remove his competitors out of the way, to ex-
tinguifh domestic faEtions, and to subdue his enemies by
repeated vicories. Overawed at this time by the Athe.
nian power, he endeavoured to negociate a treaty with
them, and succeeded. But this treaty was of ihort con-
tinuance, as we shall by and by fee.- To return to
Athens.

In that city a man began about this time to appear,

whose extraordinary merit was soon to make a great si.
gure in the affairs of Greece. By the extent of his ge.
nius, and the power of his eloquence, he was destined
often to fruitrate the designs of Philip, and to be a con-
tinual check upon all his enterprises. This was the fa-
mous Dcmiofthenes. It is proper for a moment to fix
our particular attention on this wonderful man.

He was born at Athens in the year before Christ

382, two years after Philip, of a father by trade a
blacksmith, but one of the most considerable in his pro-
session. He was left an orphan very young. Hap-
pening to be a witness of the applause betlowed on the
orator Calliftratus, he conceived a violent desire to ac-
quire glory by the fame means, and dedicated himself
entirely to the study of rhetoric. His voice was weak,
and his articulation confuted, flammering, and indi-
ftina. He had a disagreeable tone of declamation;
and a person void ot all those exterior advantages,
which are calculated to prepossess the'favour of an au-
dience, and which pave, as it were, the way to per-
suasion. Those imperfetions, would have prevented
any other person from pursuing the career of public
speaking. But Demosthenes resolved to exert his ut-
most efforts to overcome them; and for that purpose

employed

employed the most painful expedients; Sometimes de-
claiming while climbing up steep places, in order to
Strengthen his voice; and sometimes profiting by the
advice and example of the principal comedians of his
time, from whom he learned the graces of adion.

It is true, that in other refpeds he had received from

nature some of the happiest dispositions for a public
speaker. He possessed an accurate taste for all the refine-
ments of the Greek language, amazing talents for com-
position, and extraordinary ingenuity in argument;
-qualities indeed that like most others natural to man
may be extremely improved by exercise, and which the
uncommon application of Demosthenes carried to their
highest pitch. Of this his admirable orations exhibit
the most complete proof.

It was not long before he reaped the fruit of his ob-

ftinate application. The fame of his eloquence drew
people from the extremities of Greece to hear him;
and he soon flood unrivalled among his own country-
men. His eloquence was serious and correc; but withal
sublime, bold, and impetuous. His orations abound
with metaphors and allusions. He invokes the gods,
the flars, the manes of those who fell at Marathon and
Salamis. But the force of his ation constituted his
chief charaderiltic. The times required such an orator.
The Athenians, absorbed in the most supine indolence,
and consuming their time in private contefis and jealou-
fies, required the itrongeft and most striking figures of
rhetoric to rouse them from their lethargy, and to open
their eyes to the dangers by which they were threatened.
The arguments of Demosthenes made the deeper im-
pression, as an ardent zeal for the welfare of his coun-
try, and a perfect disinterestedness, were well known
to be the motives and principles upon which he ated.
Demades and his other rivals used to tell him, by way of
reproach, that his discourses smelled of the oil and lamp.
But Demosthenes very properly replied, That it were

Z 4 difrefpetful

difrefpetful to a full assembly of the citizens, to presume
to fpeak'in their presence without being properly prepa-
red. To return to the affairs of Greece.

Two years after the war of the allies, the extraordi-

nary warlike preparations of the Persian monarch alarm-
ed the Athenians, who were incited by their orators im-
mediately to take up arms, and to commence hostilities
But Demosthenes, who, though then only twenty-eight
years of age, was beginning to distinguish himself, re-
presented to the Athenians, that they ought to do no-
thing rafly, nor by a premature declaration of war to
furnish so powerful a prince with a pretext for turning
his arms against Greece. In the mean time, however,
he advised them to fit out a fleet, and to hold all their
troops in readiness.

The Lacedemonians about this time conceived the

design of making themselves mailers of Megalopolis, a
fortified town of Arcadia, which gave th'em much un-
easiness. On that occasion Demosthenes again haran-
gued the Athenians in favour of the Megalopolitans.
He convinced them, that it concerned them very nearly
to prevent both Sparta and Thebes from becoming too
powerful: and his eloquence had the eflfe of determi-
ning the Athenians to fend 3000 men to the relief of that
town, notwithflanding the alliance that then subsisted
between them and the Lacedemonians.

Philip having made the necessary preparations for wars.

defeated the llyrians in a pitched battle, and reduced
Amphipolis, an Athenian colony. As he could not
keep possession of this place without provoking the Athe-
nians, with whom it was at present his interest to keep
fair, and being unwilling at the fame time to leave in
their hands one of the keys of his kingdom, he resolved
to declare it free; and accordingly granted permiflion to
the inhabitants to form themselves into an independent
republic. Shortly after, however, by means of his in-
fluence within the town, he made himself master of it a

ifcond

second time. But it mull be confessed, that this was in
a great measure owing to the negligence of the Athe-
nians, who were too dilatory in fending troops to its re-
lief. He likewise reduced Potidea, and dismissed the
Athenian garrison which he found in the place. But
till pretending to be desirous of avoiding a rupture
with the Athenians, he used every art to lull them into
security with refpea to their real interests. Soon after
he subdued the Peonians, and recovered from the Illy-
rians the places of which they held poffeflion in Mace-
donia.

Philip soon showed himself to be a thorough politi-

cian, by putting in pracice every resource of that art,
to extend his conquests; sometimes employing firata-
gems, sometimes promises; weakening those whom he
could not conquer, and insinuating himself into the
quarrels of Greece under the chara&er of umpire. A-
bout this time he got possession of Cnidos, which he
called after his own name Philippi. The taking of this
town, which became very famous a long while after by
the battle fought in its neighbourhood, in which Bru-
tus and Cafflus were defeated, was more advantageous
to Philip than the greatef conquest. For having disco-
vered some gold mines in its neighbourhood, he caused
them to be opened, and drew from them yearly about
Iooo talents; a fum exceeding the whole revenues of
Athens. With this money he found himself in a fitua-
tion to keep up a powerful army, and likewise to main-
tain spies and partizans among the nations around. This
gold opened him the gates of many towns, and accele-
rated the success of all his enterprises. He is even re-
ported to have declared, that he believed no town im-
pregnable, which could admit the entrance of a mule
loaded with gold. On this account his gold is said to
have subdued Greece.

The Athenians were not at this time in a situation to
watch over the enterprises of Philip, being engaged in a

contest

contest to which the island of Euboea had given occasion.
That ifiand was disturbed by two factions ; one of which
favoured the Thebans, and the other the Athenians.
The matter was of importance to the latter, who derived
a part of their revenues from Euboea. They therefore
sent out a fleet, expelled the Thebans, and ptt an end
to the dissensions.

In the year before Christ 356, Olympias, the
356. wife of Philip, brought him a son, who was na-

med Alexander, and whose mighty exploits pro-

cured him in the sequel the appellation of the Great.
It is remarkable that the famous temple of Diana at E-
phefus, accounted one of the seven wonders of the
world, was burnt the fame day that Alexander the
Great was born. The person who set thisfuperb edifice
on fire was called EroJfratus. When put to the tor-
ture, he declared, that his motive for committing so
mischievous an acion was to immortalize his name.
Philip was from home when his son was born. At the
fame time that he received this welcome piece of news,
intelligence of two other particulars of the molt agree-
able nature was likewise brought him, namely, of his
being vicor in the chariot-races at the Olympic games,
and of a signal viaory obtained over the llyrians by his
general Parmenio.

Philip being resolved to have his son educated in the

most perseEt and complete manner, instantly wrote to
the famous Aristotle in these terms " I give you no-
" tice that I have gotten a son. I thank the gods, not
" so much for bellowing this son upon me, as for ha-
c ving beflowed him in your time; for I have reason
" to flatter myself, that you will form for me a successor
" worthy of me."

The facted war, or the war of the Phoceans,
355. succeeded that of the allies. It became general

among the Rfates of Greece, was carried on for
ten years with great animosity, and was extremely de-

firuitve

ftrutive in its consequences to all the parties concerned.
Religion was the pretence for it; and the cause that
produced it was very trifling. The Phoceans having
tilled a piece of ground belonging to the temple of A-
pollo, which was situated in their territory, were accu-
fed of sacrilege by their neighbours, and were cited to
answer for their condu& before the Amphityons, who
condemned the Phoceans in a large fine. The latter re-
fused to comply with this sentence, alleging that they
were intitled to the exclusive management both of the
temple and its territory: and they applied for aid to the
Spartans, who furnished them underhand with money,
and encouraged them to persist in their obstinacy.

Philomelus, a man of a daring spirit, who possessed

great influence among his countrymen the Phoceans,
persuaded them to take arms, levied troops, seized on
the temple of Delphos, effaced the decree of the Am-
phiayons, which was engraved on a pillar of the temple,
and by threats obliged the priestess of Apollo to give a
response approving of all his proceedings. The Locri-
ans attempted to oppose this enterprise of the Phoceans,
but were worsted in several encounters. ' The matter
now became ferious.-The Amphityons assembled, and
pas a decree,' declaring, That war ought to be made on
the Phoceans. Each state of Greece immediately took
part in the dispute, according as their different interests
inclined th'em. The Athenians and Spartans joined the
Phoceans: The Thebans, Locrians, Theflalians, and
the reft of the flates, took arms againIt them. Thus be-
gan the sacred war.

Philonielus, notwithstanding an oath he had sworn

not to meddle with the treasure of the temple, took
thence what money was necessary for the expences of
the war, and raised an army of lo,ooo men. At firt
several engagements. were fought with various success.
But this was like every other of which religion is made
the pretence, where under colour of religious zeal,

parties

parties indulge private resentment, was carried on with
great cruelty. The Thebans, the moif active and zeal-
ous of all, having surprised a party of the Phoceans,
condemned them all to death as guilty of sacrilege.
On the other fide, the Phoceans, in revenge for this
cruelty, thought theinfelves intitled to treat in like man-
ner such of their enemies as fell into their hands. At
last a battle ensued between the Phoceans and the The-
bans, in- which the former were defeated with great
slaughter, their general Philomelus being killed on the
spot, after behaving with a bravery that ihowed him
worthy of conducting a better undertaking. His bro-
ther, Onomarchus, succeeded him in the command; as-
fembled the remains of the Phocean army; and by the
temptation of high pay, soon raised a formidable army,
with which he made himself mailer of several places be-
longing to the enemy.

The order of time requires, that we should here di.

grefs a little, to make mention of Artemisia queen of
Caria, and wife of Maufolus. That prince had subjea-
ed to his power the people of Rhodes and of Cos, very
soon after they had been by the late peace restored to
the full enjoyment of their liberty. He is reported to
have treated the conquered people with great severity,
and to have died the year after his conquest. But the
grief of his widow Artemisia, and the sumptuous tomb
ere&ed by her to his memory, have immortalized the
names both of the husband and of the wife. Not satis-
sied, however, with honouring him in that manner, ihe
had his afies carefully preserved and constantly mixed
with her drink, till at last her body became literally the
sepulchre of that of her husband. She desired funeral
orations to be composed to his praise, and published a
reward to the person that ihould furnish the belt. It is
said, that the oration presented by Theopompus was
preferred, though his matter Isocrates was one of the
competitors. The grief of Artemisia continued till her

deaths

death, which was thereby hafrened, and happened
two years after that of Maufolus. Some authors, how-
ever, tell us, that Artemisia was not so entirely occupied
with her mourning, but that fle found time to make
considerable conquests. For she surprised the fleet of
the Rhodians, who had resolved to attempt her
dethronement; obtained possession of Rhodes, 352.
and put to death the principal inhabitants, Hence
some authors have taken occasion to call in question the
particulars related of her grief. But it is possible for
the fame person to be at once possessed of very tender
feelings, and of the resolution requisite for maintaining
his authority, and chastising his enemies. It was on
this occasion that the Rhodians applied to the Athenians
for afliiance ; and Demosthenes having become their
patron, endeavoured by his eloquence to excite the
compaflion of his countrymen in favour of that people,
whose manners had rendered them unworthy of being
protected.

Philip at firfl took no part in the sacred war. Being

more concerned about his own private interests than
about the insult offered to Apollo, he was not at all
dissatisfied to fee the Rates of Greece weakening each
other by a cruel and ruinous war. While therefore
they were destroying one another, he was solely intent
on extending his dominions, securing. his conquets on
the fide of Thrace, and reducing such places as were
advantageously situated for him. When besieging Me-
thone, a citizen of Amphipolis, named Astier, offered
him his service as so expert an archer, that he never
miffed the falleft bird on the wing. But Philip told
him, he would employ him when he had a war with the
swallows. The man was so provoked at this answer,
that he threw himself into the place, aimed at Philip an
arrow, with this inscription, " For Philip's tight eye ;"
and in effect pierced that eye. Philip returned the
arrow, with this other inscription, " If Philip take the

" ftown,

" town, he will hang up After ;" and having taken the
town accordingly, he was as good as his word. After
this accident, that prince was weak enough to be offend-
ed when any person happened in his presence to men-
tion a Cyclops.

Lycophron, brother-in-law to Alexander of Phere,

having succeeded that prince in the kingdom, imitated
his tyranny, and provoked his fubjeas to rebel. The
Theffalians applied for protecion to Philip; who being
otherwise well disposed to oblige them, immediately
went in pursuit of the tyrant, and defeated him in several
engagements.

Onomarchus, in the mean time, the general of the

Phoceans, was more successful than his brother, and
had taken several cities in Boeotia, the Thebans being
unable to make opposition. He was even'daring enough
to make. head againit Philip in his war on Lycophron,
and defeated him in two skirmishes; but a general en-
gagement having ensued, 6000 of the Phoceans were
Slain, and the reft put to flight. Onomarchus was
among the killed; and Philip took 3000 prisoners.
Betides other advantages that accrued to Philip from
this vi&ory, it procured him the characer of a prince
devoted to the interests of religion.-His success was,
in a great measure, owing to the Theffallan horse that
fought in his army.

Phaillus, the brother of Onomarchus, succeeded to

the command among the Phoceans; made use of the
riches of the temple of Delphos, as his predecessors had
done, to raise new forces; augmented frill further the
pay of the soldiers, and by that means increased the
number of his troops. He was at first unsuccessful a-
gainft the Thebans; but for that his advantage over
the Locrians made amends. Death, however, soon
fropt his career; ,whereupon a son of Onomarchus,
named Phalenius, assumed the command. But his au-

thority

thority was of ihort duration. He fell in his first en-
gagement.

Hofiilities, in the mean time, daily continuing, the

Thebans were the first who grew weary of the war; for
their finances being at length totally exhausted, they
found themselves unable to support it any longer. The
Phoceans, on the other hand, were seized with remorse
for having authorised their generals to plunder the temple
of Apollo. On an. account being drawn up of all the
money they had thence abftaaed, the whole fum was
found to amount to Io,ooo talents.

About the fame time, the Phoceans, provoked

by the cruel oppreflion with which they were 35 .
treated by the satraps, entered into an alliance
with Nectanebus king of Egypt, revolted against the
Persian monarch, and with the affiflance of 4000 Greek
troops, sent to their aid by the king of Egypt, under
the command of Memnlon the Rbodian, succeeded in
expelling the Persians from their country. The inha-
bitants of Cyprus, who were as much oppressed as the
Phenicians, joined the latter in the revolt. Ochus ap-
plied to the Greeks for afliftance to subdue the rebels,
and obtained Sooo men under the command of Phocion
the Athenian, and Evagoras the son of Nicocles. These
two brave captains, on being joined by a body of Syrian
and Cilician soldiers, formed the siege of Salamis, the
molf important city of Cyprus.--The army dispatched
by Ochus againfi Phenicia, consisted of 300,000 foot
and 30,000 horse. Memnon, intimidated by the ap-
proach of so powerful an army, entered into a private
treaty with Ochus, and offered to put him in pofleflion
of Sidon. The Sidonians, to the number of 40,000
persons finding themselves betrayed, shut themselves
up in their houses, set fire to them, and perished in the
flames. The reft of the Phenicians, terrified by the
dreadful fate of the Sidonians, immediately made their
f.ibmiflion to the king of Persia.

Ochus

Ochus having terminated with equal success the re-

bellion of the Cyprians, marched next into Egypt, which
he resolved likewise to subdue; and he was so effeEually
served by his generals, that he completed the conquest
of that kingdom in a very short time. NeCanebus, ap-
prehenfive of falling into the hands of the victor, fled
with his army into lEthiopia, from whence he never re-
turned. Ochus, after dismantling the cities, and pilla-
ging the temples, returned in triumph to Babylon.
Memnon the Rhodian, and his brother Mentor, after
their reconciliation with the Persian monarch, rendered
him very important services, especially Memnon, who
was an excellent commander.

Ochus spent the reft of his life immersed in indolence

and pleasure, committing the whole management of
public affairs to the eunuch Bagoas an Egyptian. That
favourite, provoked at his master for having polluted
the Egyptian temples, and for having killed their god
Apis, which was no other than a sacred bull, in re-
venge deprived him of his life by poison. The eunuch
finding himself, by that event, invested with the whole
power of Persia, advanced to the throne Arses the
youngest of the late king's sons. But perceiving that
young prince to discover some uneasiness at finding
himself to be rxo more than a titular king, Bagoas got
him assassinated, and put in his ,place Darius Codo-
mannus.

Philip, who was constantly attentive to every cir.

cumftance that might-turn tohis advantage, perceiving
the states of Greece to be greatly weakened by their in-
teftine wars, resolved to attempt the conquest of them.
With that view, he led an army towards the country of
Phocis, and, for the first time, entered Greece with ho-
stile intentions. The defile of Thermopyla being the
only pass by which he could penetrate into Achaia, he
endeavoured to take possession of it, under the pretence

of

of marching againt the Phoceans. But the Athenians
having prevented him. he did not think it advisable to
force the passage, and therefore relinquished the project
for the present.

Philip owed his disappointment, on this occasion, to

the eloquence of Demolihenes, who roused the atten-
tion, and animated the courage, of his fellow-citizens by
a celebrated oration. The Athenians, now wholly ta-
ken up with their games and fliows, as we have already
remarked, had occasion for a man of such discernment
and prudence, of such persuasive eloquence, and atua-
ted by so sincere a regard for his country, as this fa-
mous orator was, to route them from their lethargy-
Demosthenes made them sensible of the danger they ran
from the exorbitant ambition of Philip, who was con-
tinually employed about some new enterprise; and he
persuaded them, that the success of Philip's arms was
altogether owing to their indolence, and inattention.
" While, therefore, (said he), you spend your time in
"walking about in the forum, inquiring at one another

What is the news? what more wonderful a piece of
" news would you desire, than that a Macedonian is
" making quick advances towards obtaining a fuperi-
" ority over the Athenians, and becoming the sovereign
"arbiter of Greece ?" He proceeded to lay before them
the proper means for checking the progress of Philip.
He advised them to fit out, with all convenient speed, a
fleet of fifty galleys; to mufler up as great an army as
pollible from among thermfelves; to take into their pay
as many foreign troops as their finances would allow;
and constantly to keep up an army of obfcrvation on the
frontiers of Macedonia, to hara's Philip, and to hold
limn in awe. To convince them of the expediency and
P0flibility of complying with his advice,, he entered into
a very minute derail of particulars, and, on the whole,
.id before them the most useful and salutary in-
tA ruionsa

A a While

While the Athenians were deliberating about putting

in execution the plans proposed by Demosthenes, Philip,
after his disappointment at Thermopylae, employed
himself in extending his conquests on the fide of Thrace.
He reduced molt of the cities along the coast of the Hel.
lefpont; and, by thus increasing his power, was in a
manner paving the way to the accomplishment of his
designs on Greece. Having at last laid siege to Olyn-
thus a city possessed by an Athenian colony, the inha.
bitants implored the proteCtion of the Athenians; who
desired to deliberate on the affair, and to hear the opi-
nions of their orators. Demosthenes spoke on this oc.
cafion in favour of the Olynthians; and this oration is
commonly intitled his first Olynthian.

He there represents Philip, in the first place, as an

ambitious and dangerous prince, afhrewd politician, an
indefatigable warrior; and, as a man who, when force
and stratagem failed, was extremely skilful in accom-
plifhing his purposes by a proper application of gold.
In the next place, he describes him as being imprudent,
rash, deceitful, debauched, and irreligious; and, for
all these reasons, easy to be conquered. Hence he in.
ferred, that the Athenians ought to reform the abuses
that had crept into the government, to make an end of
private quarrels, and to combine their united efforts
against their common enemy. Demosthenes enforced
his opinion with such strength of argument, and such a
power of eloquence, that he confounded the orators
who spoke in favour of Philip, and carried his point.
For Philip already had his creatures in Athens, and
among the reft, the orator Demades, a very acute and
artful reasoner. In the mean time, thirty galleys were,
in consequence of the advice of Demosthenes, dispatch-
ed under the command of Chares to the assistance of the
Olynthians.

Philip himself avowed, that Demosthenes alone could
,hwart his designs more than all the fleets and armies of

Greece

Greece united. But as that prince was making a rapid
progress in the country of Olynthia, the apprehensions
of the Olynthians increased, and they sent to Athens for
fresh succours. Demosthenes still ated as their patron i
and, on this occasion, pronounced his third Olynthian.
To prevail on the Athenians toperfift in affiiting them,
he endeavoured to excite their compafion, by giving
them a lively description of the miseries that threatened
the Olynthians, unless they interposed in their behalf,
and exerted their utmost efforts to frufirate the attempts
of Philip. He hinted, in the most artful manner, that
it was absolutely necessary to have recourse to the funds
set apart for the expence of the public diversions, and to
apply part of them to raise troops. This was a point of
extreme delicacy; for the people had long ago declared
their sentiments very explicitly on that head, by prohi-
biting, under pain of death, any person under whatever
pretence, from proposing to apply to the purposes of
war any part of the thousand talents laid up by Pe..
rices as a perpetual fund for defraying the expence of
the public diversions, and for furniffing a certain allow-
ance of money to each of the citizens for affifing at
the public assemblies. Demosthenes, however, difre-
garding this danger, listened only to his zeal for the
welfare of the state. - He took however the most pru-
dent and artful precautions, both for avoiding the danger,
and for succeeding in his design, by requiring that com-
miflioners should be named, for examining into such
laws as should appear repugnant to the good of the slate.
But this firange people, who rather than be deprived
of their plays and amusements, would have cheerfully
lived on bread and water, looked upon this fund in too
sacred a light, to be prevailed on, even by the most
powerful eloquence of their great orator, to encroach
upon it for the most useful of purposes.

In the mean time, a third embassy arrived from the
Olynthians, begging an additional reinforcement, not

A a of

of mercenary soldiers, but of native Athenians. Their
request was complied with. But in spite of this rein-
forcement, Philip, by the treachery of two of the citi.
zens, obtained possession of the town, where he found
great riches. He made one half of the inhabitants pri.
foners, and fold the other. As for the traitors who
had betrayed the city to him, he abandond them to
the insults of the Macedonian soldiers; telling them iro-
nically, that they ought not to regard the exprefions of
a parcel of unmannerly fellows, who called every thing
by its proper name.--Philip, highly delighted with ha-
ving gotten possession of so important a polt, celebrated
his viaory with games and shows.

The Thebans, exhausted by their war with the Pho.

ceans, and finding themselves unable to bring it to
347. an honourable conclusion, implored the assistance

of Philip.-Nothing could be more imprudent,

than to call that prince into Greece at this time, when
he desired nothing more ardently, than under so fpe-
cious a pretext as the espousing of their quarrel, to get
a footing in that country; and this opportunity gave
him the greater pleasure, as he wished to pass for a re-
ligious prince. But the inveterate hatred entertained
by the Thebans against the Phoceans, made them blind
to every other consideration, and induced them to re-
fort to this dangerous expedient, which eventually oc-
cafioned their ruin. For it may be truly said, that the
Thebans, by this ftep framed chains for Greece.

About the fame time, the orator Isocrates, a very

zealous citizen of Athens, undertook, though then of a
very advanced age, to compose an oration addressed to
Philip, with whom he'was much conneQted, to dissuade
him from his designs against Greece. In this oration he
used many arguments to persuade that prince to restore
the general tranquillity of Greece; which, he assured
him. would do him more honour than the most brilliant
conquests. He advised him to turn his arms againt

the

the Persians ; and he concluded with telling him, that
though the Athenians, his fellow-citizens, were much
prejudiced against him, and thought him an artful and
deceitful prince; yet, for his own part, he never could
permit himself to believe, that a descendent of Hercules
would ever enslave the Greeks. Isocrates was then
eighty years old, an age at which men are com-
monly very credulous and very positive. It was not
probable that a prince of Philip's character, who
hearkened to no suggestions but thole of ambition,
would susser himself to be cajoled by the flattery of a
rhetorician, though couched in ever so fine words.-
At the fame time, it is not unlikely, that Plilip enter-
tained rome remote intentions of making war on the
Persians; but he desired first to reduce Greece under
his power. About this time the Athenians sent him an
embassy, with a view to found his real designs about a
general peace. But Philip amused the ambassadors with
a sham treaty, in which, however, he refused to com-
prehend the Phoceans.' It is even alleged, that he
won over to his interests all the ambassadors except De-
mofthenes; and that they protracted the period of their
embassy, to give Philip time to advance with his army
into the country ofPhocis.

By this treaty, Philip engaged to deliver Euboea to
the Athenians, by way of equivalent for Amphipolis,
and to repeople the cites of Thefpia and Platea, in spite
of the Thebans. But it may be remarked, that that
prince paid. very little regard to treaties or alliances.
T'he admonitions of-Demofthenes were negleted; for
IEfchines, who was niiow corrupted by Philip's gold, as-
fured the Athenians, that Philip aced, on all occasions,
wvith the ftriteft integrity. Philip, therefore, pursued
his schemes without diflurbance; and having made
himself mafler.of the pass of Thermopyhe, entered the
country of Phocis, and spread terror and conflernation
al around. The Phoceans, thinking themselves on the

A a 3 brink

brink of deftrution, sued for peace; of which they re-
ferred the conditions entirely to the mercy of Philip,
who obliged them to retire within the Peloponnese.
This success, obtained almost without any expence,
made Philip famous through all Greece.

Philip, in the mean time, was deliberating about ma.

king the most of his advantage. Having, for that pur-
pose, corrupted the judges of the council of the Amphic.
tyons, he prevailed upon them to assemble, and to pass a
decree, enjoining the demolition of all the cities in the
country of Phocis, and reducing them to the condition
of simple villages; the inhabitants of which were to pay
an annual tribute. At the fame time, he procured ad-
mission for himfelfinto that celebrated assembly, with the
privilege of a double vote, by way of recompence for
his having vindicated and enforced the former sentence
of the AmphiEtyons, which the Phoceans had treated with
such difrefpec. This point was of high importance to
Philip, and contributed not a little to the success of his
iubfequent enterprises.

On receiving intelligence of these tranfadtions, the

eyes of the Athenians were at last opened, and they
were now convinced of their error, in not supporting
their allies, as Lemofthenes had advised. Perceiving
Philip to be now master of the pass of Thermopylae, in
consequence of his conquest of the country of Phocis,
they, with good reason, grew apprehensive for the safe-
ty of their own city, and gave orders to foitify Pirxeus.
But Philip, satisfied with having obtained a firm footing
in Greece, put an end to the sacred war, which had now
contiued for the space of ten years, and acquired, in
the opinion of this superstitious people, the character of
a religious prince, although ambition alone was the real
motive of his whole conduct. Not thinking it advise¢
able to pufi his advantage any further for the present,
Phlilip quietly returned into his own dominions.

Philip next required the flates of Greece to confirm

thy

the sentence of the Amphidyons, admitting him one of
their number. Many of the Athenians were for paying
no regard to the sentence. But Demosthenes, in his
oration for the peace, convinced them, that their refusal
to comply with this request might provoke Philip to de-
part from his engagements; which, in the present con-
jundure, was an event by all means to be avoided.

Philip, in the mean time, was not idle. He prose-
cuted his conquests on the fide of Thrace, subdued the
Athenian colonies in that country, and made himfelfab-
solute malter of Thessaly. Next year he discovered his
intentions of reducing the Chersonese, a very rich pe-
ninfula; which, after palling successively under the do-
minion of the Athenians, the Lacedemonians, and the
kings of Thrace, had lately come into the poffefion of
its first masters, all except the city of Cardia, whereof
Cherfobleptus, Ibn of Cotys king of Thrace, retained
the possession. Philip having defeated Cherfobleptus,
the inhabitants of Cardia, apprehensive left the Athe-
nians should reclaim the superiority of their city, put
themselves under the protection of Philip, who engaged
to defend them. Diopithus, governor of the Athenian
colony, provoked at this behaviour of Philip,,attacked
that prince's territories in Thrace, and made a great
booty. Philip complained to the Athenians of the ir-
ruption of Diopithus. The creatures of Philip support-
ed the justice of this complaint, accused Diopithus of
malversations in his office, and used all their iufluence
to procure his condemnation. But Demosthenes un-
dertook the defence of Diopithus, and delivered his o-
ration " On the fubjecl of the Chersonese." On that
occasion, he demonstrated to the Athenians, that the
true design of the accusers of Diopithus was, to divert
them from examining too minutely into the condut of
Philip; who, with a powerful army, ravaged the Athe-
nian territories, and aimed at nothing less than the utter
deftruaion of their republic. At the fame time, he in-

A a 4 vcighed,

veighed, in the bitterefl terms, against those venal de-
claimers retained by Philip; described them as so many
domeltic enemies, as traitors and vipers nourifled by
the republic in her bosom, but who would one day fting
her to death. He showed in the plainest manner
that Philip, being afTured that his creatures would be al-
ways ready to justify his measures, would, in the fame
manner proceed at his leisure to take poffefiion of all
the other provinces of the republic: and he concluded,
with exhorting them to put their forces in good order,
and to provide for the other exigencies of the slate*.

But while Demosthenes was in this manner display-

ing all the zeal of a worthy citizen, and all the eloquence
of the molf consummate orator, Philip, now returned
from his expedition into Illyria, was uniformly intent on
profiting by the distractions of the Greeks among whom
discord had again broken out. The Spartans having
in a good measure repaired their late losses, began to
disquiet the Argives and Meffenians, who complained
to Philip, and received from him a very favourable
hearing. About the fame time the Thebans, adua-
ted by their hatred of Sparta, made proposals to him

likewise about forming an alliance against that
342. itate. This was more than sufficient for deter-

mining Philip to enter the Peloponnese. Imme-

diately, therefore, he procured a decree of the Am-
phiciyons, enjoining the Lacedemonians to desist from
molesting the Argives and IMcffeinians, and to permit
them to remain in full enjoyment of their liberty; and,
at the fame time, he ordered a body of troops to ad-
vance towards the frontiers of Laconia. The Spartans,
alarmed at thefr proceedings, dispatched an embassy to
Athens, to endeavour to prevail on the Athenians to

conclude

' About this time, via. in the year before Christ 343, a war

broke out betwen the Romans and Samnites, which continued
feventy-one yeats, with various success i but terminated at last in the
comIplte conciueft of the latter.

conclude with them an offensive and defensive alliance,
that they might jointly oppose the enterprises of Philip
and provide for their mutual security.

Demosthenes on this occasion gave full vent to his

zeal, and pronounced an oration, wherein he demonfira-
ted'the justice and expediency of complying with the re-
quest of the Lacedemonians; set in a clearer light still
the ambitious intentions of Philip, and made it very evi-
dent that he aimed at nothing less than the total subjec-
tion of Greece. " Philip (fays he), excels you as much in
" acing as you do him in speaking; he is at this moment
"advancing troops against the Peloponnese. Can you
"imagine that you shall remain in safety, when this
"prince is in poffeflion of the whole country around
" you ?" In a word, Demosthenes made use of every
argument to rouse the Athenians from their lethargy,
and to persuade them to assist the Lacedemonians. The
partizans of Philip, on the other hand, represented to
the Athenians, that as that prince had hitherto commit-
ted nothing contrary to the treaties fubfifling between
him and the republic, it were unjust in the latter.to de-
clare war against him; and indeed in a literal sense this
was true. But in the mean time Philip, unwilling to
draw upon himself the united force of all Greece, relin-
quithed his enterprise againfi the Peloponnese, and
turned his thoughts to the conquest of Euboea, which
he used to call " the JJackles of Greece." Having pro-
cured good intelligence within the island, he found
means to corrupt the principal inhabitants with money,
landed a considerable body of troops, took the city of
Orea, and appointed governors to ac under his autho-
rity.

The Athenians hearing of the danger they ran of lo-

sing that island, quickly sent thither some troops under
the command of Phocion, an Athenian general, whore
xirtue and singular character deserve to be particularly
taken notice of,

He

He was a disciple of Xenocrates, and conformed his

life to the most rigid maxims of the philosophy of his
master, being remarkably serious in his outward de-
portment, going always barefoot, and without a cloak,
never frequenting the public baths, and being a professed
enemy of every fort of flattery. But, notwithflanding
thus stoical behaviour, he was endued in a supreme degree
with the power of eloquence. He did not indeed fludy
the pompous and florid branch of that art; but con-
founded his antagonit by the strength of his arguments;
came. directly to the point; and often with a .single
word confuted the reasoning of the most eloquent ora-
tors. On this account Dernothenes used to call him
-- Ihe pruner of his periods."-This fort of eloquence
was much relifled by the Athenians, who being a people
of a quick, lively apprehension, liked to be inftru&ed at
a word.-Phocion had already engaged in public affairs
and had given proofs of his bravery and other eminent
abilites. After the example of Themittocles and Arif-
tides, he thought it belt to unite military fkiill with know-
ledge in the art of government.

Phocion, upon his arrival in Euboea, finding
341. that Plutarch of Eretria, by an instance of the ba-

fest treachery, had changed fides, and taken arms

against the very troops whose aflifance he had solicited,
immediately attacked him, gained a complete victory,
expelled him the country, and had the honour ofpre-
serving that important island to his countrymen.

Philip, to counterbalance the bad success of his enter-

prise against Eubcea, resolved to distress the city of A-
thens by famine. With this view he turned his arms
against Thrace, the country whence the Athenians drew
the greatest part of their provisions, and he laid siege to
Perinthus a city in the Propontis. But though he in-
vested the place with an army of 30,000 men and innu-
merable waxlike engines, yet the besieged made so ob-
ftinate a resistance, that the Byzantines had time to

come

come to their assistance. Philip formed the plan of ma-
king a diversion; and for that purpose marched against
Byzantium, to which he laid siege with the half of his
army.-It'was at this time that he lent for his son Alex-
ander, who, though no more than fifteen years of age,
had already displayed a bravery and a genius for mili-
tary affairs altogether extraordinary. This attempt of
Philip alarmed Greece, and gave some uneasiness even
to Persia. All the fiates assembled their forces, and De-
mofthenes once more exerted his utmost efforts to rouse
the Athenians from their indolence. The orations pro-
nounced by that orator on this occasion have obtained
the name of Philippics.

In those admirable compositions Demosthenes laboured

to prove, that one of the greatelt supports of Grecian li-
berty in ancient times, was the unshaken integrky of
its citizens, of whom not one was dastardly or base
enough to accept of the wages of corruption from the
common enemy, and in return to engage himself to pro-
'titute his talents to forward the ruin of his country;
that the perse& union which subsisted among the princi-
pal states of Greece, likewise contributed in a high de-
gree to the fame glorious end; and that at present their
safety and independency depended entirely on their mu-
tual union with one another againEt the profefTed enemy
of them all.-He then. showed them that Philip had
broken the peace by making a conquest of every place
round about them; and that he confidered them as his
mortal enemies. He said it was absolutely necessary to
dispatch an army into the Chersonese; and to endeavour
by every means to prevail with the neighbouring na-
tions to unite their forces and to flop the progress of his
arms.

What Demosthenes said was but too true. Philip

was then advancing towards the Chersonese. It is fit to
observe that Athens at this time swarmed with a multi,

tude

tude of mercenary orators, of whom the greater part,
being in the pay of Philip, invariably opposed the views
of Demosthenes, contradicted his opinions, and by their
idle clamours often retarded the good effects produced
by his harangues. At present, however, all their en-
deavours were to no purpofe.-The Athenians, anima-
ted by the force of Deofithenes's eloquence, sent out a
fleet under the command of Chares, a man of poor abi-
lities, whose only aim was to enrich himself, and who
owed his command to the power of a facion. No soon-
er, therefore, did he appear on the coast of'the Helles-
pont, than the greater part of the cities shut their gates
against hitm.

Philip,' feeing that the Athenians had at last taken the

alarm, endeavoured to quiet them with fine professions.
For that purpose he sent them a letter of recrimination,
full of complaints very artfully expressed, whereby he en-
deavoured to show them that peace had been first infrin-
ged .on their part. He accused them of stirring up the
Persians against him; and boasted much of his own
ftriat';obfervance of treaties. This letter, written in a
most artful manner, with much dignity and precision,
and with all the marks of candour and truth, made it
evident that Philip was as skilful a writer as he was a
brave soldier; qualites in which he greatly resembled
the all-acomplifhed Julius, the destroyer of the Roman
liberty. Demosthenes exerted every resource of his in-
genuity to efface the firl impreffions'made by this letter
on the minds of the Athenians. He went to the bot-
tom of Philip's allegations, and demontrated them to be
altogether asseted and groundless. He proved that Phi-
lip himself, and not they, was the first aggressor, by in-
vading the Athenian territories; and that his only-view
in making the peace, was to disarm them, that so he
might attack them unprepared. He concluded with
telling them plainly, that these complants of Philip's
w'ere equivalent to an open declaration of war; and

that

that therefore they mufl no longer be sparing either of
the public funds or of the wealth of individuals; and- r
above all, that they ought to employ more able con.-
manders.

In consequence of these representations, the Athe-

nians ordred Phocion to march to the relief of Byzan-
tium with a frefl reinforcement. The arrival of that com-
mander, the fame of gwhofe justice and capacity was uni-
verfally known, disappointed all the schemes of Philip.
Phocion behaved with so much prudence and {kill, that
he obliged Philip to raise the siege of Byzantium. He
took several of his flips; recovered some fortfied towns;
and forced him to retire from the Hellespont. The
Byzantines and Perinthians beflowed on Phocion the
highest marks of graitude and affetion. They offered
the freedom of their cities, together with some extraor-
dinary privileges, to such of the Athenian soldiers as
choie to fettle among them. They prffed a solemn act,
wherein they set forth, that when Philip laid wafle their
country, and besieged their cities, the Athenians came
to their relief, with a fleet of izo flips, and saved them
from the extreme miseries wherein they were threat-
ened; and lastly, they erected several tlatues in honour
of the Athenians.

Philip, to repair this disappointment, praaifed
every art to amuse the Athenians, offering proposals 338.
of peace, and carrying on with them sham negocia-
tions, which he found means to protradt for the space of
two years. About that time he marched against the Scy-
thians, with an army much less numerous than theirs, and
made a considerable booty. The Triballi, a people of
Maefia, opposed his passage back, and obliged him to
come to an engagment. The battle proved obstinate
and bloody. Philip was. wounded, and on the point of
being taken by the enemy, when his son Alexander,
then in the fevententh year of his age, hastened to his
assistance, and had the glory of rescuing him from this

imminent

imminent danger. Such were the beginnings of that
valour which was soon to aflonifh the universe.

Philip, desirous of putting a stop to the continual depre-

dations committed on the maritime parts of his domi-
nions by the incursions of the Athenians, renewed his
negociations for peace. But Demosthenes convinced
the Athenians and Phocion himself, who inclined to
liften to Philip's proposals, that that prince intended only
to amuse them; and he prevailed with them to continue
their hostilities. Philip finding the Athenians deaf to
all terms of accommodation, and sensible at the fame
time of the superiority of their naval force over his
own, had recourse to itratagem, and secretly engaged
the Theffalians and Thebans to call him to their assist-
ance, that so he might enter Greece by the permission
of both. For this purpose it was necessary to produce
a rupture between those states and Athens; and chance
favoured his intentions.

The Ozolae of Locris being cited before the Am-

phiayons, on an accusation of appropriating to their
own use certain grounds belonging to the temple of
Delphos, commissioners were appointed by the judges
to visit the territory in question, and to inquire whether
the Ozola were the, lawful proprietors of it or not.
The Ozolae, thinking themselves unjustly disturbed in
their possessions, treated the commifioners of the Am-
phidyons as enemies; and obliged them, by several diE-
charges of darts, to retire precipitately.---This beha-
viour was confidered as an ac of disobedience highly
deserving of puniflment. And the orators retained in
the pay of Philip represented to the Amphityons, that
war ought to be decreed against that sacrilegious people.
But as the Greek states seemed backward to engage in
the enterprise, from the apprehension, no doubt, of
a second sacred war, the fame orators advised the Am-
phiayons to employ foreign troops for the execution of
their vengeance, and to choose Philip as their com-

mander

mander in chief. The Amphi6tyons, not aware of the
consequences of making such a choice, and well pleaied
to save their refpeaive flates the expences of this war,
approved of the proposal, and, by a solemn decree, e-
leted Philip commander in chief of the Greeks. Am-
baffadors therefore were sent to beg of him to come and
vindicate the cause of religion. Philip instantly assem-
bled an army, entered the country of Phocis, seized on
Elatea the capital city of the country, and by that means
opened himself a passage into Attica. The Athenians,
on receiving intelligence of these proceedings, were
thrown into great contfernation.

Nest day an assembly was holden, where none of the

other orators attempting to speak, Demosthenes alone
endeavoured to encourage the Athenians. As acute a
politician as he was a powerful orator, he began by ex-
plaining to his countrymen the true nature of the al-
liance between Philip and the Thebans, which gave
them so much uneasiness. He showed them very plainly,
that the Thebans were far from being so cordially or
firmly attached to Philip as they believed:-Tbat the
taking of Elatea must immediately open their eyes to
their real interests; that in the present conjuncture it
was highly expedient for the Athenians to support the
Thebans, because the ruin of Thebes muff infallibly
draw after it that of Athens; and that, therefore, they
ought to bury in oblivion the enmity fubrifling between
their state and that of Thebes. He convinced them,
that Philip, by the powerful army with which he was
attended, meant to terrify into fubjedion such itates as
were inclined to oppose him. He therefore advised them
to arm all their forces; to dispatch ambassadors to the
other flates to persuade them to unite in defence of the
common liberty; to give notice to the Thebans that
they were ready to aflift them; and to endeavour by
every means to render this a national war, and to form
a general condederacy againit the common enemy. So

comprehensive

comprehensive and penetrating was the genius of De-
mofthenes, that it constantly suggested to him the belt
resource on the most pressing occafions.-The Athe-
nians perceived the full force of his arguments; complied
with his advice in every particular; andpaffed a very
solemn decree to that effet, which did great honour to
their good sense and magnanimity.

As the negociation whereby they were to endea.

vour to prefuade the Thebans to accede to the confede-
racy was of the utmost importance, because the terri-
tory of Boeotia was a barrier to that of Attica, Demos-
thenes was set at the head of the embassy to Thebes.
Philip, at the fame time, sent thither ambassadors on
his part; one of whom named Pithon, celebrated for
his lively eloquence, spoke first. He put the Thebans
in mind of the many services rendered them by Philip;
recapitulated the various instances of bad treatment re-
ceived by them from the Athenians; and exhorted
them either to assist Philip in the conquest of Attica, 'or
to remain neuter. Demosthenes spoke next. Provoked
by the captious arguments of Pithon, he that day out-
did even himself. He convinced the assembly, that the
seizure of Elatea sufficiently discovered the designs of
Philip, and that the ruin of Athens muff infallibly be
attended with that of Thebes. Perceiving, however,
that the Thebans were disposed to observe a neutrality,
and that it was a point of the utmoftconfequence to
prevail with them to enter into the alliance, his imagi-
nation continued to warm upon him, and at last threw
him into such a wonderful enthusiasm of eloquence,
that he altonifed the minds of his hearers, and brought
them to the point he desired. He described Philip as
an ambitious, artful, and deceitful prince, absolutely
regardless of good faith or treaties, who had formed the
plan of gradually poffefling himself of the whole country
of Greece, by subduing its states separately, and one
after another; he demonstrated that his pretended fa-

yours

vours were so many snares; and that it was the inte-
reft of both flates to unite their whole flrength against
such a common enemy.

The Thebans, convinced by the arguments of this

wonderful man, and inflamed with the love of their
country, forget all former fubjeds of discontent against
their neighbouring [late, and entered entirely into the
views ofthe Athenians.

Demosthenes, ever after, spoke of this negociation

with the greatest fatisfaftion; calling it his masterpiece
in eloquence and politics; and telling the Athenians
that he had dissipated the thunder which growled above
their heads.

The news of this resolution of the Thebans difcon-

certed Philip's projecs. He therefore betook himself
to his old shifts, and very artfully endeavoured to dig
fuade the Athenians from taking arms, offering them
advantageous terms of peace. But as he had by this
time loft every degree of credit, they were not filly
enough to allow themselves to be blinded by his pro-
fellions. Nor did they pay more regard to the dreadful
responses of the oracle, which Philip made to speak ac-
cording to his pleasure. On this occasion Demosthenes
humorously observed, that Pythia Philipized.

Both fides therefore prepared for war. Philip enter-
ed Bceotia with an army of 30,000 foot and 2ooo horse.
His troops were not much more numerous than those of
the Greeks; but they were much better disciplined and
commanded. The bravery of the soldiers was nearly
equal on both fides; and the Athenians wanted nothing
but good generals. For the faction of Chares again rai-
fed him to the chief command; and he had got for col-
league Lyficles, diftinguiihed by his rashness alone.
Thus the only Athenian worthy of commanding, name-
ly Phocion, was altogether excluded from the office.
Such are the capital errors which in every flare occasion

B b the

the loss of battles, and all the misfortunes that thence
ensue.

The two armies came to an engagement in the
338. neighbourhood of Cheronea, in Bceotia. Philip

commanded the right wing of the Macedonian

army; and his son Alexander, assisted by the most ex-
perienced officers, the left. The battle was fought with
great obflinacy, and victory remained long doubtful.
Alexander showed himself worthy the command then
intruded to him for the first time; and by his valour
and prudence gave signs of what he ffiould become in
the end. Falling with great impetuosity upon the The-
bans, he broke and put to flight their sacred battalion,
which was the flower of their army. Philip, on the o-
ther hand, gained at first some little advantage over the
"Athenians; but these quickly repairing the disorder, in
their turn, repulsed the Macedonians. The imprudence,
however, of Lyficles, occasioned their ruin. Think-
ing himself victorious, after having broken the centre of
the Macedonians, he pursued the fugitives with a blind
impetuosity, instead of attacking the wings of their army
in flank. Philip Perceived and availed himself of his
error. Rallying the wings of his phalanx on a small
eminence, he ruffed with great fury on the rear of the
Athenians, and put them to flight. Here Demosthenes
furniflled a striking proof, that the fame person seldom
possesses all qualifications in an equal degree. He threw
away, his arms, and betook himself to flight. Of the
Athenians o.ao were killed and 2000 taken prisoners.
But the loss of the Thebans was much greater.

Philip, transported with joy at this viCtory, erected a

trophy, sacrificed to the gods, and gave presents to his
officers. It is said, that having next day given a great
entertainment, the wine raised him to such an extrava-
gant pitch of joy, that he ran to the field of battle, in-
fulted the dead bodies of his enemies, and fell a dan-
cing, singing at the fame time the beginning of the de-

cree

cree drawn up by Dermoflhenes. It is added, that De-:
mnades, who was one of the prisoners, reproached him
with his uttgenerous behaviour, by telling him, that,
being Agamemnon, he aCted the part of Thersites;
and that Philip was so far from being offended at his
boldness, that he set him at liberty; and, as a farther
proof of his generosity, sent away all the other Athe-
nian prisoners without ransom. Their countrymen were
so much affected by Philip's obliging condut on this
occasion, that they agreed to renew their ancient treaty
of alliance with him. But that prince could by no means
pardon the Thebans.

The Athenians, after this terrible disaster, intfead of

teflifying any resentment againit Demosthenes, who
had advised them to undertake the war, itill followed
his counsels. In vain did his enemies accuse him as the
occasion of the misfortune at Cheronea. The people
convinced of the integrity of his intentions, acquitted
him with honour, preserved the highelt efleem for him,
and loaded him with fiill greater marks of their favour
and confidence. Guards were ported. and fortifications
repaired by his advice. He was pitched upon to pro-
nounce the funeral oration of the brave men who had
fallen at Cheronea; and the Athenians inclosed their
bones in a magnificent monument with an inscription,
importing, that they had fallen in the cause of their
country.

It may be here remarked in palling, that these fune-

ral orations, and the other public, marks of diftinAion
bestowed on those who had died in battle, were admi-
rably calculated to inspire the Athenian youth with an
ardent desire of military glory. The sons of those who
were slain in fight, were produced at the first feast cele-
brated after such fight, clothed in complete armour,
and attended by a herald, who made a public procla-
mation in the following terms: "These young orphans,

Bb b 2 " whom

6, whom a premature death in the service of the state
; has deprived of their fathers, have found in the peo.
6' pie a common father, who charge themselves with
<: the care of them till they flhall arrive at the age of

manhood; and they are refpedively invited to aspire
C at the foremost employments in the commonwealth."

The people further committed to Demosthenes the

charge of procuring provisions for the city ; and decreed
him a crown of gold, for having furnished a fum of
money to repair the walls. 'The sentence of Ctesiphon,
decreeing this crown to Deinofthenes, having been ar.
raigned by Efchines, the cause was tried with uncom.
mon solemnity, and a vast concourse of people asser.
bled from all quarters to hear this important dispute be.
tween two io celebrated orators. Demrofthenes flione
particularly in his answer to the invectives of Efchines,
on the subjec of the defeat at Cheronea. He told the
audience, that he was by no means answerable for that
event, which, like every other, was in the power of
the gods alone, who disposed of vicory at their pleasure.
Then he addreffecl himself to the Athenians in a style of
rhetoric the most figurative and bold that is any where
to be met with. " No, Athenians, I swear to you by
" the manes of those brave citizens, who sacrificed their
c lives for the liberty of their country, on land at Ma.
" rathon and Platea, on sea at Salamis and Artemifium,
s' and by the multitude of others, who, though unfuc-
"c cefsful in the fame glorious cause, have been honour-
"ed by the republic with the solemn rites of burial, not

by those alone who were fortunate and victorious,
" that you aded as you ought."

Though the Macedonian faction was now become very

powerful at Athens, Efchines nevertheless failed, 'was
even punished with banishment, and obliged to take re-
fuge at Rhodes. On this occasion Demosthenes beha-
ved to his rival with great generosity ; and as he was
departing, forced him to accept of a considerable fum of

money.

money. Efchines was so struck with his behaviour,
that he burst out into this exclamation: " How much,"
said he, " must 1 regret the loss of a country, where I
" leave such an enemy, that 1 despair of finding any
" where else so generous a friend !" On arriving at
Rhodes, he opened a school for eloquence, and began
with reciting his oration against Demosthenes, which
was very highly commended by his audience. But ha-
ving proceeded to recite that made in answer to it by
Demosthenes, nothing was heard but a general flout
of applause; infoniuch that Efchines could not refrain
from crying out, " Ah ! what fmould you have thought
" of it, had you heard him deliver it himself?" A fay-
'ing that did as much honour to the candour of the one
as to the eloquence of the other. Efchines was very
much esteemed as an orator by the Athenians, who
called those three discourses of his that yet remain, by
|the names of 4The three Graces.

The misfortune at Cheronea was charged againfl the
generals Chares and Lyficles; and Lycurgus the orator
became the public accu!er of the later. This Lycurgus
being a man of great integrity, but of a rigid severe
charater, inveighed against Lyficles in the bitterest
terms. " You commanded," laid he, " and a thou-
" sand citizens were killed; you commanded, and all
" Greece was enslaved." He so exasperated the peo-
ple, that Lyficles was put to death. Chares, though
equally culpable with his colleague, was, by some means
r other, acquitted. Lyficles was a man possessed of no
other merit than extraordinary bodily strength, and the
impudence and presumption of a bully.

The decline of Grecian liberty may be dated from the
attle of Cheronea. That viEtory, by spreading the
error of Philip's arms through Greece, paved his way
o a more complete conquest. The Lacedemonian
ower, which lately had made both Greece and Asia to

B b 3 tremblie

tremble, was now so much decayed, that we find them
hardly named among the states by whom the enterprises
of Philip were opposed.

That prince found he had at length attained the point

at which he had so long aimed; and perceived, that at
present it would be no difficult matter for him to reduce
the Greeks entirely under his power. HIe therefore re-
solved to undertake an expedition he had long medita-
ted against the Persians; and to prevail with the Greeks
to join himin it, he procured himself to be chosen their
commander in chief by an assembly composed of mem-
bers from all the states. He soon afterwards dispatched
part of his army into Asia Minor, under the command
of ,ittalus and Parmenio. It is certain, however, that
Philip negleaed to profit as he might by his late victo-
ry; whether he thought it still dangerous to pufl the
Greeks to the last extremity; or, whether he was satis-
sied with having humbled their pride,and with having
obtained himself to be eleced their generaliffinio.
VWhatever may have been the cause, he resolved, before
proceeding on his Persian expediiton, to put his private
family affairs in order.

The joy which Philip derived from the success of his

military operations, was disturbed by the divisions that
prevailed in his family. His first wife, Olympias, a
woman of a revengeful, jealous disposition, had so pro.
voked him by her ill temper, that he had divorced her,
and taken to wife Cleopatra, the niece of Attalus, one
of his principal officers. This new marriage was fdlem.
nized with much pomp and solemnity; but was in the
end troubled by a quarrel between Attalus and Alcx-
ander. The former, when heated with wine, having
said very imprudently, that the Macedonians ought to
pray to the gods to bellow on them a lawful fucceflor
by their new queen; Alexander (tarted up in a paflion,
by throwing his cup at the head of Attalus, cryed out,

1" low wretch, dost thou take me for a baard, ?

Ph~aIiPs

Philip, in a rage, flew at his son with hi's sword in his
hand; but being lame rumbled, so that the reft of the
company, had time to interpose, and to prevent his do-
ing any mischief. Alexander, unable to digest the as-
front, had the boldness to rally his father on his fall,
telling him, that it was ridiculous for him to think of
an" expedition into Asia, who could not safely walk from
one table to another. Alexander soon after left the
court, and retired with his mother into Epire. This
was the prelude to a bloody tragedy.

Philip, by the intercefflon of Demaratus, recalled his

son to court. As he had his Persian expedition much
at heart, he resolved to consult the gods about the event
of it, and gave a favourable interpretation to a very
ambiguous response of the Delphic priestess. After this,
having promised his daughter Cleopatra in marriage to
Alexander king of Epire, the brother of Olympias, he
resolved to celebrate the marriage with great magnifi-
cence, and invited the principal men in Greece to be
present at the cerenony. Mioft of the cities, on that
occasion, lavished on Philip the highest elogiums; and
some of them sent him crowns of gold. Athens parti-
cularly, the nurse of orators and poets, was among the
first to pay her homage. A tragedy was at this time
performed, wherein Philip was represented under a
feigned name, as the conqueror of Darius and mnafler of
Asia. Next day games and 1hows were celebrated.

After the marriage a sumptuous feast was given,
which was diftinguihled by a grand procession from the
palace to the theatre. In this proceflion were carried
twelve tfatues of exquisite workmanfiip; of which one
that represented Philip, under the figure of a god,
greatly surpassed the reft. The king himself, dressed in
white, appeared as the principal personage in this pro-
cession, marching between two files of his guards, who
were ranged at some diflance. But in the instant that
Philip, aimidft the joyful flouts and acclamations of his

B b 4 fubjecas

fubjeds, was tatiing the highest pleasure of which the
vanity of man is susceptible, a young Macedonian called
Paujanias, breaks through the crowd, and plunging a

dagger into the boobm of Philip, strikes him
336. dead on the spot. The assassin fled; but was

pursued, taken, and in the first tranlt)orts of rage

excited by his bloody deed, cut in pieces. This Pau-
fanias, on being dishonoured in the molt infamous man-
ner by Attalus, Philip's uncle, had applied for fatisfac-
tion to Philip, who, averse to punifl .Attalus, amused
Pausanias with vain promises. 'i he young man taking
those delays for an absolute refusal of justice, was exaf-
perated to the highest degree, and resolved in revenge
to assassinate Philip; which accordingly he accomplished
in the manner just mentioned.

Olympias, however, was accuscd, and with a good

deal of probability, of having had a hand in the murder
of her husband. For, instead of showing any concern
for such an imputation being laid to her charge, flhe
caused the body of the assassin to be taken down from
the cross and to be buried, and afterwards vented her
rage on Cleopatra, by murdering her son in her arms.

The news of Philip's death was received with the

greatest joy through all Greece; but particularly at A-
thens, where the people crowned themselves with gar-
lands, and behaved with the most indecent marks of
pleasure and rejoicing. Even Demoflienes himillf ap-
peared in the public Tffembly with a garland of fiowers
in his hand, and exhorted the Athenians to thank the
gods for this event.

Thus perished, at the age of forty-feven years, and in

the twenty-fourth year of his reign, Philip king of Mace-
don, a prince of a most ambitious and enterprising cha-
rater. By his own account, the happirefs of nations,
the reparation of injuries, and the deftrution of ty-
rannv, were the sole motives of his conduCt. But not-
·withltanding those profeflons, he was continually ailu-

ing,

ing, by imperceptible means, at some private design;
and he prosecuted all his schemes with undeviating per-
severance. He was impenetrable as to his views and in-
tentions, and never made use of confidents. Fruitful
in resources, he seldom had recourse to force till ad-
dress failed him. But when once engaged in war, he
aAed with the utmost diligence, vigour, and intrepidi-
ty, and was inferior to no commander of his time either
for bravery or conduet. He rendered his soldiers the
belt in Greece; was particularly ikilful in conciliating
their affection by a familiar and complaisant behaviour,
and in maintaining at the fame time his authority over
them in full force. Betides the accomplilhmnents already
mentioned, Philip had acquired a stock of the most va-
luable and finest parts of learning, and wrote and spoke
with equal dignity and ease. He was a consummate po-
litician, always seizing the most favourable moment for
attacking his enemies, availing himself of their weakness
and domestic troubles, and by a liberal distribution of
gold bringing over to his interests some of the leading
men in every state. He readily granted his assistance to
thole who desired it, and laboured to weaken the
itrongef .

But the defects in this prince's charaaer did more

perhaps than counterbalance his great parts. For, tho'
a most artful politician, the means he employed were al-
most always contrary to justice and good faith. He ne-
ver hesitated to deceive those with whom he treated;
and he was little scrupulous about practising fraud,
perfidy, or any other crime, provided it might contri-
bute to the advancement of his power. He appears,
too, to have been entirely devoid of religion. He used
to fay, that children were to be amused with toys, and
men with oaths. - What an abominable character !
Such, however, is the picture of this prince offered us by
history; not the less detestable, surely, for being that of
a prince. But though truly of no religion, he chose,

however,

fubjeds, was tafling the highest pleasure of which the
vanity of man is susceptible, a young Macedonian called
PauJanias, breaks through the crowd, and plunging a

dagger into the bosom of Philip, itrikes him
336. dead on the spot. The assassin fled; but was

pursued, taken, and in the first transports of rage

excited by his bloody deed, cut in pieces. This Pau-
fanias, on being dishonoured in the most infamous man-
ner by Attalus, Philip's uncle, had applied for fatisfac-
tion to Philip, who, averse to punifih Attalus, amused
Pausanias with vain promises. ' he young man taking
those delays for an abiolute refusal of justice, was exaf-
perated to the highest degree, and rcfolved in revenge
to assassinate Philip; which accordingly he accomplihed
in the manner just mentioned.

Olympias, however, was accuscd, and with a good

deal of probability, of having had a hand in the murder
of her husband. For, instead of flowing any concern
for such an imputation being laid to her charge, fle
caused the body of the assassin to be taken down from
the cross and to be buried, and afterwards vented her
rage on Cleopatra, by murdering her son in her arms.

The news of Philip's death was received with the

greatest joy through all Greece; but particularly at A-
thens, where the people crowned themnfelves with gar-
lands, and behaved with the most indecent marks of
pleasure and rejoicing. Even Demoflhenes himself ap-
peared in the public a.fTembly with a garland of flowers
in his hand, and exhorted the Atilenians to thank the
gods for this event.

Thus perished, at the age of forty-feven years, and in

the twenty-fourth year of his reign, Philip king of Mace-
don, a prince of a most ambitious and enterprising cha-
rater. By his own accbunt, the happiness of nations,
the reparation of injuries, and the deffrution of ty-
rannv, were the sole motives of his condust. But not-
withstanding those profeflions, he was continually aim-

ing,

ing, by imperceptible means, at some private design ;
and he prosecuted all his schemes with undeviating per-
severance. He was impenetrable as to his views and in-
tentions, and never made use of confidents. Fruitful
in resources, he seldom had recourse to force till ad-
dress failed him. But when once engaged in war, he
aced with the utmost diligence, vigour, and intrepidi-
ty, and was inferior to no commander of his time either
for bravery or conduct. He rendered his soldiers the
best in Greece; was particularly Ikilful in conciliating
their affetion by a familiar and complaisant behaviour,
and in maintaining at the fame time his authority over
them in full force. Betides the accomplishments already
mentioned, Philip had acquired a itock of the most va-
luable and finest parts of learning, and wrote and spoke
with equal dignity and ease. He was a confumnate po-
litician, always seizing the most favourable moment for
attacking his enemies, availing himself of their weakness
and domestic troubles, and by a liberal distribution of
gold bringing over to his interests some of the leading
men in every state. He readily granted his assistance to
those who desired it, and laboured to weaken the
itronge.

But the defects in this prince's characer did more

perhaps than counterbalance his great parts. For, tho'
a most artful politician, the means he employed were al-
most always contrary to justice and good faith. He ne-
ver hesitated to deceive those with whom he treated;
and he was little scrupulous about practising fraud,
perfidy, or any other crime, provided it might contri-
bute to the advancement of his power. He appears,
too, to have been entirely devoid of religion. He used
to fay, that children were to be ainufed with toys, and
men with oaths.- What an abominable character !
Such, however, is the picture of this prince offered us by
history; not the less detestable, surely, for being that of
a prince. But though truly of no religion, he chore,

however,

however, to assume the appearance of it, and affected
to keep a public officer to remind him every morning of
his being mortal. The Greeks were the dupes of his
hypocrisy; which, together with every other artifice,
he employed to foment among them dissention and
jealousy. He fludied particularly to keep up and to en-
crease the animosity that subsisted between the Thebans
and Athenians; and most of the citizens of both repub-
lics fell into the snare.

He was, however, a ftrit, and, for the most part,

an impartial justiciary. Of this history records several
instances. One day, as he was returning from along
debauch, a woman having begged of him to decide
her cause, he had it pled on the spot. and gave sentence
against her. " I appeal from the judgement," cried
the woman. " Howl from your king?" answered
Philip, " and to whom do you appeal ?" " To Philip
" when failing," replied the woman. Philip, struck
with the words of the woman, reviewed the cause, and
altered his former judgement. With refpet to his mo-
rals he was a professed debauchee; his most intimate
friends were persons of the fame charater; and his
court was filled with drunkards and buffoons.

Thole of the learned who have studied with most ac-

curacy the merits of the father and of the son, are of
opinion, that the extent of Alexander's conquests does
not equal the difficulty of those of Philip; and that it
was more ealv for the former to subdue Asia with the
aITiflance of the Greeks, than for the latter to destroy
the power of the Greeks with Macedonian strength a-
lone. " It mult be allowed," fays M.Tourreil, " that

at first fight we are inclined to give the preference to
- Alexander, the splendor of whose conquefls outshines
' that of Philip's; but on a more narrow infpetion,
c and on balancing the obstacles that lay in the way of
" the one against the circumstances that forwarded the

\iluccefs of the other, we shall be of opinion, with Cio

cerc,

# CHAP. IV. Affairs of the Greeks, Macedonians, and Persians, from the death of Philip till the death of Darius Codomanus king of Persia.

.': cerp, that the son was a great conqueror, but that
·" the father was a great man."

·: CHAP. IV.
Affairs of the Greeks, Macedonians, and Perfans, from

the death of Philip till the death of Darius Codomanus
king of Persia.

WIE have already observed, that Alexander
was born in the year before Christ 356. From 356.
his infancy, he, on several occasions, gave
proofs of an extraordinary loftiness of sentiment. Being
one day asked by his friends, whether he would not
choose to contend in the foot races at the Olympic
games (for he was extremely swift of foot), he an-
fwered, that he would, if kings wrere to be his cmpeti-
tors. On receiving the news of a city being taken or
a battle won by his father, so far from discovering any
signs of joy, he used to appear melancholy and difcon-
solate. " My friends (would he fay), my father will ac-
"complifh every thing, and will leave nothing at all for
" me to do."

In every branch of learning that it was thought ne-

ceflary to teach him, he made allonifling progress. We
have told already, that Philip gave him for preceptor
the famous Ariltotle. Alexander conceived as high
an e.steem for that illufirious philosopher as Philip en-
tertained.for him. He went farther, and even honoured
him as a father, faying, that his natural father had given
him existence, but that this second father had taught
him to make the proper use of his existence. Under
such a master, the happy genius of Alexander made the
most rapid progress; and he soon imbibed the principles
of the whole circle of philosophy. Ariflotle chiefly flu-

died

died to enable his pupil, by a proper cultivation of his
judgement, to distinguish between jufi reasoning and so-
phiftry, and to make him minutely acquainted with eve-
ry branch of morals, which he regarded as the only
foundation of prudence and wisdom. In teaching hint
rhetoric, he took pains to show what species of eloquence
is mnoft becoming of a sovereign prince ; and he made
him sensible that it ought to abound less with figures than
with sense; that it ought to be strong and nervous, ra-
ther than florid ; and to reft more on fads than on
words.

Alexander was particularly fond of Homer, whose

works he regarded as the noblest productions of human
genius. In them he was delighted to discover captiva-
ting exhibitions of that valour and magnanimity with
which he hirnelf was animated. It is well known,
that after the battle of Arbela, he ordered a moit
valuable golden box that had belonged to Darius
to be set apart for holding the books of Homer.
Plautarch tells us, that he loved to read and to con-
verse with men of learning; two admirable sources
of instruction to a prince. On the fine arta;, such as
nmuic, painting, and sculpture, he bestowed but a cur-
ifry attention, fuflicient to give him an idea of their
value and use; which in luct matters is all that a prince
ought to know. He was of an acive impetuous dilpo-
fition, and very tenacious of his opinion. He very
early became the most expert horseman in his father's
court; and was the only person who dared to back the
famous Bucephalus, a very fine horse, sent as a present
to Philip, but so fiery and high-mettled, that they de-
fpaixed to be able to break him. It was on this occa-
iion that Philip, feeing Alexander returning from finifn-
ing the course in which he had backed this ungovern-
able horse, cried out to him in a rapture, " Seek, my
" son, another kingdom, Macedonia is not worthy
" to cntain you." It is said, that this horse would

afterwards

afterwards susser no person but Alexander to mount
him; that he leaned down on his knees to receive him
on his back; that after being mortally wounded in the
battle againfi Porus, he saved the life of Alexander, by
carrying him through the crowd of enemies that fur-
rounded him, and then expired; that Alexander shed
tears for his death; and, in memory of him, built on
the banks of the Hydafpis a city, which he called after
him Bucephalia.

Alexander mounted the throne of Macedonia at the

age of twenty years; and in the fanme year that Darius
Codomanus mounted that of Persia. Ai;er performing
the ceremonies of his father's funeral, Alexander ap-
plied his attention to secure the conquests of Philip over
the neighbouring nations, which at present were far
from being in a fettled condition. In Greece, parti-
cularly, though Philip had awed the states into fubmiif-
flon by the terror of his arms, yet their minds were far
from being reconciled to his authority. The conjunc-
ture was delicate. The queflion was, whether he ihould
endeavour to preserve tiofe conquests by moderation
and intrigue, or by the force of arms? Alexander
quickly formed his resolution, hearkening-alone to the
dicates of his courage.

To quell the commotions that had already broken out

among some of the barbarous nations who had taken
arms, he hastily led his army towards the Danube,
passed that river in the night, and defeated the Triballi
in a great battle. About the fame time the fiates of
Greece formed a confederacy against him ; and a ru-
mour having arisen that he was killed, the Thebans
made an insurrection, and cut in pieces the Maceconi;n
garrison that held their city in fubjcclion. At Athens,
too, Demoflhenes put all in motion, calling Alexandcr
(of whose real characer he was yet ignorant) a giddy
young man; and he wrote letters to Attalus, one of
Philip's ger.cr.ls in Asia Minor, advising him to revolt.

Alexander,

Alexander, already suspicious of the fidelity of Attalus,
thought it necefary to have him taken off, although he
had transmitted to him those treasonable letters of De-
mofthenes.

After making the Barbarians sensible of his merit, he

resolved to proceed to Greece. " It is proper," said
he, " to show Demosthenes at the gates of Athens, that
' I am every way a man," He advanced, therefore,
towards the pass of Thermopyla:; passid it without re-
iftance; entered Boeotia; required of the Thebans to
deliver up to him Phaznix and Prothentes, the authors
of their infurretion; and, on their refusal to comply
with his demand, immediately attacked them. The
Thebans fought with great bravery and obstinacy; but
being much inferior to the Macedonians in point of
numbers, they were at lalf broken, and almost all cut off.
More than 6000 men were killed on the spot. Thebes
was taken, and treated with the utmost rigour of war.
Alexander, personally incensed against the Thebans for
the extravagant joy they had testified at the news of his
death, resolved to satisfy his vengeance, by the utter
deifruclion of their unhappy city. He fold more than
30,000 of the inhabitants for ilaves; and permitted none
to enjoy their liberty except the priests, and the de-
fcendants of the celebrated poet Pindar.

The total ruin of Thebes, and the severity of Alex-

ander to its miserable inhabitants, threw the other states
into the greatest conflernation. Every thing gave way
to him ; and even the Athenians, with Demosthenes
himself, implored the mercy of the conqueror by a so-
lemn deputation. Alexander, however, dispatched mef-
fengers to the Athenians, infifling on their delivering
up to him ten of the orators, who had been chiefly in-
firumental in forming the late confederacy against him.
The orator Demades, a particular favourite of Alexander,
undercooik to soften him. The Macedonian having al-
ready latisfied his refentnient by the ruin of the The-

bans,

bans, and being unwilling to be detained from the exe;.
cution of the great design he was meditating, gave a fa-
vourable hearing to Demades, insisted on the banish-
ment of Charidemus alone, frankly forgave the Athe-
nians, and exhorted them to watch over the affairs of
Greece during his absence. Then he assembled all the
Rtates at Corinth, and procured himself to be solemnly
eleded commander in chief of the Greeks against
Persia.

So grand an undertaking, calculated to dethrone the

sovereign of the east, and to produce the greatest revo-
lution, to far as we know, that ever happened on our
earth, required a condu&er of the most extensive ge-
nius, intrepid, -,nterprifing, incapable of being stopped
by any obstacle, and endued with the greatest abilities of
every kind.-Such a man was Alexander.-lt is, at the
fame time true, that he found the Greeks fill aAuated by
their inveterate hatred of the Persians, whom to subdue
was the most ardent desire of their fouls. It is likewise
true, that, however otherwise corrupted, they fill main-
tained their superiority in arms over the Persians. The
famous retreat of the xo,ooo Greeks was yet frefl in
every body's remembrance; as were the exploits of
Agefilaus, who with a handful of men had made the
great king to tremble on his throne. The bravery of
the Macedonian troops was universally known.

It was at the time of this folernn assembly of the flates

of Greece at Corinth, that Alexander, surprised at not
being visited by the famous Diogenes, as he had
been by all the other eminent philoolphers, resolved
to pay that Cynic a visit. Finding Diogenes bafiing
in the fun, and in a situation that indicated extreme
poverty, Alexander asked him, whether he wanted any
thing. " Yes," answered Diogenes, " I want you to
" remove from between me and the sun-beams."-
This answer raised the indignation of the courtiers,
but attrated the admiration of Alexander; who de-

clared,

clared, that if he were not Alexander he would choose
to be Diogenes.

Alexander, before setting off for Asia, went to Delphos,

to consult the priestess of Apollo. But the priestess having
refused to go to the temple, because the day happened to
,be one of those called inauspicious, on which she was
..prohibited from consulting the god, Alexanderis said to
have laid hold of her by the arm, to force her to go
thither. The prieflefs having thereupon cried out
" 0, my son, it is impossible to resist you," Alexander
took these words for the response; and, without re-
quiring any other, returned to Macedonia ; where, after
making the necessary preparations for his departure,
offering a solemn sacrifice, and celebrating public games,
he gave a grand entertainment to all the princes of the
blood, and general officers, at which there were no
fewer than 200 tables.

Alexander having appointed Antipater governor of

Macedonia during his absence, distributed in presents
and largefles among his friends almost all the domains
belonging to the crown, bellowing a portion of land
on one, a town on another, royal privileges and exemp-
tions on a third.

Alexander set out for Asia in the beginning
434. of spring, at the head of an army of 30,000 foot

and 5000 horse. Most of his officers were men,

who, having grown old in the service of Philip, were
thoroughly experienced in the art of war; and his fol-
diers were all veterans, and perfetly acquainted with
discipline. Parmenio commanded the foot, as did his
son Philotas a part of the horse. Alexander marched
directly to the Hellelpont, which he passed with i6o
galleys and several smaller vessels ; conducing, with his
own hand the galley wherein he failed himself.

His treasury was very inadequate to so great an un-

dertaking. But -both Alexander and his officers were
firmly persuaded that they were marching rather to cer-

2 tain

tain conquest, than to attempt a doubtful expedition.
Alexander was the firit of his army that jumped on A-
fiatic ground. Arriving at Ilium, he resolved to cele-
brate public games to the memory of Achilles; which
he caused to be performed around that hero's tomb.
On that occasion, he expressed his envy of the good
fortune of Achilles, in having found a faithful friend
while he lived, and after his death a Homer to immor-
talize his exploits.

When he arrived at the banks of the Granicus, Par-

nenio advised to halt a little, that the troops might have
some time to repose themselves. But Alexander's ea-
gernefs to proceed, prevented his complying with this
advice. He said, it was proper to take advantage of the
terror which the news of his arrival had created among
the Persians. His courage was rather animated than
depressed at the view of the vast army'which waited for
him on the opposite fide of the river; and which a-
mounted to upwards of loo,ooo foot and Io,oo0
horse, under the command of Memnon and Rhodian, a
very skilful general.

Alexander placing himself at the head of the right

wing of his army, plunged into the river, and was fol-
lowed by all his troops. The Persians, feeing the Ma-
cedonians advancing, assailed them with a shower of
darts. Both armies come at last to the charge. The
Macedonians, fighting under the double disadvantage of
inferiority in point of numbers, and the worst ground,
give way a little at first. Alexander encourages them
by his presence, deals death with every firoke, and
bears down all before him. He charges the Persian ca-
valry, which make a brave refiltance. He engages Spi-
throbates, the fon-in-law of Darius, and transfixes him
with a lance. Here Clitus, who fought by Alexander's
fide, saved his life, by intercepting the firoke of a
battle-ax that was aimed at him. The Macedonians,
feeing the danger that threatened their king, redoubled

C c their

their efforts, and at last put the Persian cavalry to flight.
Then Alexander charges the enemy's infantry with his
Macedonian phalanx, which had by this time passed the
river. The Persians, confounded at the boldness of the
1Iacedonians, made but a feeble resistance, and were
quickly routed. No part qs the Persian army now kept
its ground, except a body of Grecian infantry engaged
in the service of Darius. 'Ihefe finding thelnfelves de-
ferted by the Perfi.ns, and their retreat cut off by the
Macedonians, began a most obflinate engagement ; and
being all brave weli-difriplined veterans, they fought
with the most desperate obilinacy, and were all killed
on the spot except 2000, who were made prisoners.
The Perfi;nsrin this battle, loft 20,000 foot and 2500
horse. The loss of Alexander vas only about 200 men,
among whom were twenty-five horsemen of the royal
guard, to whose memory Alexander ordered flatues to
be ereted. He mhowed the utmost attention to the
wounded, going himself to fee them dressed · He or.
dered all the Greek prisoners to be conveyed to Mace-
donia, and sent to the Athenians 300oo Persian bucklers
as a token of his vicory,

This vicory was a happy prelude to those that were

to follow, and served to propagate the terror of the Ma-
cedonian arms. Sardis, the key of Upper Asia, open-
ed its gates to the conqueror. Ephesus followed the ex-
ample; and Alexander there offered sacrifices to Diana.
Trallis and Magnesia, in like manner, sent him their
keys. Miletus alone, where the brave Memnon had
taken refuge, resolved to Itand a siege, and made a long
resistance. But upon the Macedonians attempting an
assault, after having made several breaches in the walls,
the garrison thought proper to capitulate.

Alexander, to deprive his troops of all hopes of re-

turn, unless vicorious, ordered his fleet to be destroyed;
reserving only a few filips for transporting such engines
as might be necefitry in the course of the expedition.

He

He next marched towards Halicarnassus, to which he
laid siege. The inhabitants, commanded by Memnon,
made so very long and vigorous a resistance, that a man of
less obstinacy and resolution than Alexander would have
been wearied out, and would have abandoned the en-
terprife. But he persisted, and at last prevailed. Mem-
non, however, made his escape by sea, with the greater
part of the inhabitants, and the riches of the town.

Upon this, several princes of Asia Minor submitted to

Alexander, and acknowledged him for their superior
and sovereign; and, among the reft, Mithridates king
of Pontus, who, resolving to follow the fortunes of A-
lexander, accompanied him in all his future expeditions.
Alexander spent the winter in the province of Mithridates;
but took the field early in the spring, and passed a nar-
row defile on the sea-coast, that forms the communica-
tion between Syria and Pamphylia. This defile hap-
pening then to be in a great measure covered by the sea,
Alexander's soldiers were obliged to march a whole day
in the water;

It was about this time that he discovered a conspiracy
against his life. Alexander, the son of Eropus, gene-
rdl of his cavalry, was the principal author of this con-
fpiracy, which he was induced to undertake by a pro-
mise of 1ooo talents of gold by Darius. The traitor
was immediately put to death. Alexander arriving in
Phrygia, took Celene after some resistance. From
thence -he proceeded to Gordion, where he desired to
fee the chariot to which was tied the famous Gordian
knot; tome oracle having declared, that he who loosed
it ihould arrive at the empire of Asia. Alexander,
after trying in vain to untie it, cut it in pieces with'his
iword, faying, That the manner of loosing it was of no
importance, provided the thing were accomplished.

In the mean time, Memnon the Rhodian, the belt
general that Darius had, advised that king to carry the
war into Macedonia, by which means he could make

C c z such

such a diversion as would lay Alexander under the ne-
ceflity of returning to Europe, to defend his own domi-
ions. Darius approved of the advice, and gave Mem-
non the command of a fleet for putting. it in execu-
tion. Memnon thereupon reduced Chios and Lesbos,
but died as he was besieging Mytilene. Darius was
extremely sorry for the loss of that general; and having
now no other commander capable of supplying his place,
he was obliged to take the command of his armies him-
self.

Alexander thus freed of Memnon, whose abilities

might have thrown great obstacles in the way of his
projects, subdued Cappadocia, advanced towards the
Higher. Asia, and arrived at the pass of Cilicia, by
which alone he could penetrate into the country of
Tarsus. On this occasion, he was highly favoured by
his good fortune. For though his army might have
been long stopped, and perhaps defeated at this pass,
which was very narrow,-yet he found it quite un-
guarded, passed it without opposition, and arrived at
Tarsus time enough to prevent that very rich town
from being burnt by the Persians.

It was now about the end of summer, and the
33A. weather was violently hot. Alexander, struck

with the clearness of the waters of the river Cyd-

nus, which wafles that city, resolved to bathe in it.
But he had hardly entered the water, when he was
seized with an excessive' chilnefs. Those that were with
him instantly conveyed him to his tent in a slate of utter
insensibility. The news of this accident filled the camp
with the highest consternation; and the soldiers began
to figure to themselves the numberless misfortunes to
which the death of their prince should expose them.
Alexander, in the mean time, recovering his senses,
perceived the danger of his disease. We may easily
figure to ourselves the violent agitation of his mind,
thug to find himself flopped in the entry of his career,

and

and almost on the point of ending his days in so unhappy
and obscure a manner. He fancied he already heard
the' noise of the Persian army; and not so desirous of
life as of glory, commanded his physicians to administer
the most speedy remedies.

But the physicians, confidering that Darius had pro-

mifed a reward of iooo talents to any person who would
rid him of Alexander, dreaded to render themselves
responsible for his life by the application of any remedy.
But one of them named Philip, who had been about
the person of Alexander from his infancy, and entertain-
ed a strong affecion for him, feeing his beloved matter
in such extremity, despised all danger, and proposed to
give him a draught that should quickly procure him
relief. In the mean time, Alexander received a letter
from Parmenio, whom he had left behind him in Cap-
padocia, counselling him to beware of Philip, whom
Darius had corrupted by a promise of iooo talents.
How great muff have been the perplexity of Alexander
on this trying occasion, difiraded between fear and
hope, racked by suspicion on one fide, and encouraged
by his confidence in Philip on the other! His difiruft at
last gave way to his confidence in Philip; and taking
the draught prepared for him in one hand, he, with the
other, gave Parmenio's letter to Philip; and, looking
Rtedfaftly at the physician's countenance, drank out the
potion without hesitation or the appearance of any un-
easiness; but, at the fame time, he perceived in Philip's
face evident marks of honest indignation. The phyfi-
cian, after reading the letter, said no more, than that
the recovery of his king would soon wipe off all fufpi-
cion of the shocking crime laid to his charge; and he
intreated Alexander not to prevent the effieds of his pre-
scription, by giving way to anxious inquietudes. The
remedy, in the mean time, began to operate; but not
without occasioning very severe effects on the king;
Which, for some time, held the minds of those present

C c 3 i

in painful fufpence. But a speedy cure soon dispelled
all their fears, and restored the king, in perse& health,
to the eyes of his desponding soldiers, who at the fight
passed from the lowest deje&ion to the highest joy.

Darius, in the mean time, who lay encamped on the

plains of Assyria with an army of between 400,000 and
500,000 men, resolved to go in quest of his enemy,
instead of waiting for him. That monarch, accuflomed
to the extravagant flattery of his satraps, who aflured
him of a certain viaory, aiked Charidemus, the Athe-
nian orator, whose banishment from his native country
had been procured by Alexander as already mentioned,
whether he believed the Persian army to be powerful
enough to conquer that of the presumptuous Macedo-
nian. Charidemus, incapable of flattery or diffimula-
tion, answered with the honest freedom of a republican,
that all the pompous and magnificent warlike prepara-
tions of the Persian army, and their prodigious num-
ber of men, might indeed terrify and confound the
neighbouring powers of the Persian monarchy, but
would make no such impression on the Macedonian
army, which was all covered with steel: That the Mace-
donian phalanx was an impenetrable bulwark; that all
their soldiers were inured to war, were thoroughly dif-
ciplined, and were satisfied with the plainer food; that
the Ihetalian horsemen were not to be repulsed by
flings; and that all the gold and silver, of which the
Persian camp displayed such a vain parade, might be
much more usefully employed in hiring good troops.

To speak so honestly and plainly to a prince corrupted

by flattery, and who regarded himself as the mods power-
ful monarch in'the world, was highly dangerous. Cha-
ridenmus experienced to his colt the truth of this maxim.
Darius, though naturally of a mild and gentle difpo-
fition, was so provoked at the bluntness of the Athenian,
that he ordered him to be put to death. But that aw-
ful profpeC by no means altered the tone of Charide-

mpus;

mus; who, as Quintus Curtius'tells us, when led to
execution, cried out, " My death shall be quickly a-
" venged, even by the very man against whom 1 have
<( given my best advice. But you fllall furnish an ex-

ample to posterity, that when men allow themselves
c to be dazzled by prosperity, the good qualities bei
" flowed by nature are quickly eradicated."

Darius repented, when too late, of having put Cha.

ridemus to death. In the mean time, he advanced with
his army towards the Euphrates, never beginning his
march in the morning till after fun rife. Quintus Cur.
tius has given us a description of the march, or rather
of the royal procefilon immediately about the person of
the Persian monarch; but though possible, it carries so
much appearance of absurdity, that we shall take notice
of it only by way of note, whereof the substance
follows *.

C c 4 Par.

* Altars of silver with the fire called eternal; 36G young boys

clothed in purple robes: the chariot of Jupiter drawn by white
horses: ten chariots: a body of cavalry composed of men of twelve
different nations: another body of cavalry called the immortal, a,
mounting to o,ooo, drefled in robes of cloth of gold : the relations of
the king, to the number of io,ooo, most sumptuously dressed: the Do-
riphori, or body-guards of the king : the chariot of the king, adorn-
ed with images of the geds, and two statues, one of war, the other
of peace, placed in the middle of the yoke, and set off with precious
flones; between there (tatues was an eagle of gold with his wings ex-
tended: The king appeared on this chariot, dressed in the highest
magnificence, begirt with a belt of gold, whence depended his
fcymitar, having his head adorned with a tiara firmounted with a
crown of blue and white: an each fide of him marched 200 of his
relations: he was followed by io,ooo pikemen. His rear was corn
posed of 3o,0oo foot: then came a chariot, carrying Syfigambiss
the mother of Darius, accompanied by his wife: fifteen large cha-
riots, bearing the king's children, with their governors and eunuchs ;
and his concubines, to the number of 360: 600 mules, and ooo
camels loaded with money: The wives of the officers of state all
mounted on chariots: The proceflion was closed by companies of
light-armed troops,

taken possession of the pass between Syria and Cilicia,
to secure a retreat to his troops in cafe of necessity, and
he had likewise taken possession of the fmnall city of lfius.
Alexander hearing that Darius- was encamped at Soca
in Assyria, marched directly againit him, paired the de-
file of Syria, and took post near the city of Myriandra.
The Greek commanders, in the service of Darius, ad-
vised that monarch to wait for the enemy in the plains
of Assyria, where he might avail himself of all his
itrengt-h. This prudent advice was accounted traiterous
by the courtiers, who, therefore, were of opinion,
that those Greeks, together with their men, ought to
be immediately cut in pieces. But Darius rejeEed this
proposal with horror; and after thanking the Greeks
for their advice, set forward to meet his enemy.-Da.
rius directed his march towards Cilicia, entering into
that country by the pass of Ammanicus, which lies above
that of Syria; and then advanced towards Issus, with-
out knowing that he was in the rear of Alexander. In-
telligence being brought him that the Macedonian was
flying, he thought he had no more ado but to go in
pursuit of him.

Alexander hearing of the situation of Darius's
333. army, was overjoyed at the thoughts of engaging

in so narrow a spot, where he had room enough

to bring all his forces into altion; while, on the other
hand, Darius could not make use of the twentieth part
of his. He felt, however, some anxiety at being on
the eve of coming to so important an acion ; but his
natural intrepidity quickly got the better of all his ap-
prehensions. After causing his troops to refresh them-
selves, and offering up a solemn facrifce to the gods, he
gave orders at midnight for marching, and brought his
army by day-break to the station he intended to occupy.
Hearing that Darius was within a league and a half of
him, he immediately ranged his troops in battle order.
The spot whereon they were drawn up was a fine

plain

plain in the neighbourhood of the river Issus, con-
fined by mountains on one fide, and by the sea on the
other. He disposed his cavalry on the wings; and
formed the phalanx into fix divifions.--Craterus
commanded the infantry on the extremity of the left
wing; Parmenio the reft of that wing ; and Alexander
himself the right wing.-His cavalry were covered by his
light armed troops, and his infantry by a body of archers
under Antiochus.

Darius placed in the centre of his first line 30,000

Greeks who were in his service, and being all complete-
ly armed and disciplined after the Grecian manner,
formed the main strength of his army. The reft of his
infantry were drawn up behind the first line, except
20,000 who were potled on the mountain on the right
of the Macedonians. His cavalry was ordered to crois
the river Pinarus which ian through the middle of the
plain; and then a large detachment of them puffhed on
towards Parmenio. Alexander observing this motion of
the Persian cavalry, altered his former disposition a
little, commanded the Theftalian cavalry to occupy the
post at which the Persian cavalry seemed to aim, and
Itationed his light armed troops in front of his infantry,

The main bodies of both armies coming at last in

view of each other, Alexander rode through his ranks
and exhorted his soldiers to do their duty, reminding
the Macedonians of their repeated vitories in Europe,
and of their recent and most glorious success at the Gra-
nicus, and afluring them, that a tingle victory would
render them masters of the empire of Persia; exhorting
the Greeks to recall to their remembrance the heroic
behaviour of their ancestors at Marathon, Thermopyla,
and Salamis, and the miseries brought upon their coun-
try by the Persians; and animating the Illyrians and
Thracians with the hopes of the immnenfe plunder the
Persian army, if beaten, ihould afford them. The whole
army called aloud to be led on to the engagement.

The

410 THE HISTORY or Book IV.

The right wing of the- Macedonians, to avoid as much

as possible the showers of darts poured upon them by
the Persians, plunged immediately into the river, and
advanced to the charge. The shock was extremely
violent, and they fought man to man. Alexander was
very desirous of having the honour to engage Darius
hand to hand; and the fight of that monarch, confpi-
cuoufly mounted on his superb chariot, redoubled this
desire in the Macedonian hero, who inflantly pufied for-
ward, and exerted his utmost efforts to reach Darius.
The battle round the king became very desperate, and
a great number of Persian noblemen were killed fighting
bravely. The horses of Darius being wounded, rear
and break loose from the yoke. Darius jumps from
that chariot, mounts another, flies, and is followed by
the whole right wing of his army. On the other hand,
the reft of the Macedonian army being attacked in flank
by the Greek troops, as warlike and well disciplined as
themselves, had occasion for all their bravery to support
the charge. The battle between them was very bloody
and doubtful. But the Macedonian right wing, now
vitorious, flies to the affi(tance of their left, attacks the
Greeks in flank, and obliges them to give way. At
the fame time the Persian had charged the Theffalian
cavalry, and had at first broken through several fqua-
drons.-The Theffalians affecing to take flight, as if
firuck with a panic, the Persians pursue them in disorder;
but the Theffalians rallying unexpecedly, renew the
engagement. Intelligence arriving, in the mean time,
that Darius had fled, the Persian horsemen were dif.
couraged, betook themselves to flight, and a great
number of them were cut off in the retreat. The rout
was then general: 800ooo Greeks made good their escape
and retired towards Lesbos. 'The barbarians take dif-
ferent roads; some fly towards Persia; some take refuge
in the woods. The Macedonians, in the mean time, pofG
^cffed themselves of Darius's camp, where they found

his

his mother ard his wife, together with two princesses
and a son, his infant children.--The Persians loft a vait
number of men in this battle, while the loss on the
fide of the Macedonians was very inconsiderable. Alex-
ander himself was wounded in the thigh by a sword;
but the wound was attended with no dangerous con-
seq uences.

Alexander, weary ofpurfuing Darius, returned to the

Persian camp, where he gave a grand entertainment to
his principal officers. While at table, the noise of
crying and mourning reached their ears. This proceed-
ed from the mother and wife of Darius ; who obierving
Darius's chariot and bow, which Alexander had taken
in the pursuit, imagined Darius was killed, and were
bewailing his death in the most disconsolate manner.
Alexander, moved with their misfortune, sent Leonatus,
one of his officers, to assure them that Darius was alive.
But the woman imagining that Leonatus came to put
them to death, intreated to have permiflion, before their
execution, to bury the body of Darius. Leonatus
soon made them fentible of their mistake, and aflured
them of an honourable protection from Alexander.
That prince, after visiting the wounded, and feeing the
dead buried, testified great joy to his officers on ac-
count of his victory; betlowed the highest commenda-
tions on their bravery; and loaded them with presents.
lie then went to pay a visit to Syligambis and the other
princesses, and entered their tent with no other attend-
ant but his favourite Epheftion.

This interview was extremely moving, and exhibited

those diftinguithed characters in a point of view so
affecting, and from their situation so peculiarly interelt-
ing, that the greatest painters have exerted their flill
to eternize the scene with the most elegant touches
of the pencil. Epheflion being of the fame age with A-
lexander, and of a more advantageous flature, was
mistaken for the king by the ladies, who accordingly

threw

threw themselves at his feet. Syfigambis, on being in-
formed of her mistake, prostrated herself before Alex-
ander, and excused herself because she had never seen
him before. But Alexander raised her from the ground,
" My dear mother, (said he), you are not mistaken,
" for he is likewise Alexander." A noble expression, as
honourable for the prince as for the favourite.-Syfi-
gambis expressed the highest gratitude for the favours
and obliging attention he had ihewn them; and Alex-
ander took the son of Darius in his arms, and careired
him very fondly. Here the real heroism and virtue of
Alexander shone forth in full splendor. He gave orders
to treat the princesses with all the refpe&l due to their
rank, making his camp as sacred an asylum for their
virtue as any temple; nor would he afterwards trust
himself in the pretence of Darius's Queen, who was a
woman of singular beauty. To underltand the full ex-
tent of his magnanimity on this occasion, we must re-
member that Alexander was then in the full bloom of
youth, unmarried, and a conqueror. But far from at-
tempting to derive any ungenerous advantage from his
vitory, he studied to alleviate the misfortunes of his
illustrious captives by the most polite attention, and the
most respectful kindness and indulgence.

Parmenio having, in the mean time, marched to Da-

mafcus, received from the governor of that city all the
treasures deposited there by Darius for defraying the
expences of his warlike expeditions, together with the
equipages of many Persian lords, the whole amounting
to an immense value. The Macedonians likewise found
in that city several princesses of the royal blood ofPerfia,
with a great number of the wives of the satraps, and a
multitude of officers belonging to the household of
Darius.

Darius continued to fly with the utmosn precipitation

Through many defart provinces, till he crossed the Eu-
phrates, and arrived at Thapfacus, Alexander in the

mean

mean time entered Syria, where most of the cities vo-
luntarily opened their gates to him. In one of those ci-
ties that prince received a letter from Darius, couched
in such haughty terms as but ill became his present situ-
ation. Without giving Alexander the title of king, he
offered him any fum of money he fhoild demand as
the ransom of his mother, his wife, and children; and
counselled him to reft satisfied with the dominions of his
anceltors, and not to persist in his attempt to usurp the
kingdom of another. Alexander returned an answer
in the fame strain. He enumerated the misfortunes
brought on Greece by the Persians. He reproached
them with having suborned affafiins to murder his father
Philip; and. upbraided Darius with having offered a re-
ward of 1ooo talents to any person who should kill him,
Alexander: he therefore concluded, that he was not
the aggressor. He intimated however to Darius, that
on his applying to him in a suppliant manner, he should
receive his mother and wife without any ransom; and he
concluded, by desiring him to remember, when he
wrote to him next, that he not only wrote to a king
but to. his own king.

Upon Alexander's arrival in Phenicia, the Sidonians

paid him their homage with great pleasure, because,
eighteen years before, Ochus had destroyed their city,
and cut off most of the inhabitants. Their king, Stra-
to, having declared for Darius, was deprived of the
crown by Alexander, who desired Ep!-eftion to pitch
on any of the Sidonians whom he thought most worthy
of succeeding to that dignity. Ephaefion accordingly
offered the sceptre to two young men, who were bro-
thers, and in whofe.houfe he happened to lodge. But
they generously declined the honour, because they were
not of the royal blood. Epheftion firuck with admira-
tion at their magnanimity, begged of them to inform
him of any person who had that advantage. They there-
upon named Abdolonymus,. whole generosity and inte.

grity

grity had reduced him to such poverty, that he was
obliged to cultivate his garden. with his own hands for
his subsistence. The young men were desired to find
him, and to acquaint him with his good fortune. Ha-
ving accordingly gone to him, they saluted him as king,
and told him, that he must throw aside the wretched ap-
parel he then was wearing, and put on the royal robe
they had brought him. It was with great difficulty that
they convinced him they were not jesting. " Assume,"
said they, " with there royal robes the sentiments of a
,c king, preserve on the throne that virtue which has
' made you worthy of it; and when you shall preside
cc there as the arbiter of life, and death, forget not the
" situation from which you were exalted to that impor-
' tant dignity."

All the inhabitants of Sidon were overjoyed at hear-

ing on whom the choice had fallen. Alexander desired
to fee the new king; and having asked him, whether
he had been able to support with patience his former
situation? " Would to heaven," answered Abdolony-
mus, " I may be able to support with equal resolution
' the crown you have been pleased to place on my
" head." Alexander conceived a high opinion of the
virtue of Abdolonymus, and ordered all the furniture
and rich effects of the late King Strato to be given to
him.

The only city in Phenicia which did not acknowledge

its dependence on the Macedonians was Tyre, account-
ed, even before the captivity of the Jews at Babylon, the
moit flourishing city in the world. Its advantageous si-
tuation, the induRtry of its inhabitants, the/fuperior ex-
cellence of its purple, and other cbmmodities,.rendered
it the centre of commerce, the richest city ofthe east,
and the mistress of the sea.

The Tyrians were desirous of making Alexander their
friend, but did not choose to make him their master;

and therefore on his offering to enter their city,
332. 2 they

they shut their gates agAin(t him. Incensed at this
affront, Alexander resolved to take vengeance on them,
by laying siege to their city. This undertaking car-
ried with it the appearance of extreme difficulty, the
city being not only situated in an island, at the distance
of a quarter of a league from the continent, but likevife
very strongly fortified, and the Tyrians being firmly re-
olved to make an obstinate resistance. It was however
of great importance to' Alexander to get possession of
Tyre, as by th:-t means he should command all Pheni-
cia, should deprive the Persians of one half of their na-
val flrength, become sovereign at sea, and so reduce in a
little tine both Egypt and the island of Cyprus. Besides
these vnotives in point of expediency, ;-lexander was of
a disposition that could brook no refinfance; and diffi-
culties served only to render him more obstinate. Per-
ceiving, however, that it would be necessary to construct
between the continent and the island a mound, which,
at the fame time that it must be a tedious and laborious
work, might after all be sweeped away by the violence
of the waves; and that the other obstacles of every kind
were very great, and might detain him too long from
the prosecution of his other enterprises; Alexander
thought it advisable to attempt an accommodation, and
therefore sent heralds to offer terms of peace to the Ty-
rians. But instead of listening to his proposals, the pre-
sumptuous citizens killed the heralds, and threw their
bodies from the top of the walls into the sea. Alexan-
der, transported with rage at this insult, determined to
undertake the siege, whatever it might coif him.

As a circumstantial detail of the particulars of this

famous siege would require more room than the nature
of the present work will admit of, we fllall confine our-
leives to the most remarkable circumstances attending it.

Alexander, in the first place, ordered a foundation

to be laid for raising a mound to communicate between
the continent and the island. This work was attended

with

with incredible labour, and the Tyrians exerted their
utmost efforts to impede its execution. At last, how-
ever, when it drew towards a close, a violent tempelt a-
riling, overthrew by the force of the waves the effect of
all their labours. This unfortunate accident, capable of
discouraging any other man than Alexander, had no such
effet upon him, nor upon his soldiers, who recommen.
ced their labours with wonderful alacrity.

In the mean time the news of his vitory at Issus

brought to his afliftance a valt number of galleys from
different quarters. Sidon, Rhodes, Cyprus, and several
maritime cities in Lycia, contributed each its quota;
and when to these supplies were joined the remains of
his own fleet, he appeared before Tyre with upwards of
0oo galleys. The Tyrians now finding the Macedonians
superior to them in naval itrength, durit no more ven.
ture out of their harbour. The latter, therefore, pro-
fecuted their work unmolested, and soon finimfed the
mole. Warlike engines were quickly erected on it;
and Alexander ordered his fleet to attack the city from
the sea while he invested it from the mole. The be-
figed were overwhelmed with ihowers of stones, and the
walls of their city were incessantly battered by all forts
of engines. The Tyrians finding themselves thus vigo-
roufly attacked, sent away molt of their women and chil-
dren tb Carthage; but still continued to defend themselves
with wonderful obstinacy, and every day put in practice
some new invention to frustrate the attempts of the be-
fiegers, insomuch that Alexander deliberated more than
once about railing the siege. A fea-fight at last ensued,
wherein the Tyrians were defeated, and many of their
sips funk. Alexander took advantage of the confter-
nation produced among the besieged by this defeat, to
give a general assault. Both the attack and defence
were most desperate. The battering rams make breaches
in several parts of the wall: The Macedonians instantly

rush

rush forward by those breaches: Alexander exposes him-
self to the most imminent danger, performs prodigies of
valour, and by his example encourages his soldiers: The
Macedonians at last get poffefion of the ramparts: The
Tyraians fly on all fides, are put to the sword without
diftindtion, and most of them are sacrificed to the fury
of the conquerors *.

The Sidonians, compaffionating the miseries of the

unhappy Tyrians, saved the lives of more than 15,000
of them, by conveying them privately aboard their llips.
Alexander, exasperated to the higeft degree by the
length and obitinacy of the siege, crucified o000 of the
Tyrians along the fea-ihore, and fold for slaves upwards
of 30,000 of them whom he had made prisoners.
Thus was taken the famous.city of Tyre, after a siege
of seven mouths duration, and one of the most memo-
rable recorded in ancient history.

At this siege Alexander was wounded in the shoulder.

Darius in the mean time sent Alexander another letter,
offering him rooo talents as the ransom of the prin-
cesses, with his daughter Statira in marriage, together
with all the provinces he had conquered, as far as the
Euphrates. Parmenio was of opinion, that Alexander
ought to accept of these terms, declaring, that if he
were in Alexander's place, he would accept of them
himself: " And so would 1," answered Alexander,
" were I Parmenio." In answer, he informed Darius,
that he had no occasion for his money: That with re-
sped to the conquered provinces, he, Darius, offered

D d "with

* In the course of this siege Alexander having made an incursion

into the country of the Arabians who dwelt about Antilibanus, in-
volved himself in very imminent danger from an affecionate attach-
ment to his preceptor Lysimachus, who being unable through age to
keep up with the reft of the party, Alexander resolved to tfay behind
with him. Thus separated from the main body of the soldiers, they
remained a whole night in a most disagreeable situation, surrounded
by parties of the enemy. But by Alexandei's intrepidity and good.
fortune, they were extricated from their dangerous dilemma.

with a bad grace what it was not in his power to be-
stow; but that he might, whenever he pleased, venture
another battle, which, in all probability, would decide
which of them ihould remain the conqueror and mailer.
This answer convinced Darius, that he had now no al-
ternative but once more to try the fate of war.

Alexander, provoked against the Jews, for their ha-

ving refused to supply his army with provisions during
the siege of Tyre, under pretence of an oath of fidelity
sworn by them to Darius, marched towards Jerusalem,
with an intention to treat that city as he had treated
Tyre. Jaddus, the high priest, hearing of his approach,
had recourse to sacrifice and prayer; and in consequence
of a revelation made t6 him in a dream, cloathed him-
self in his pontifical vestments, and taking with him all
the servants belonging to the temple, marched out in
solemn procession to meet Alexander. That prince, on
feeing the high priest, was struck with surprise and ve-
neration ; and coming up to him, saluted him with a re-
ligious refpet. His officers appearing confounded at
this behaviour, Alexander told them, that it was not
the man but the great God, whose servant he was,
whom he meant to honour by this refpecful behaviour;
assuring them at the fame time that before leaving Ma-
cedonia, as he was anxiously revolving in his mind his
future expedition, he had seen in a vision this very
high priest, dressed in the fame robes he now wore, who
encouraged him to prosecute his intended invasion of
the Persian empire, and told him, that the God whom
he worihipped, would conduct his undertakings, and
crown him with victory That he recollected this vision
the moment he had at this time set eyes on the-high
priest, and that therefore he entertained no further
doubt of conquering Darius.

It is most likely that this pretended dream of Alexan-

der's was the child of political hypocrisy. The intention
iG obvious. Alexander wi.hed his own soldiers, as well

as

as the Persians, to be persuaded that the gods had de-
rfined him to subdue the empire of the east ;-a belief
that muff inspire his troops with additional confidence,
and his enemies with despair. Several other passages of
Alexander's conduct show very clearly that this was a
principal point of policy with that prince: and it is pro-
bable that the opinion he laboured to inspire, first of his
divine mission, next of his divine descent, and finally of
his own personal divinity, gradually broached as he ad-
vanced among more ignorant and more superstitious na-
tions, contributed considerably to his subsequent con-
quests. I am therefore thoroughly persuaded, that in
propagating this idea Alexander was less prompted, by
vanity than by policy.

Alexander, delighted with the accomplishment of this

flattering perdition, embraced the high preift, and en-
tering Jerusalem, proceeded to the temple; and offered
sacrifices, complying in every particular with the direc-
tions of Jaddus. After which the high priest laid before
him the passages of Daniel's prophecies, which respeCted
Limfelf and his conquests.

Overjoyed at those wonderful prophecies, Alexander
bestowed many marks of his kindness on the Jews, and
desired them to ask of him some favour. They de-
manded permission to live in conformity with the laws
of their fathers ; and Alexander granted the request.

Alexander next directed his march towards Gaza,
which he desired to subdue, that he might open to him-
self a way into Egypt. But Betis, the governor placed
there by Darius, thought it his duty to defend the place
to the last extremity, by which means the Macedonian
was flopped before it no less than two months. He
took it however at last; and out of resentment for the
obstinate defence made by the inhabitants, he put lo,ooo
of them to the sword, fold.the reft for slaves, and instead
of ihowing that refpet for Betis which his bravery and
his fidelity to his sovereign deserved, used him with the

D d most

with a bad grace what it was not in his power tobe-
stow; but that he might, whenever he pleased, venture
another battle, which, in all probability, would decide
which of them should remain the conqueror and mailer.
This answer convinced Darius, that he had now no al-
ternative but once more to try the fate of war.

Alexander, provoked against the Jews, for their ha-

ving refused to supply his army with provisions during
the siege of Tyre, under pretenceof an oath of fidelity
sworn by them to Darius, marched towards Jerusalem,
with an intention to treat that city as he had treated
Tyre. Jaddus, the high pried, hearing of his approach,
had recourse to sacrifice and prayer; and in consequence
of a revelation made to him in a dream, cloathed him-
self in his pontifical vestments, and taking with him all
the servants belonging to the temple, marched out in
solemn procession to meet Alexander. That prince, on
feeing the high priest, was struck with surprise and ve-
neration; and coming up to him, saluted him with a re-
ligious refpet. His officers appearing confounded at
this behaviour, Alexander told them, that it was not
the man but the great God, whose servant he was,
whom he meant to honour by this refpetful behaviour;
assuring them at the fame time that before leaving Ma-
cedonia, as he was anxiously revolving in his mind his
future expedition, he had seen in a vision this very
high priest, dressed in the fame robes he now wore, who
encouraged him to prosecute his intended invasion of
the Persian empire, and told him, that the God whom
he worshipped, would conduc his undertakings, and
crown him with viEtory : That he recolleced this vision
the moment he had at this time set eyes on the'high
priert, and that therefore he entertained no further
doubt of conquering Darius.

It is most likely that this pretended dream of Alexan-

der's was the child of political hypocrisy. The intention
ji obvious. Alexander wihed his own soldiers, as well

as

as the Persians, to be persuaded that the gods had de-
rfined him to subdue the empire of the east ;-a belief
that must inspire his troops with additional confidence,
and his enemies with despair. Several other passages of
Alexander's conduct show very clearly that this was a
principal point of policy with that prince: and it is pro-
bable that the opinion he laboured to inspire, first of his
divine mission, next of his divine descent, and finally of
his own personal divinity, gradually broached as he ad-
vanced among more ignorant and more superstitious na-
tions, contributed considerably to his subsequent con-
quests. I am therefore thoroughly persuaded, that in
propagating this idea Alexander was less prompted, by
vanity than by policy.

Alexander, delighted with the accomplishment of this

flattering perdidion, embraced the high preift, and en-
tering Jerusalem, proceeded to the temple, and offered
sacrifices, complying in every particular with the direc-
tions of Jaddus. After which the high priest laid before
him the passages of Daniel's prophecies, which refpeted
bimfelf and his conquests.

Overjoyed at those wonderful prophecies, Alexander
bestowed many marks of his kindness on the Jews, and
desired them to ask of him some favour. They de-
manded permission to live in conformity with the laws
of their fathers ; and Alexander granted the request.

Alexander next directed his march towards Gaza,
which he desired to subdue, that he might open to him-
self a way into Egypt. But Betis, the governor placed
there by Darius, thought it his duty to defend the place
to the last extremity, by which means the Macedonian
was stopped before it no less than two months. He
took it however at last; and out of resentment for the
obstinate defence made by the inhabitants, he put 1o,ooo
of them to the sword, fold.the reft for slaves, and instead
of showing that refpe& for Betis which his bravery and
his fidelity to his sovereign deserved, used him with the

D d z moit

most disgraceful cruelty. Commanding his feet to be
pierced, and a cord to be passed through the holes, he
caused him to be dragged round the city till he died, as-
secting to imitate Achilles, who used the body of Heaor
in the fame manner.

Leaving a garrison in Gaza, Alexander advanced to-

wards Egypt, and arrived before Pelufium. The Egyp-
tians had long submitted with impatience to the Persian
government. They entertained a strong resentment of
the cruelty of Ochus, and desired nothing more ardent-
ly than an opportunity to throw off the yoke under which
they groaned. As oion therefore as Alexander appeared
among them, they cheerfully submitted to his authority.
Mazeus, Darius's governor at Memphis feeing Alexan-
der at the head of a powerful army, opened to him the
gates of that capital, and put him in possession of 8oo0 ta-
lents, and all the rich effects of the king.

Every thing giving way in thic manner to Alexander,

his heart, elated by so many victories, was no longer
proof against the baneful influences of prosperity, which
generally corrupts the heart, and renders men blind to
their real situation. The vanity of Alexander suggested
to him the ridiculous projet of imitating the example of
some of the ancient heroes, by pretending to be the son
of Jupiter. WTith this absurd view, he resolved to pay
a visit to the tem-ple of Jupiter Ammon. situated in the
midst of the deserts of Libya, at the distance of twelve
days journey from Memphis; and he found means pre-
vioufly to corrupt the priess, by large presents, to be-
have to himi in the manner he desired.

In this journey he observed beyond Canopus a spot

very advantageously situated for being the foundation of
a maritime city. He gave orders therefore for immedi-
ately beginning the work, and called the city after his
own name Alexandria. Its happy situation, and fine
harbour, afterwards rendered it one of the mola flourish-

I · ing

ing cities in the world, and evinced the finguilar pene-
tration and comprehensive ideas of its great founder.

The journey of Alexander proved as dangerous as its

motive was extravagant; for the road lay through de.
ferts covered with mountains of burning sand. The fol-
diers feeing themselves environed on all hands with
frightful de:serts, were seized with conflernation; and
their water having failed them, they were on the point
of perishing for thirst, when a storm of rain coming on,
relieved them from that distress. At length they arri-
ved at the temple of the god, situated on a spot of pretty
good ground, surrounded by a thick wood. The god
was represented under the figure of a ram, covered with
precious stones. Alexander, on entering the temple,
was saluted as son of Jupiter by the chief priest ; who as-
fured him, that the god himself acknowledged him as
such. Alexander received the appellation with joy, and
worfliipped Jupiter as his father. The priest likewise
foretold him; that he flould become sovereign monarch
of the whole world. Here again we find vanity, ambi-
tion, and hypocrisy, united in this irange tranfaaion
and its confcquences.

Alexander constantly, after his return from this visit,

assumed in all his letters and dispatches the title of Son of
Jupiter Ammon. His subjects privately pitied this ri-
diculous folly; but his mother Olympias rallied hini
pleasantly enough on his vanity, begging of him in her
letters to defilt from promoting a quarrel between Juno
and her.

That prince, before leaving Memphis, fettled a pro-

per form of government for Egypt, conferring the prin-
cipal military offices on Macedonians alone, and diftri-
buting the country into various departments. But he
permitted the Egyptians to make use of their ancient laws.

Alexander, leaving Egypt, proceeded towards the east

to pursue Darius. During a short stay which hemade
at Tyre, having been informed of the death of Statira,

D d 3 Darius's

Darius's queen, he immediately paid a visit to Syfigam.
bis and the other princesses; testified much compassion
for their misfortune, omitted nothing that might con-
tribute to alleviate their grief, and celebrated the queen's
funerals with vast magnificence. Darius, on receiving
the news of his wife's death, from a eunuch who had
made his escape from the Macedonian camp for that
purpose, was extremely grieved, and enquired at the
eunuch with the utmost earnestness, whether Alexander
had ever attempted her virtue. The eunuch assured
him with the most solemn oaths, that Alexander had
constantly behaved to Statira with the utmost delicacy
and refpea ; and that he had discovered on all occa-
sions the highest attention and regard for the other
princesses. Darius, on hearing this, beseeched the gods,
in presence of his courtiers, that if by their immutable
decree the royal line of Persia was destined to fail, Alex-
ander alone might mount the throne of Cyrus.

Alexander, continuing his march, passed the Euphra-

tes, and advanced towards the Tigris with his whole ar-
my. Darius perceiving that the Macedonian would
lifen to no terms of accommodation, assembled an army
more numerous till than any of the former. The plains
of Mesopotamia were covered with his troops. Darius
direEted his march through the country of Nineveh;
but he dispatched Mazeus with a detachment of 6oco
men to oppose Alexander's passage over the Tigris, the
most rapid of all the rivers of the east. Alexander, in
the mean time, having discovered a ford, 'effe&ed the
passage of his army, his foot being disposed in the
middle, and his cavalry on the two wings. The pas-
sage was attended with much trouble and confusion,
the soldiers being obliged to carry their arms and their
baggage on their heads. If Mazeus had arrived in time,
the Macedonians in all probability might have been de-
feated. But the singular good fortune that attended A-
lexander in all his enterprises, saved him from this danger.

Alexander

Alexander encamped for two days on the farther fide

of the Tigris. As the army was preparing for their de-
parture on the third, an eclipse of the moon happened,
This occasioned a superstitious alarm among the troops,
which happily, however, produced no bad confequen-
ces. The soldiers complained loudly, that to satisfy the
ambition of a single man, they should be obliged to tra-
vel to the extremities of the earth, and that even con-
trary to the will of the gods, who thus refused them the
light of the heavenly bodies. But upon the soothsayers
declaring, that the moon was the luminary which fa-
voured the Persians, while on the contrary the Greeks
were patronized by the fun, and that therefore this
eclipse threatened the former with some impending mif-
fortune, the superstitious multitude approved of the in-
terpretation, and resumed their courage. Letters in
the mean time were intercepted, wherein Darius endea-
voured, by vast promises, to persuade the Greek soldiers
to assassinate Alexander. But that prince, by the ad-
vice of Parmenio, took no notice of these letters to the
army. Darius, who was now only at the diltance of
seven or eight leagues, dispatched ten of his relations,
to propose to the Macedonian new terms of peace, more
advantageous still than any of the former. Alexander
returned for answer, That Darius certainly pretended to
treat of peace with an insidious intention, since he was at
that very instant labouring to persuade his, Alexander's,
own soldiers to murder him; that therefore he was de-
termined to use him not as a generous enemy, but as a
base assassin: and he concluded with a ridiculous figure,
telling him, that the world could no more admit of two
masters than it could of two funs.

Darius's army was encamped near the village of Gau-

gamella, in a large plain, at some distance from Arbela,
a city of Assyria. Alexander, after halting some time
to repose his troops and to fortify his camp, there de-
posited all his baggage, and advanced in battle.order to-

D d 4 wards

ward the Persians. Parmenio advised to attack the
enemy in the night, by which means they might obtain
at more easy victory. But Alexander answered, that he
disdained to steal a victory, and that he was resolved to
fight and conquer in the face of day. The army of Da-
rious passed the night under arms. Alexander, after of-
fering up sacrifices to the gods, -retired to reft, not with.
out some anxiety; but falling asleep at lafi, he continu-
ed to sleep so roundly, that they were obliged to awaken
him. Parmenio having expressed much surprise to A-
lexander that he could enjoy such perseEt tranquillity and
composure on the very point of coming to so important
an engagement:---" "Why," answered Alexander,
" ihould I be otherwise, since the enemy has come to
" deliver himself into our hands ?"

Arming himself immediately, he mounted his horse,

rode through the ranks, and exhorted his men to main-
tain their former reputation. Never did he discover
more cheerfulness or resolution. The army of Darius,
according to the most credible account, amounted to
no fewer than 600,ooo foot and 40,000 horse: that of
Alexander's to no more than 40,000 foot and between
7000 and Sooo horse. The troops on each fide were
drawn up in two lines, with the cavalry on the wings.
Two hundred chariots, armed with scythes, were ranged
in the front of the Persian army; and Darius had taken
post in the centre of the foremost line. Alexander had
placed his archers at the head of his army; and to pre-
vent any bad effects from his being surrounded, he gave
orders to the second line to face about in cafe they were
attacked in the rear.

The battle was begun by the cavalry. Alexander's

being charged by those of the enemy, fuflained the first
flock with difficulty; but at last were so lucky as to re-
pulse them. The Persian chariots, armed with scythes,
were next let loose. Upon which the Macedonian ar-
chers discharged a shower of arrows, that galled and

frightened

frightened the horses, and eaufed many of them to run
back :a'mong' the Persian troops, while the Macedo-
nians opening their ranks, permitted the reft of them
to pass.

In the mean time, the soothsayer Ariftander, dressed

in a white robe, advancing into the midit of the troops,
cries but, that he fees an eagle above Alexander's head.
This being a presage of viEtory, animated the troops
with fresh courage. Alexander instantly rushes forward
to support Aretus, who had put to flight the Persian ca-
valry.; and attacking, along with him, the left of the
enemy, fairly breaks them, and then advances against
the quarter where Darius fought. A very bloody and
obftinite engagement en'sued. The soldiers about the
Persian Monarch exerted extraordinary efforts in his de-
fence. But that p.rince's armour bearer being killed by
a javelin thrown from Alexander's own hand, the Per-
fian troops in that wing thinking it was the king himself
who had fallen, set up a frightful cry, were filled with
coiiflernation, and began to give ground. Dai'ius, a-
fraid of falling into the hands of the Macedonians, con--
lults his safety by flight.· A dreadful slaughter followed.
In the mean time, however, the left of the Macedonians,
commanded by Parmenio, was in great danger. A de-
tachment:of the Persian cavalry having forced their way
through them, galloped up to the very baggage. But
the infantry in the centre of the fecond'line facing a-
bout, attacked this body of cavalry in the rear, and obli-
ged them to retreat. The danger, however, was not
yet over, Mazeus next fell upon them, with all the ca-
valry under his command. Alexander, informed of the
danger that threatened Parmenio, returned fromn purfu-
ing Darius, hurried to support his own troops, and falling
in with the body of cavalry that had made the attempt
on the camp,' charged them with the greatels vigour.
The battle was very obstinate. Alexander loft sixty of
his guarlds; but, at length, the Persians were repulsed

and

and put to flight. On the other hand, Mazeus hearing
of the flight of Darius, and of the defeat of the troops
that had fought about the king's person, was so con-
founded at the news, that he gave over the pursuit of
the Macedonians, whom he had thrown into great dif-
order. Parmenio observing this change in the condut
of Mazeus, called out to his troops, that the enemy was
seized with a panic, and that one bold effort would in-
sure them the victory. The Macedonians, animated by
this information, advance againfit the enemy, charge
them with irrefiftable fury, and put them to flight. A.
lexander perceiving that vitory every where declared
for him, returned to the pursuit of Darius, whom he
expected to find in Arbela, where great part of his
treasures were deposited. But Darius, afraid to flop
there, abandoned the city, together with an immense
booty to the Macedonians.

Such was the event of this famous battle, in
331. which the Persians are said to have loft 300,000

men; and the Macedonians no more than 200.

Alexander, after exprefing, by proper sacrifices, his gra-
titude to the gods for this great vi&ory, distributed mag-
nificent presents among the officers who had principally
diftinguilhed themselves. He expressed particular satis-
faaion with the conduct of his Greek soldiers; and, by
way of recompence, ordered all the Greek cities to be
set at liberty, and every species of tyrannical government,
then prevailing among them, to be abolished.

Darius, passing the river Lycus, hurried towards Me-

dia, by the way of the mountains of Armenia, attended
by a very slender retinue.

Alexander having taken possession of Arbela, found,

in that city, 4000 talents of money, (nearly L. 600,ooo
Sterling), and other treasures to an immense value.-
From Arbela he marched to Babylon, where Mazeus
made his submissions, and delivered up the city. Moit
of the Babylonians, impatient to fee their new matier,

went

went out of the city to meet him. Alexander made his
entry at the head of his army. The walls of Babylon,
so celebrated in hiflory, were covered with multitudes
of fpe&ators; the roads were strewed with flowers by
order of the governor of the citadel; and on both fides
of the way altars were ereted, whereon were burnt
perfumes of an exquisite flavour. Immediately behind
the retinue of Alexander were carried the presents de-
ftined for him; among which were many wild beasts,
such as lions, panthers, &c. confined in cages: Next
came the Magi singing hymns; then the Chaldeans,
soothsayers, musicians, and the Babylonian horsemen:
Alexander was mounted on a chariot surrounded by his
guards, and marched along in triumph. He distributed
a great part of the money found in Babylon in presents
among his soldiers; every Macedonian horseman recei-
ving about L. 3 Sterling; every other horseman about
L. 4; and every foot soldier about L. 2.

As Alexander possessed an extraordinary tafle for the

sciences, he passed some time in conversation with the
Chaldeans, who entertained him with their most cu.
rious astronomical observations. He flaid thirty-four
days in Babylon. His residence in this city which was
then immersed in luxury and every species of voluptu.
oufnefs, greatly corrupted his troops. While at Baby-
lon, he was joined by a number of recruits sent him by
Antipater. Alexander departing at last from Babylon,
entered the province of Sitacena, a very fruitful coun-
try. Here, to keep up a spirit of emulation among his
soldiers, he appointed rewards to be dilributed among
the mol: valiant by the officers who had been witnesses
of the bravery displayed by each of them in the several
battles. Here, too, he made some necessary alterations
in his military discipline. Then he proceeded towards
Susa, a city, in Persia, and arrived there on the twen-
tieth day after his departure from Babylon. The gover-
nor of the province sent his son to meet him, and fol-

x lowed

lowed soon after himself, 'with a present consisting of
dromedaries and twelve elephants, which he delivered
to Alexander on the banks 'of the river Choafpus, so
celebrated in history for the delicious taste of its waters.
Alexander entering Susa, found there 5o,eoo talents of
money (upwards of L. 6,ooo,ooo Sterling), and rich
furniture and effets to an immense value. Before quit-
ting Susa, Alexander put a garrison into that city, con-
filling of 3000 men and Ibo0 of his veteran Macedonian
Ibld'iers. He likewise left there Syfigambis and Da-
rius's children, and made that princess a present of some
beautiful purple fluffs that had been sent him from Ma-
cedonia, For Alexander conflantly behaved to her
with as high refpe&.as if ihe had been his own mother;
and so far conformed himself even to the Persian mnan-
ners, that he never fat down in her presence till she
gave him permission.

Alexander nest advanced into' the country of the

lJxii; where, after eflablifhing his authority, he com-
mitted the greatest part of his army to Patmenio. Ta-
king none but the light-armed troops along with him-
self, he penetrated into Persia through the mountains
till he reached the pass of Susa. Ariobarzanes, with
4000 men, having taken possession of the rocks that
commanded that pass, rolled down from the top of them
large flones, which crushed to pieces many of the Ma-
cedonians; who finding it impossible to proceed, were
obliged to stop short in the midst of their vicorious ca-
reer. In this dilemma, a Greek offered to conduc the
Macedonians by a secret unfrequented path to the fum-
mit of those rocks. Alexander accepted of his service;
and taking along with him a good part of his troops,
set out on the attempt. But they met with incredible
difficulties in their way, and narrowly escaped perishing
among the snow. Arriving, however, at the top of the
mountain at last, and discovering the main body of the
enemy, he instantly attacked and cut them in pieces.

Whereupon

Whereupon Craterus, whom he had left at the bottom
of the hill with the refl of the troops, took possession of
the pass, and put the enemy to flight.

Alexander having extricated himself from this dan-

gerous situation, advanced towards Persepolis, the an-
cient residence of the Persian monarchs, and the capital
of their empire, where a part of Darius's treasures were
deposited. After passing the Araxus, he was met, not
far from Persepolis, by about 800 Greeks, all old men,
who having been formerly made prisoners by the Per-
sians, had been by them maimed and disfigured in
their bodies with the most hocking inhumanity. They
came to implore the protection of Alexander; who, on
feeing their miserable situation, could not refrain from
shedding tears. He did all in his power to comfort
them; and offered to procure them a passage home to
their native country. But the Greeks told him, that,
in their present frightful condition, they durst not ap-
pear in Greece; and that, besides, they were unable
to support the fatigue of so long a journey. Alexander,
therefore, consented to let them stay in the fame place,
where they had already spent so many years; and after
presenting each of them with three drachmas, four oxen,
and five suits of cloaths, he firiAly enjoined the go-
vernor of the province carefully to prorec them from
all bad usage for the future; and granted them an ex-
emption from every kind of tribute.

Most of the Persians abandoned Persepolis on the ap-

proach of Alexander, who entered it at the head of his
phalanx. The soldiers, recalling to their remembrance,
that it was from this city those immense armies of Bar-
barians had proceeded, who had spread devastation
through Greece, were seized with a furious spirit of re-
fentment, and cut in pieces the remaining inhabitants.
The treasures amafled in this city greatly exceeded all
that had hitherto fallen into the hands of Alexander.
One would have imagined that the'whole riches of Per-

fia

fia had been here collected together. For besides es-
sects of inestimable value, near L. 16,0ooo,oo Sterling
were found in the royal treasury. This city was indeed
the fountain of the Afiaticluxury. Besides the cities
already mentioned, Alexander had got possession of fe-
veral other very rich towns; and in particular, he had
found at Pafagardus alone near L. 900,000 Sterling.

While Alexander remained at Persepolis, he gave a

grand entertainment; at which, besides other ladies,
a courtezan named Thais, a native of Attica, happen-
ed to be present. In the height of their jollity, this
Thais "having indiscreetly declared, that she would
account it a very great happiness to have the pleasure of
setting fire, with her own hands, to the palace of Xerxes,
the greate{t enemy of Greece, and the de{troyer of A-
thens, all the courtiers highly applauded the thought,
and Alexander himself among the first. The whole
company, therefore, instantly snatching up burning
torches, rushed out; and in a moment reduced that
magnificent palace to ashes. A piece of extravagant
fdlly, for which Alexander repented very sincerely as-
terwards.

Darius had by this time reached Ecbatana, the capi-

tal of Media. Of all his mighty forces, no more than
30,000 now remained with him; among whom were
4ooo Greeks, 4ooo archers, and 3000 horse, com-
manded by Beffus, satrap of Baftriana. The unhappy
monarch, affernbling his officers, returned them thanks,
in the most moving manner, for having adhered to his
fortunes, and for not having deserted him like the reft ;
a fidelity for which the gods, he told them, must cer-
tainly reward them, though, perhaps, it might never
be in his power. He assured them, at the fame time,
that, with their assistance, he would still boldly face the
enemy; that, for himself, he never would submit to
the conqueror; and that they had the means of defence
in their arms and valour, Molt of the officers applaud-

ed

ed this heroic resolution; and aflured him, that they
would spend the last drop of their blood in his service.
But Beffus had already formed a traiterous conspiracy
with Nabarzanes commander of the horse, to seize the
person of Darius, and either to deliver him up to Alex-
ander, if so warmly pursued that they could not hope to
escape, or, in cafe of escaping, to put him to death,
and to usurp the sovereignty in his place. In profecu-
tion of their plan, the traitors persuaded a part of their
soldiers to support their measures, by telling them, that
they were on the point of falling into the hands of Alex-
ander. Darius got intelligence of this conspiracy; and
it is easy to imagine what extreme sorrow he mufl have
felt on that occasion. Patro, the commander of the
Greeks, and a man of stria honour, shocked at so bate
an inflance of treachery, pressed Darius to commit the
care of his person to his Greek soldiers, whose faithful
attachment he had often experienced. But Darius de-
clined the offer, that he might not affront his natural-
born fubjets, by trusting his safety to firangers in pre-
ference to them. That unfortunate monarch soon be-
came a viaim to this tenderness for the Persians. The
traitors seized him, and conducted him in a covered
chariot towards Bactriana.

Alexander arriving at Ecbatana, caused to be depo-

fited, in the citadel, all the treasures he had found in
Persia, amounting, by Strabb's account, to about
L. 22,5o0,ooo Sterling. Then he ordered Parmenio
to march towards Hircania with the Thracians and the
reft of the cavalry; and sent orders to Clitus, who had
been left behind at Susa, to come and join him in Par-
thia. In the mean time Alexander himself went in pur-
suit of Darius, who had left Ecbatana only five days be-
fore. Arriving at the Caspian defile, he encamped
there, and halted all next day. Here he received in-
telligence, that Darius had passed the defile, was seized
by the traitors, and was dragged about in a chariot by

Beffuso

Beffus. Alexander, ihocked at the news, hastened his
march. The barbarians, thoughlifuperior in numbers,
had not courage to fland their ground, but fled when
they heard of his approach. Beffus ordered Darius to
get on horseback, the more easily to escape from his
enemies. But that prince refused to comply, telling
Beflus, that the gods were fending him an avenger in
the person of Alexander. Beffus and his accomplices,
enraged at this answer, discharged their arrows at him;
and having wounded him mortally, they and their fol-
diers dispersed by different routs.

The advanced guard of Alexander's army found Da.

rius in a retired place, lying in his chariot at the point
of death. He had still strength enough left to desire
some drink; which having been brought him by Poli.
Itratus a Macedonian, he said several moving things to
that officer. " Friend (said he), the sense of my ina.
"' bility to reward thee for this kind office, completes
C the fum of my misfortunes." HIe begged of him to
assure Alexander, that he died with a most grateful
sense of his extraordinary kindness to his mother, his
wife, and his children; that he prayed to the gods to
bless his arms with victory, and to make him monarch
of the whole world; and that he trusted to his genero-
fity to take vengeance for his death on his treacherous
murderer. Then laying hold on the hand of Polifira-
tus, " Give him (added he,) thy hand in my name, as
" I now give thee mine, as the only token I can be-
" flow on him of my esteem and gratitude." After ut-

tering these words he expired. Alexander ar.
330. rivingfoon after, was penetrated with grief on

feeing the mangled body of Darius, and shed

many tears. After causing the body to be embalmed,
he lent it to Syfigambis, that {he might cause it to be
buried with all the funeral honours usually paid to the
deceafc kings of Perfla.

Da-

that time he had reigned only fix. He was a prince of
.a mild disposition. In his person ended the Persian
empire, after having flood 206 years under thirteen
kings, viz. Cyrus, who was the founder of it, Camby-
fes, Smerdis the magian, Darius the son of Hyflafpis,
Xerxes I. Artaxerxes Longimanus, Xerxes 1I. Sogdia-
nus, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon, Ochus, Ar-
ies, Darius Codomanus.

The Persian empire was originally composed of two na-

tions totally dissonant to each other both in their tem-
pers and manners. The Persians led a fober hardy life;
the Medes were effeminate and luxurious. The manners
of the latter quickly corrupted thole of the former ; and
the attention of both was solely directed to pleasure and
magnificence. The conquest of Babylon by Cyrus
contributed greatly to this pernicious change, by sup-
plying him with all the means of luxury and refinement.
The Persians were so thoroughly degenerated from the
original virtue of their forefathers, that of all the people
on earth they were the most addited to luxury and
voluptuoufincs, the most overbearing, haughty, cruel,
and perfidious. Add to this, that after the unsuccessful
enterprises of Darius and Xerxes againtf Greece, they
gave themselves wholly up to indolence and sloth. Mi-
litary discipline being quite negleced, their armies
were no better than a confused multitude of men igno-
rant of war. The Greek soldiers retained in their pay
formed their choiceit troops; and Memnon the Rhodiar
was their best general. The command too of those
armies was not committed to experienced officers, but
to grandees, without any other merit than their high
birth or their superior interest at court. Their kings
being in a manner buried in their palaces in sloth and
debauchery, all public affairs were managed by the in-
terpofition of eunuchs and women. The very education
of their princes, was calculated to render them vicious
and weak. For being accustomed from their earliest

E e years

# CHAP. V. Affairs of the Greeks, Macedonians, and Persians, from the death of Darius Codomannus to that of Alexander the Great.

years to hear nothing but the baset. adulation, they
were incapable for the reft of their lives either to under-
ltand good and wholesome counsel, or to make the
proper use of it. Their persons being debilitated by
effeminacy, and their minds corrupted by flattery, their
resolutions generally wanted wisdom, and their enter.
prises vigour.

C H A P. V.
Affairs of the Greeks, Macedonians, and Persians, from

the death of Darius Codomannus to that of Alexander the
Great.
L ET us for a moment turn our eyes to Greece.

The Lacedemonians, hearing that Antipater was

gone with all his forces upon an expedition into
330. Thrace, thought the opportunity favourable for

shaking off the Macedonian yoke; and they for-

med a confederacy for that purpose with most of the states
of the Peloponnese. Antipater, receiving intelligence of
these proceedings, returned with all possible expedition,
and led his troops against the Lacedemonians. The
army of the latter amounted altogether to no more than
42o,ooo foot and 2000 horse, while the troops of Anti-
pater were double that number. An engagement en-
sued. Both parties fought with extraordinary bravery,
and the acion was most iharp and obstinate. But An-
tipater, having by an affeaed flight drawn the enemy
into plainer ground, where he could more effeeually
employ all his flrength, gained the vicory at last. King
Agis fell fighting valiantly, after having performed a-
flonifhing feats of bravery. The Lacedemonians loft
more than 3000 men, and the power of Sparta was
thereby irretrievably ruined. Antipater communicated
the news of this victory to Alexander in very modest

terrams

terms, from an apprehension of exciting his jealousy.
By the directions of Alexander, he punished some of the
principal authors of the revolt.

Some of the Greek troops having been about this

time discharged by Alexander, the reft of the soldiers,
imagining that he was preparing to return to Macedoniai
were transported with joy at the thought; and initantly
fell to packing up their baggage and loading the wagi-
gons.-Alexander, alarmed at this unexpeCted tumult,
commanded the attendance of the officers, who endea-
voured to calm his apprehensions, by assuring him that
they could easily bring back the troops to a proper sense
of their duty. Alexander, however, thought it necessary
to assemble the whole army, and to make them a speech,
which he delivered in the most prudent and artful terms;
commending exceedingly the bravery of both officers
and soldiers, and extolling their exploits; but represent-
ing to them, that it was absolutely necessary firmly to
establish his conquests; and particularly, that it was
highly worthy, both of him and his generous soldiers,
to punish the treachery of Beffus, who had affaflinated
his king, with a view to deprive them of the glory 9f
saving him; a piece of juflice which he was extremely
impatient to discharge.

The soldiers instantly exclaimed, with one voice, that
they were ready to follow their prince wherever he
pleated. Alexander immediately led them into the
country of Hyrcania, which he soon subdued ; ando
with equal celerity, he conquered the Mardes, Arii,
and several other nations. About this time Nabarzanes
fiirrendered himself to Alexander, and brought along
with him to that prince the eunuch Bagoas, who had
been the chief favourite of Darius. Quintus Curtius
pretends, that it was much about this time too that
Thaleftris queen of the Amazons, who was desirous of
feeing Alexander, came and paid him a visit at the
head of 3oo women armed with lances, The fame au.

E e ithor

thor tells us, that as soon as she saw Alexander, she dif-
mounted from her horse'; but that after confidering him
attentively, she could not help taking notice, that his
stature by no means corresponded with his fame; that
she testified, however, an inclination of becoming his
wife for some time, that she might have a child of
his begetting to inherit her kingdom, and that A-
lexander granted her request. But as the best au-
thors, particularly Arrian, take no notice of. this ad-
venture, the story of Quintus Curtius is justly accounted
a fable.

From this period Alexander begins to appear quite

another man than we have hitherto seen him. His man-
ners take a different turn. Henceforward he sets no
bounds to his pleasures or to his passions, but abandons
himself without reserve to voluptuoufnefs and debau.
chery; and after having appeared superior to all the fa-
tigues and dangers of war, he suffers himself to be over-
come by the attractions of pleasure. So true it is,
that too high a pitch of prosperity is a weight above the
power of human tlrength to bear. Nothing now pre-
vailed but an uninterrupted course of games and feafis,
it which he and his officers consumed whole days and
nights in the company of a great number of captive
women, who ainufed them with their tinging and other
female arts. Grown giddy with his good fortune, and
dazzled with these enchanting scenes, he began to de-
fpife the aultere and hardy manners of the kings of
Macedonia, assumed the sumptuous dress of the Persian
monarchs, and obliged his officers and friends, much
against their inclination to dress after the fame fashion.
He desired, too, to imitate the pomp and effeminacy of
the Persian kings. He filled his palace with 36o con-
cubines, and insisted on being addressld with polira-
tion by those who were admitted into his presence
This behaviour excited murmurs among his troops,
djpecially among the oldef soldiers, ,.ho said that

Alexten-la

Alexander was becom a satrap of Darius. To put an
end to this discontent, he resolved to lead his army
againlt Beffus. But, before departing, he ordered all his
own baggage and that of his soldiers to be brought to
one place., where he set fire with his own hand to his
own, and' desired his soldiers to follow his example by
setting fire to theirs. They obeyed, but with great re-
gret, as they thus destroyed all their former booty.
Then he set off towards Badriana, where he still had
much danger and fatigue to undergo.

It was about this time that the pretended con-

fpiracy of Philotas happened. Alexander irnpu- 330.
ted it as a crime to that officer, who was the son
of Parmenio, that he had not informed him of a con-
fpiracy againlt his life by one Dymnus, who had volun-
tarily put himself to death just as he was on the point
of being apprehended. Philotas was tried by an assembly
of the whole army, and, in spite of the ftrongelt rea-
sons alleged by him in his justification, was condemned
to the most cruel torture. The intenseness of the pain
not only extorted from him a confession that he himself
was guilty, but even that his father was concerned in
the plot. He was condemned and executed after the
manner of the Macedonians; being {toned to -death.

It is true that some parts of the former behaviour of

Phlilotas had given umbrage to Alexander ; and that his
h.iughtinefs had procured him many enemies, of whom,
unfortunately for him, several were his judges. But it
is uncertain whether Alexander really believed Parmenio
to be guilty, or whether his subsequent treatment of
him did not rather proceed from a dread of the resent-
ment of so able a commander for the cruel injustice done
to his son. However that might be, he resolved, in
spite of the numberless important services performed for
him by that excelleut officer, to sacrifice him to his
quiet and security; and for that purpose he dispatched
Polydamus into Media, where Parmenio then com-

E e 3 manded,

manded, with private inftrudCions to the governor of the
province and the principal officers.

All the proper measures being accordingly concerted,

those to whom the execution was intrusted went to
Parmenio, whom they found walking in his park, and
presented him with a letter as from Philotas, The old
general immediately began to inquire very anxiously a-
bout the king, and to express the highest admiration
at his surprising acivity in pushing his conquests. But
while thus profusely bestowing praises on Alexander,
the venerable old man is, by the orders of that fame
Alexander, basely assassinated. Thus were rewarded
the important services and inviolable attachment of a
man seventy years old, who had constantly assisted Alex.
ander with his bell advice, and without whom it is high.
ly probable that the warlike operations of that prince
never would have been attended with such success; and
this ungrateful and inhuman treatment was inflited on
no better ground than a most improbable suspicion, un-
Supported by any evidence. This is one of the acions
that has thrown the deepest slain on the memory of
Alexander.

Alexander perfifled in his pursuit of Beffus; in the

course of which he had many fatigues to undergo, many
Pountries to traverse, and many dangers to encounter,-
The news of his approach determined the Bactrians to
desert Beffus, to whom they had hitherto remained firm-
ly attached. Beffus, therefore, was forced to betake
himself to flight; and pairing the river Oxus, he took
refuge in Sogdiana with a fmna! body of troops. Alex-
ander haying'purfued him thither, Spitamenes, the ac-
complice and confident of Beffus, formed a conspiracy
of the principal officers against him, seized him, loaded
him with chains, and delivered him up to Alexander.
That prince highly commended the behaviour of Spita-
menes; and ordered Beffus to be delivered over to
Axatres the brother of Darius, to be used with all the

ignominy

ignominy he deserved. But his punishment was de-
layed till he ihould be tried in an assembly of the
Persians.

It was during his pursuit of Beffus, that Alexander

committed an ation of the greatest injustice and cruelty
that occurs in history. He caused all the inhabitants
of a small city where the Branchidae resided to be put to
death, although they had voluntarily surrendered them-
selves, and had received him with the highest de-
monftrations of joy. And for what cause this un-
provoked inhumanity? Under pretence that the an-
ceftors of those citizens had behaved perfidiously to the
Milesians, by delivering up to Xerxes the treasures of
the temple of Idumean-Apollo, whereof the Milesians
were the guardians.

Alexander penetrated still farther and farther into

Batcriana in search of new conquests. Upon his arrival
at the Jaxartes he was attacked by a barbarous people,
who rushing down upon him from the mountains, made
some of his men prisoners. Alexander resolved to force
them from their strong holds; but in the attempt was
wounded in the leg by an arrow, and carried off to his
tent. The barbarians, astonished at the bravery with
which they had seen him fight, believed him-to be a god,
and sent ambassadors to make their submissions.

Having next made himself master of Maracanda the

capital of Sogdiana he still continued his progress, rava-
ging the country. In these parts he received an embassy
from the Abian-Scythians, a poor nation, who placed
their chief glory in the practice of justice, and never
made war but in their own defence. They sent to in-
form Alexander that they submitted to him; and he re-
ceived them under his protecion. But in the mean
time, the Sogdians and Batrians having revolted at the
instigation of Spitamenes, Alexander resolved to punish
their treachery and that of their leaders. Laying
siege therefore to Cyropolis the utmost city in the

Persian

Persian dominions, he took it by assault, and gave it;up
torbe pluhdered. Then he besieged the city of the Me-
maconians, who had put to death fifty of his horsemen,
whom he had sent to them with friendly intentions.
The besieged made a molt despera:te refitance. Many
.of: Alexander's best soldiers peri.shed in the enterprize;
and he himself narrowly escaped being killed by a.flone.
-As difficulties served only to heighten his courage,
-he proceeded with more vigour than usual; and ha-
ving made-a breach in the wall by means of a mine, en-
tered the city, and destroyed every thing with fire and
i\vword. Fle treated several other cities of Sogdiana in the
fame manner, to punish their revolt. Then he cau-
.fed a town to be built on the Jaxartes, and called it

.Alexandr ia.
While his army was employed at the work, the king

of the Scythians, taking umbrage at this new settlement,
sent an army to interrupt their operations, and to drive
away the Macedonians; and about the fame time a detach.
ment that had -been sent to Maracanda againif Spitame-
nes was cut in pieces. This threw Alexander into
some perplexity; but he inflantly formed his refolu-
tion, and assembling his troops, encouraged them by a
harangue to pass the Jaxartes. In the mean time,
twenty ambassadors arriving from the Scythians were in-
.troduced into the tent of Alexander, where they deliver-
·ed the celebrated speech recorded by Quintus Curtius,
which is so much admired for its solidity, ingenuity,
and simplicity; and it is perhaps the best piece of com-
position to be met with in the whole work of that fro-
thy writer.-Thefe Scythian ambafladors are made to
address themselves to Alexander in very plain terms.
They call him without any ceremony a robber, 'who em-
ployed hinfelf in making war on people who had never in-
jured him. " You (fay they), who boas of your co-
"' ming to exterminate robbers, are yourself the:greatelt
,' roLbbr in the world. 'You have plundered all the na-

.' tions

" tions whom. you have subdued. Are not those who
( live in the woods to be exempted from knowing you,
't and from feeling your violence ? If you are a god,
<c as you fay you are, you ought to do good to mankind.

If you are a man, you ought to hearken to the diEtates
of reason and humanity.".
To this Ipeech Alexander made a very short answer,

telling the ambassadors, that he would make the proper
use both of his own good fortune and of their advice.
He persisted, however, in his former resolution,, and
transported his army over the Jaxartes on rafts. This
was a bold undertaking. The river was very rapid,
and a powerful army appeared on the opposite bank
prepared to dispute their landing. The passage accor-
dingly was attended with much difficulty; the Macedo-
nians being obliged to engage before they could make
good their landing, But the good fortune of Alexan-
der surmounted all obstacles. The barbarians, unable
to sustain the shock of the Macedonian cavalry, were
broken and put to flight. Alexander loft in the acion
sixty horsemen. The fame of this viclory obtained over
the Scythians: made the Macedonians to be regarded as
invincible.

Alexander, eager to get hold of Spitamenes, returned

towards Maracanda; but Spitamenes fled on his ap-
proach. Having sacked the city of Sogdiana, he found
there, among other prisoners, thirty young men of ex-
traordinary beauty, with whose fortitude he was no less
delighted than with their fine appearance; for they tef-
tified unshaken resolution on hearing that they were to
be put to death. Alexander asked them, whether they
would accept of life, on condition of engaging in his
service. The young men consented, and afterwards
served him with great fidelity.--From thence he pro-
ceeded to Batria, where he caused the nose and ears
of Beflus to be cut off, and then sent him to Ecbatana.

I * -Therea

There the traitor's four limbs were tied to as many
bended trees, which tore his body in pieces.

About this time Alexander received a reinforcement

of i6,ooo men from Macedonia, with whose assistance
he was enabled to subdue the reft of the country of Sog-
diana, of which only one place called Petra Oxiana
now held out. This being a itrong fort, situated in the
face of a sleep rock, inaccessible on all fides except by
one narrow path, and being defended by a powerful
garrison, its governor would liften to no terms of fur-
render.-Any person but Alexander would have thought
it madness to attempt the attack of such a place; but he
loved to contend with obstacles that appeared infur-
mountable. Seleting therefore 300 of his moit ative
soldiers, he commanded them to climb this rock in the
most accessible place. They complied with the orders
of their king; but about thirty of them loft their lives
in the enterprise by falling from the precipices. -At last,
however, after incredible labour and difficulty, they
reached the summit of the rock, and displayed the ap-
pointed signal to the Macedonians below, who thereup-
on pointed out to Arimazus the governor of the place,
the soldiers who had taken post on the top of the rock
above him. At the fame time the whole army shouted
for joy. Arimazus, astonished at the boldness of Alex-
ander's troops, thought himself undone, and offered to
deliver up the place, on the sole condition of having the
lives of hirnfelf and his garrison spared. But Alexander
refused to grant him even that.; and having got posses-
sion of the place, he crucified him at the foot of the
rock.

Then Alexander subdued the country of the Massa-
et2e and Dahae. In this country having been attacked
by a lion when hunting, he killed the furious animal
with one stroke.

On his return to Maracanda he gave a grand enter-
tainment at which being flutfered more than ordinary

by

by the great quantity of wine he had drunk, he boast-
ed very highly of his own exploits, undervalued exceed-
ingly those of his father, and even ridiculed some pas-
fages of Philip's life. The oldel officers who had ser-
ved under Philip were much offended at this behaviour;
and Clitus in particular, who had saved Alexander's
life at the battle of the Granicus, could not conceal his
diffatisfaaion.-It is true, that Clitus carried the matter
too far; for, not satisfied with extolling to the skies the
a&ions of Philip, and setting them far above those of
Alexander, he was rash enough to enter on the defence
of Parmenio's memory, insisted on the particulars of his
tragical fate with great acrimony, and concluded with
observing, that the officers of Alexander might judge
from thence what fort of reward they had to expet for
their past services. Alexander, though much exafpe-
rated, retained his passion for some moments, and com-
manded Clitus to leave the room. Clitus accordingly
rising up, exclaimed, addressing himself to Alexander,
%' I fee plainly you can no longer endure the converfa-
' tion of men who are free; and that you desire rather
" to live among slaves, disposed on all occasions to pay
s homage to your Persian robe." Alexander, unable
any longer to contain himself, seized a javelin to kill
Clitus; but some of the guests interposed and prevented
him, while others forced Clitus away.-A little while
after however, Clitus having returned tinging verses
injurious to Alexander, the enraged prince sprang for-
wards, tranfixed him with a javelin, and threw him to
the ground; exclaiming, Go, then, and join
c' Philip and Parmenio." But feeing Clitus 328.
dead, he was instantly struck with horror at what
he had done, refleaing, that he had killed a man to
whom he owed his life, and that for a few imprudent
words which the power of wine alone had made him
utter. Transported with grief, he threw himself on the
b9dy of Clitus ; and seizing the javelin with which he

had

had killed him, attempted to plunge it into his own
body. But his friends prevented him, and carried him
into his chamber by force. There he continued nearly
two days firetched on the floor, weeping aind lamenting,
and determined to let himself perifi of hunger. Bur
the soothsayer Ariftander, affiited by the philosophers
Callifthenes and--Anaxarchus, argued him out of this
resolution. This tragical event exhibits a very signal
proof of the dreadful effec's of,drunkennefs and anger;
and flows the great importance of early avoiding those
m-oss dangerous vices, which obicured all the glory of
Alexander's splendid actions, and enllaved that great
conqueror of bo many nations.

Alexander having in a good measure recovered from

his grief, again took the field, subdued a province on
the borders of Scythia, and got poffeilion of the rock
Choriana, though not without very great labour and
difficulty. It was after this expedition that the wife of
Spitamenes, after endeavouring in vain by every fort of
intreaty to persuade her husband to make his peace
with Alexander, murdered him at last during the night,
and brought his head to that prince; who, fiocked at'
so horrible an action in a woman, ordered her to be dif-
miffed with ignominy. Still continuing his march, he
was overtaken by a dreadful storm, which was succeed-
ed by weather so excessively cold, that more than ilooo
soldiers died of it; and if Alexander had not given or-
ders to cut down a great number of trees, and to make
fires of them, the whole army muff have perished.

Arriving in the country of the Sacec, he was received

in a most refpedful and magnificent manner by Oxi-
artes' their king, who gave him a grand entertainment,
at which his daughter Roxana was present. This lady,
besides the most exquisite beauty, pofeffed a great deal
of gaiety and wit, and captivated Alexander so highly,
that he made her his wife. But the marriage gave much
.difatisfa&tion to the Macedonians.

Alexander,

Alexander, insatiably bent on conquest, resolved to

penetrate into the Indies, which was accounted the
richest country on earth. With this view he ordered
the flields of his soldiers to be indented with plates of
silver, their coats of mail to be adorned with gold, and
the bridles of the horses to be gilded. But before set-
ting out, he resolved to put in execution a scheme that
he had long revolved in his mind, namely, to obtain di-
vine honours to be paid him by his soldiers. For this
purpose he gave a most magnificent entertainment, to
which he invited his whole court, as well Greeks and
Macedonians as Persians. After remaining some time
at table hinfelf, he retired. Then Cleon, one of the
most servile of his flatterers, in consequence of a pre-
vious concert, began a pompous oration; in which he
expatiated on the wonderful merit and extraordinary ex-
ploits of Alexander, enumerated with extreme oftenta-
tion the many obligations conferred by him on all who
were present, and concluded xvith a proposal to ac-
knowledge him for a divinity. For this he cited the
example of former great conquerors placed among the
number of the gods, such as Hercules and Bacchus. He
assured the company, that, on Alexander's returning,
he himself would be the first to salute him as a god; and
he exhorted all the other guefis, and particularly the
best and wisest among them, to follow his example.
By these last words he hinted at the philosopher Cal-
lifthenes, a man very highly esteemed for his knowledge
in the sciences, and for the purity of his manners. Cal-
lilthenes perceiving the eyes of the whole company fixed
on him, flood up, and made a speech ; in which, after
observing that the king himself, if he hid been present,
would never have permitted Cleon to utter such gross
flattery, he declared, that though that prince was wor-
thy the highest honour and praise, yet there was an im-
mense difference between the honour merited by the
most perfect mortal and the worihip due to the almighty

gods;

gods; that to the last, no man living could ever be in-
titled, nor could presume to accept that divine title, till
he had thrown off mortality; that the pracice of the
Persians, which had been urged as a precedent by Cle-
on, ought on many accounts to be of no weight here,
since it was impossible that the vanquished could ever
give law to the viaors. Alexander, who was concealed
in an adjoining apartment, overheard every syllable of
what past; and returning soon after into the hall of en-
tertaiment, was immediately adored by the Persians.

Callifthenes soon received the reward of his generous

sentiments. A plot having been discovered against the
life of Alexander, whereof one Hermolaus was the prin-
cipal author, Callifthenes was comprehended in the
number of conspirators on account of his friendihip
with Hrrmolaus, was thrown into prison, and put to the
torture; under the torments of which he expired, pro-
telling his innocence with his laftbreath. What hor.
rid barbarity! This initance of unjust vengeance is a
perpetual dishonour on the charater of Alexander.
Seneca calls it with great justice, an eternal reproach,
and a crime that never can be wiped out by the great-
eft talents and most hsining exploits: " For (adds
' the philosopher), if we mention Alexander's having
' slain, with his own hand, 1ooo Persians; his having
" dethroned the most powerful king in the world; his
" having penetrated to the ocean ; still the remembrance

of his having unjustly murdered Callifthenes will re-

"cur upon our minds, and efface the splendor of all
"those great actions."

Independent of the eager desire for conquest enter-

tained by Alexander, he had learned from the fabulous
traditions of the Greeks, that Hercules and Bacchus,
both sons of Jupiter, had carried their arms into the In-
dies; which, of itself, was a sufficient motive for him to
undertake the fame expedition. The danger and diffi-
culty that attended such an enterprise, was to Alexan-

der

deran additional motive still. We will not pretend to fay
how far his condud in that refpet was justifiable. But
thus far we may venture to assert, that true glory never
can consist in increasing human misery, too great al-
ready through the unavoidable accidents of life, by dif-
fusing ruin and deitruetion over the face oftheearth,
and wantonly disturbing the peace and quiet of man-
kind.

As soon as Alexander entered India, many petty so-

vereigns paid him their homage and obedience. One
nation, however, had the courage to oppose him. But
they were defeated after a flight engagement; and A-
lexander, to strike terror into others, who might be in-
clined to follow their example, besieged their capital
city, took it, and put all the inhabitants to the sword.
Then he marched against the city of Nyfus, which fur-
rendered at discretion. And now nothing was heard of
but the daily reduction of cities on all fides, and that in
spite of a thousand difficulties. But Alexander fur-
mounted every obflacle of art and nature, by such an
uninterrupted series of good fortune, as appeared alto-
gether supernatural. Happening to be wounded in the
leg by an arrow, at the siege of one of those towns na-
med Magofa, the pain extorted from him these remark-
able words: " The whole world calls me the son of
" Jupiter, but this wound makes me sensible that I am
" till a man."

Arriving at the river Indus, he paned it without any

difficulty, the necessary preparations having been made
by Epheftion, who had gone before for that purpose.
The king of that country, named 2axilhus, came to meet
him, and put into his power both his person and domi-
nions, " knowing (as he said) that Alexander fought only
" for glory." On being asked by Alexander, who was
highly pleased with this address, of what he flood most
in need? he answered, " Of soldiers ;" because he had
a war to maintain against two neighbouring kinigs, Abi-

fares

fares and Porus; of whom the latter, who lived beyond
the Hydafpes, was the most powerful. Taxilus sent a
present of fifty elephants to Alexander, who, in return,
bestowed on that prince magnificent marks of his
bounty.

Abifares followed the example of Taxilus, and sent

ambassadors to put all his dominions under the power
and protection of Alexander. But Porus was a prince
of sentiments too generous and elevated to itoop to so
mean a behaviour. Alexander, surprised at neither re-
ceiving a visit from Porus himlelf, nor from any perlbn
in his name, sent to inform him that he must pay him
tribute, and come in person to make his submissions.
Porus answered, that if he were to pay him a visit, it
ihould be with his arms in his hand. Alexander then
advanced to the river Hydafpes, which was very broad,
deep, and rapid; and, on the opposite bank, Porus ap-
peared ready to dispute the passage, at the head of a for-
midable army, with a number of elephants ranged in its
front. But the danger of palsing the river was what ter-
rified the Macedonians the most ; for they could nowhere
find a ford. Alexander had previously caused a great
number of boats to be so conftruded that they could be
taken to pieces, and by that means be easily transported
from place to place. As the river was full of islands,
the youngest and most vigorous of the Macedonians
threw themselves into the water with no other arms than
their javelins, and swimming to one of those islands in
which the enemy had made a lodgement, attacked and
killed a great number of them. But a fresh reinforce-
ment arriving to the assistance of the Indians, they ad-
vanced against the Macedonians, overwhelmed them with
their darts, and obliged them to swim back again to the
reft of their army. Porus, who beheld this skirmish,
was much elated with its success.

Alexander, anxious to cross the river, had recourse to
a stratagem to effect his purpose. He gave orders to

make

make a bustle and noise in several different places, as if
he had a mind there to attempt a passage. By there
means he diftra&ed the attention of Porus, who imme-
diately hurried towards those places. Alexander, in the
mean time, after committing the charge of the camp to
Craterus, with part of the troops, to impress the enemy
with a belief that the whole army still continued in its
former position, marched away with the reft, and passed,
undiscovered, in boats, into a small ifand overgrown
with wood. A violent florm of rain and thunder co-
ming. on, capable of discouraging any other person
than Alexander, favoured his passage. While pafling
the river in a boat, he is said to have let drop these
striking expressions: " 0, Athenians! could you be-
"lieve that I would willingly expose myself to so great
"dangers in order to attract your commendations ?"

While Porus kept a ftrit eye on Craterus, who, by

his motions, seemed determined to attempt the passage,
Alexander reached the farther fide without moleftztion t
and immediately drawing up his army in battle order,
though it consisted of no more than 6000 men and 5oao
horse, made the proper dispositions for fighting.

Porus hearing that Alexander had made good his pas-

sage, detached agains him a considerable party of ca-
valry under the command of one of his sons. But A-
lexander attacking this detachment with great vigour,
cut off the greatest part of them, and killed their com-
mander. Porus, informed of the death of his son, and
of the defeat of his troops under his command, advan-
ced against Alexander with his-whole army, consisting
ds 30,000 foot,' 4000 horse, 6oo chariots, and 2oo ele-
phants, which he drew up in battle order, with the ele-
phants in the front. Alexander made various evolutions
with his cavalry, to protrat the time till the reft of his
infantry should arrive. Then,' inflead of attacking the
main body of the enemy, he dispatched iooo archers
to assail the cavalry on their left wing. in front; ordered

F f Coenus

Ccenus to make a sudden evolution and to attack the
lame cavalry in the rear, and he himself charged them
in flank.

The Indians, thus harassed on all fides, gave ground

and retreated towards their elephants. In the mean
time, the Macedonian infantry having formed themselves
into their phalanx, advanced against those dreadful ani-
mals, and assailed them with their spears. The elephants,
rendered furious by their wounds, broke through the
thickest of the Macedonian battalions. But Alexander
.after throwing the enemy's left wing into confusion, u.
nited his cavalry, which was superior to that of the ene-
my, into one body, and carried terror and disorder
throughout. The elephants, now deprived of their con.
duaors, ran about at random, and overthrew every
thing that came in their way. At last the Macedonian
infantry formed again, made a vigorous effort, complet.
ed the disorder among the Indian cavalry, and cut most
of them in pieces. Craterus having by this time passed
the river with the reft of the army, fell upon those who

were retreating, and made a great slaughter.
327. The Indians loft, in this battle, 20,000 foot;

and molt of their elephants were either killed or
taken. Alexander loft no more than I 12 men.

Porus, after behaving with surprising bravery, and

being wounded in the shoulder, was obliged at lad,
when he saw his army totally defeated, to retreat on his
elephant. Alexander, desirous to save him, sent Taxi-
lus to persuade him to surrender. But Porus, instead of
listening to his persuasions, cried out on feeing him ap-
proach, " Is not tliat Taxilus, the traitor to his fubjets
-6 and his native country !" Other officers, therefore,
being dispatched to Porus with the fame intention, at
last, with much difficulty, prevailed upon him to con-
sent; and Alexander himself advanced to meet him.
Porus approaching him with a resolute undaunted air,
was asked by Alexander, " Hcow he desired to be treat-

6c ed?"
-

ed"---" As a king," answered Porus. " Dc

C you wish for nothing else ?" replied Alexander :
" No, said Porus, that comprehends every thing." A.
lexander, struck with admiration at his magnanimity,
left him in possession of his kingdom, and behaved to
him with the highest marks of honour and efleem. A-
lexander ordered a city to be built on the field of battle,
and called it Nicea.

Advancing still further into the Indies, he subdued

many nations. Alexander now seemed to regard him-
self as commniflioned by the gods to enslave the universe,
and to exterminate those who should presume to oppose
his power. Marching against the Catheans, a valiant
people, who had united for the defence of their common
liberty, he defeated them in a great battle near a city
called Pangala, which he next took and destroyed. It
was there that he found the Brachmans, who were both
the philosophers and likewise the ministers of religion
in India, and were very highly reverenced and esteemed
by their countrymen. These Brachmans led a most au-
stere life: They drank nothing but water, subsisted on
herbs and roots, spent much of their time in singing
hymns to the gods, fasted often, continued all their lives
in a slate of celibacy, and when oppressed by decrepi-
tude, or the infirmities of old age, voluntarily and
cheerfully burnt themselves to death. Cicero re-
lates several instances of their astonishing patience,
They believed, that the world has had a beginning, and
that it shall have an end. They entertained the fame
opinion as Plato with refpet to the immortality of the
foul; but they adopted the doctrine of the metempfy,
chofis.

When these philosophers raw Alexander, theyRfaniped

on the ground with their feet. Being asked their rea-
son for this behaviour, they informed that prince, that
no person could really possess more of that element, the
earth, than the small space 'of it which he actually oc

F f 2 espied

cupied; that Alexander differed not materially from o-
ther men, except in being more refllefs and ambitious;
and that when he ihould die, as die he muff, he could
then occupy no greater a part of all his vast conquests
than any other man. One of these philosophers, named
Calanus, at the earnest intreaty of one of Alexander's
officers, agreed to accompany that prince in his expedi-
tions. Ihefe philosophers commonly made use of.allu-
sions and metaphors, the better to explain their mean-
ing. Their chief, to give Alexander a more lively.idea
of the fiate of a great empire, having laid on the ground
a large dry ox's hide, pressed with his foot each.of its
corners, one after another.; and desired the king to re-
mark, that, on his doing so, the other parts of the hide
rose up; but at last placing his foot in' the middle, he
kept the whole level. By this he meant to insinuate,
that a king ought to reside in the centre of his domini-
ons, so as to be able to prevent all revolts and disorders
in the remotest quarters of it ; and that he ought never
to undertake such diflant expeditions as that which A-
lexander was then prosecuting.

The Macedonians perceiving, in the mean time,. that

Alexander, whose intention was flill to push forward,
was taking measures for passing the river I-lyphafus,
could, no longer conceal their discontent. They com-
plained loudly, that their king seemed determined to set
no bounds to his expeditions; that he was flill advan-
cing farther and farther from their native country ; and
that he seemed quite unconcerned at the exceflive dan-
gers and fatigues to which he was continually exposing
his troops. Alexander hearing of this commotion, as-
fembled the whole army, and made a long speech,
wherein. he laboured to persuade them to pafs-the Hy-
phafus ; telling them, that. to retreat at present, would
appear a disgraceful flight; that all his hopes were pla-
ced on. their courage and resolution; that, by their as-
fiflance, he assured himself of success in all his enter-

prises;

prises; and he begged of them not toffruftrate his glo-
rious expectations, of rivalling the exploits of Hercules
and of Bacchus. Perceiving however, that his argu-
ments produced no effect on his soldiers, who held down
their heads in mournful silence, he exclaimed, " What!
" not one of you answer me ? Then I am abandoned,
"betrayed, delivered over to my enemies. Be it so,
" then; but still I will pass this river, should not a

single man of you accompany me. The Scythians,

" the Badrians, more faithful than you, will follow me
" wherever 1 lead them. Return, return to your
" native country, base betrayers of your king, and
" boast of having deserted him amidfl barbarous
"and hoflile nations. As for me, I shall either find
" here the viEtory of which you despair, or a glorious
"death."

In spite of this pathetic address, both officers and fol-

diers persisted in their silence. At length their grief
burst forth in sighs and tears, insomuch that Alexander
himself could not refrain from weeping. Then Cenus
advancing forward to the throne, and taking off his hel-
met, pled the cause of the army. He assured Alexan-
der, that the affeltion entertained for him by his soldiers
was nowise diminiflhed; that they were ready to march
whithersoever he desired to lead them; but he begged
him to liflen to their refpectdful representations. " We
" have performed every thing for you," continued he,
" that it is in the power of men to perform: We have
" traversed the earth in your service, we have arrived
" vitorious at the end of one world, and yet you me-
"ditate the conquest of another; look on these disfigu-
" red countenances, and on these limbs covered with
" scars; the poor remains of us that have escaped from

so many dangers and fatigues want strength to fol-

" low you farther. We all earnestly desire to revisit
"our native country, there to enjoy the fruits of our
" toils. Forgive this desire, which nature has implanted

F f 3 "in

cupied; that Alexander differed, not materially from o-
ther men, except in being more restless and ambitious;
and that when he should die, as die he mutl, he could
then occupy no greater a part of all his vast conqueRts
than any other man. One of these philosophers, named
Calanus, at the earnest intreaty of one of Alexander's
officers, agreed to accompany that prince in his expedi-
tions. Tlhefe philosophers commonly made use of.allu-
sions and metaphors, the better to explain their mean-
ing. Their chief, to give Alexander a more lively.idea
of the slate of a great empire, having laid on the ground
a large dry ox's hide, pressed with his foot each.of its
corners, one after another ; and desired the king to re-
mark, that, on his doing so, the other parts of the hide
rose up; but at last placing his foot in the middle, he
kept the whole level. By this he meant to insinuate,
that a king ought to reside in the centre of his domini-
ons, so as to be able to prevent all revolts and disorders
in the remotest quarters of it ; and that he ought never
to undertake such distant expeditions as that which A-
lexander was then prosecuting.

The Macedonians perceiving, in the mean time,. that

Alexander, whose intention was fill to push forward,
was taking measures for passing the river Hyphafus,
could, no longer conceal their discontent. They com-
plained loudly, that their king seemed determined to set
no bounds to his expeditions; that he was iill advan-
cing farther and farther from their native country ; and
that he seemed quite unconcerned at the exceflive dan-
gers and fatigues to which he was continually exposing
his troops. Alexander hearing of this commotion, as-
fembled the whole army, and made a long speech,
wherein- he laboured to persuade them to pafs-the Hy-
phafus ; telling them, that. to retreat at present, would
appear a disgraceful flight; that all his hopes were pla-
ced on their courage and resolution; that, by their as-
fiflance, he assured himself of success in all his enter-

prises;

prises; and he begged of them not to'fruftrate his glo-
rious expecations, of rivalling the exploits of Hercules
and of Bacehus. Perceiving however, that his argu-
ments produced no effect on his soldiers, who held down
their heads in mournful silence, he exclaimed, " What!
" not one of you answer me ? Then I am abandoned,
"betrayed, delivered over to my'enemies. Be it so,
" then; but fill I will pass this river, should not a

f" ingle man of you accompany me. The Scythians,

"the Badrians, more faithful than you, will follow me
" wherever 1 lead them. Return, return to your
" native country, base betrayers of your king, and
"boast of having deserted him amidst barbarous
" and hostile nations. As for me, I (hall either find
" here the victory of which you despair, or a glorious

death."
In spite of this pathetic address, both officers and fol-

diers persisted in their silence. At length their grief
burst forth in sighs and tears, insomuch that Alexander
himself could not refrain from weeping. Then Coenus
advancing forward to the throne, and taking off his hel-
met, pled the cause of the army. He assured Alexan-
der, that the affetion entertained for him by his soldiers
was nowise diminifled; that they were ready to march
whithersoever he desired to lead them; but he begged
him to liften to their refJeCtful representations. " We
" have performed every thing for you," continued he,
" that it is in the power of men to perform: We have
" traversed the earth in your service, we have arrived
c- victorious at the end of one world, and yet you me-
"ditate the conquest of another; look on these disfigu-
" red countenances, and on these limbs covered with
" scars; the poor remains of us that have escaped from

so many dangers and fatigues want strength to fol-

" low you farther. We all earnestly desire to revisit
"our native country, there to enjoy the fruits of our
"toils. Forgive this desire, which nature has implanted

F f 3 "in

" in the breasts of all men." There words were ac-
companied by the groans and tears of the whole army,
who called Alexander their lord and father. The offi-
cers next addrefred him to the fame purpose. Still,
however, he remained inflexible, and shut himself up a-
lone in his tent. But finding the soldiers obltinate in
their resolution, he at last issued orders for their prepa-
ring to return. This news spread inconceivable joy
through the troops; and the camp resounded with the
praises of the king.

Before setting out, Alexander caused twelve
326. altars of an extraordinary height to be ereted ; a

camp of far greater dimensions than the one he

really occupied, to be marked out; and a bed, seven
feet and a half in length, to be made in each tent. By
these extravagant operations, he intended to impress
posterity with a belief, that he and his men exceeded in
stature all the reft of the human race. The necessary
preparations being made, the army embarked aboard a
fleet of 800 vessels, and proceeded to the conflux of the
Hydafpes and Acefinus.

After suffering greatly from the violence of those ri-

vers, Alexander entered the country of the Oxydrace
and Mallians, two warlike nations. Having defeated
them in several engagements, he marched against the
capital of the Oxydracsa, and besieged it. Here he
was the first man that mounted the wall; his men ha-
ften to support him ; but the ladders break, and he is
left alone. To avoid the darts hurled at him from all
quarters, he jumps into the city amidst the enemy.
Here he ran the greatest danger he was ever exposed
to. He places his back to the trunk of a large tree,
wards off with his shield the darts aimed at him, and
with his sword keeps the nearest of his enemy at bay:
At last he is deeply" wounded with an arrow, and his
arms fall from his hands. An Indian believing him
dead, approaches to firip him of his 1armour. Alex-

ander

ander recovers himself, and plunges a dagger into the
Indian's body. His principal officers arriving in the
mean time, performed prodigies of valour to save their
king, and fuifained all the efforts of the enemy till the
reft of the army forced the gates, and rushing in put
all they meet to thefword. Then Alexander was carried
off to his tent; but as the surgeons were obliged to en-
large the wound before they could extrac the arrow,
he fainted under the operation, and his men imagined
him dead. It was several days before he recovered of
this wound. As soon as he was able to go abroad, he
presented himself to his soldiers, to dispel their appre-
henfions.

In the mean time deputies arrived from the Oxy-

dracee and Mallians, bringing him presents, promising
to pay him tribute, and offering to deliver him hostages.
Alexander accepted of those tokens of submission, and
appeared well pleased with the embassy. Craterus
seizing this favourable moment, represented to him the
terror into which his late danger had thrown the army,
intreated him to be more careful of so precious a life
for [the future, and to reserve his bravery for some
occasion worthy of it. We shudder with horror, added
he, at the very idea of the extreme danger to which you
exposed your important life in a dispute for so paltry
a place. Alexander, delighted with this strong mark
of the affeaion of his officers, embraced them one after
another; and made them an excellent speech, in which
he discovered all his greatness of foul. He assured
them, that he entertained the most grateful sense of the
repeated marks of affecion they had shown him:
" But," continued he, " you and I think of this mat-
" ter very differently: You desire to enjoy my society
"for a long while; but I do not estimate life by the
"length of its duration, but by the opportunities it
" affords me of gaining glory. I might, indeed, cir-
" cumfcribe my ambition within the narrow limits of

"Macedonia,

Macedonia, and spend my life in inacivity and

cc sloth; and I confess too, that, counting by my vic-
c tories, and not by my years, 1 may be said to have
" lived long already. But were it not unbecoming
" in me, after making but one empire of Europe and
" of Asia, to flop short in so noble a career, and to
" relinquilh the path of glory, in which 1 have re-
" solved for ever to tread? Only prote& me from base
<' treachery and domeflic enemies, by which most
C princes have perified, and I miyfclf will take care of
,' what remains."

The magnanimity that lfines through this difcouffe is

sufficiently expreflive of the great foul that animated the
Macedonian hero; and whatever our opinion of his con-
quests and ambition may be, it is impossible for us not
to admire his noble and elevated sentiments.

Alexander next led his army into the country of the

Sarbacae; who, though a powerful nation, were struck
with terror at his arrival, and immediately made him
their fubmifflons, Thence continuing his rout, he arri-
ved at Patala, where he caused a citadel and harbour to
be built. In this place the river Indus divides itself into
two large branches. Seized with a desire to fee the
pcean, he embarked his whole army at this place upon
the right-hand branch of the river. When he approach-
ed the ocean, his heart exulted with joy, and he assured
his soldiers, that they were now at the end of their
labours, and that their exploits had reached to the
farthefl bounds of nature. His fleet, in the mean time,
was exposed to great danger by the ebbing and flow-
ing of the ocean. Ignorant of the cause of this pheno-
menon, both officers and soldiers were thrown into the
greateRf consternation, Alexander, however, still pro-
ceeded forward -with part of the fleet, to get a view of
the vaRf extent of sea that was before him; and arriving
at the ocean at last, he performed a solemn sacrifice to
Seeptune, After having thus, as he imagined, puflied

his

his conquers to the remotest corners of the earth, he re-
turned to join the reft of his army in the neighbourhood
of Patala.

He then seriously gave orders for making the necef-

fary preparations for his return. He embarked the best
of his troops on board of his fleet, of which he gave
Nearchus the command ; and with the reft he himself
set out for Babylon by land. Nearchus being obliged
to wait till the ieafon became favourable, did not leave
India till about the end of September. Alexander sus-
sered much on his march by famine and the inclemency
of the weather, insomuch that three-fourths of his army,
which at his departure amounted, by Arrian's account,
to 120,000 foot and 15,000 horse, periihed on the
way. They were obliged to eat even the beasts of
burden; and, to crown their miseries, the plague broke
out among the troops. After continuing his journey
for sixty days, he arrived at last in the fruitful country
of Gedrofia, where he halted some time to repose his
troops, and to recruit his cavalry, receiving every kind
of provisions in great abundance from the neighbour-
ing princes.' Being now on the confines of Persia,
he gave his soldiers most beautiful arms; and he tra-
versed the province of Carmania, not so much
like a conqueror as like another Bacchus; affect- 325.
ing to imitate the pretended triumph of that god
in his progress through Asia, after his conquest of the
Indies.

Alexander was mounted on a chariot drawn by eight

horses, and appeared fitting at a table, were he spent
the whole day in feasting and debauchery. This cha-
riot was preceded by several others, of which some were
covered with rich tapetfry, in the form' of tents, and
others with branches of trees, disposed in the form of
arbours. Along the road the soldiers found large calks
full of wine, ready broached, of which they drank as
much as they pleased. The whole country re-echoed

with

with the found of musical instruments, and with the
noise of bacchanals, running about in the most frantic
manner, with their hair loose and diflievelled. This
proceflion, which presented nothing to the eyes but
people drunk with wine, lasted seven days.

Nearchus in the mean time prosecuted his voyage, by

coasting along the shores of the oceai, Arriving at last
at a place distant, as he was told, only five days jour.
ney from where Alexander happened to be; he set out
to find him, and informed him, that the fleet, about
the fate of which Alexander began to be very uneasy
was out of all 'danger. After acquainting Alexander
with this agreebale piece of news, Nearchus returned to
his fleet, and failed up the Euphratus till he reached
Babylon.

While Alexander remained in the country of Carma-

nia, he received grievous complaints against several of
his governors of provinces; who, -concluding that he
never would return to call them to account for their
condu&t, had exercised every fort of tyranny and rapine
during his absence. Alexander thinking it proper, by
a speedy execution of justice, to ensure the affections of
the conquered provinces, cauted to be put to death all
the governors conviCted of oppression, together with
those who had aCted as the ministers of their violence.
What a happiness for a state, when its prince applies
the sword, which he ought not to carry in vain, to pu-
nifh the oppressors of his subjects, and to take vengeance
on the instruments of tyranny and injustice 1

Alexander arriving at Paf'.garda, a city of Persia,

was met by Orfinus, the governor of that country, a
man possessed of immense riches, who brought to the
king a great number of magnificent presents, among
which were many fine horses, chariots adorned with
gold, several precious pieces of furniture, golden vass,
and 4000 talents of silver. Besides these presents to the
king, Orfinus bestowed marks of his bounty on all the

principal

principal officers of Alexander, except the eunuch Ba-
goas, that prince's chief favourite, for whom he enter-
tained a thorough contempt. Servants employed about
princes as the instruments of their vilest passions, are
always endued with fouls as fordid as their flations, and
are capable of sacrificing to their base resentments the
molt sacred considerations. This infamous eunuch
omitted no means to ruin Orfinus in the opinion of the
king, and was perpetually accusing him of treason and
of rapine. Not satisfied with employing calumny for
this villanous purpose, he suborned obme of Orfinus's
retainers to become at a proper season the accusers of
their matter. After having by these means instilled into
the mind of Alexander suspicions againfl his fubjeEt, and
by that means having artfully disposed him to give cre-
dit to grossest accusations againit him, he at last got
him accused to the king, of having plundered the tomb
of Cyrus, within which Alexander, in place of the im-
mense riches he was made to expec, found nothing but
a shield and some arms. The magi, who were entrust-
ed with the care of the tomb, were put to the torture
in vain. Bagoas at last prevailed with the followers of
Orfinus, whom he had corrupted, to accuse their ma-
fter of having stolen those treasures; and Orfinus was
thereupon seized and put to death, without being al-
lowed to make any defence. A firiking example to
princes of the danger of suffering themselves to be too
easily prepossessed against any of their fubjeds or de-
pendents by the insidious arts of their favourites.

While Alexander remained at Pafagarda, the Brach-

man Calanus, who had accompanied that prince in many
of his expeditions, having been attacked by a violent fit
of the cholic, resolved to put an end to his days; and,
by the molt earnest intreaties, at last obtained permiflion
to cause a funeral pile to be ereted, upon which he
might burn himself. After offering up his prayers to
the gods, and performing the other ceremonies pradti-

fedl

fed in his native country, he embraced his friends, beg-
ged of them to spend the day in feaftingand making
merry with Alexander, mounted the funeral pile, co-
vered his face, and suffered himself to be burnt with all
the marks of cheerfulness and fatisfation. Alexander,
in compliance with the request of Calanus, assembled
his friends, and having proposed a prize to him who
should drink the most, the whole company indulged
themselves in so great an excess of wine, that forty-one
of them died of it. What a monfirous scene * !

Then Alexander visited Persepolis, and was firuck

with great regret for having burnt that fine city.-From
Persepolis he proceeded to Susa, where the fleet and
army met. In this city, Alexander took to wife Sta-
tira, the eldest daughter of Darius, and bestowed the
youngest on Epheffltion. MIoft of his principal officers
followed the example, and married the daughters of
the ndbleit Persians. Alexander gave a grand enter-
tainment to all the new married, at which gooo guefis
are said to have been present. The king, on this occa-
sion, resolved to discharge all the debts of his soldiers;
a generosity worthy of Alexander, for they amounted
to 1o,ooo talents. He did not even desire them to fpe-
cify the particular debts that each of them owed. As
the soldiers seemed, at first, to doubt the sincerity of
his intentions, he exprefled to them that excellent senti-
ment, " That a king ought never to break his word with
" his fubjecs, nor ought fubjets ever to fufpet the fin-
' cerity of their fovereigh's profeflions."

While 'Alexander continued at Susa, he was joined

by 30,000 young Persians, defined to supply the place
of the old decayed soldiers. The were all strong and
well made, and were armed and disciplined after the

Macedonian

* The conqueror in this abominable contest was rimed Proma-

cLus. Ile is said to have.drunk on this occasion fourteen bottles, or
fourteen English quarts; and to have survived his viaory but three
days.

Macedonian marnner. They passed in review before the
king, who was delighted to fee the fine appearance of
this new army.

Harpalus, whom Alexander had left governor of Ba-

bylon, had dissipated, in the most extravagant manner,
the immense riches that had. been committed to his care,
indulging himself in all kinds of debauchery, on the
supposition that Alexander never would return to call
him to an account. But getting notice at last of his
arrival, and of the severity with which he had treated
the other governors who had been guilty of malverfa-
tions in their duty, he quitted the service of Alexander,
and taking with him 5000 talents, the remains of his
former wealth, retired to Athens. On his arrival there,
the mercenary orators immediately offered him their
belt services. Harpalus, finding that Phocion possessed
great credit with the people, offered him a present of
700 talents. But that virtuous republican rejected his
offer with disdain, and desired him to desist from cor-
rupting his fellow-citizens with his money. This was
not the first time that Phocion had given proof of his
disinterestedness and integrity. He had rejected, with
the fame firmness, the offers both of Philip and Alex-
ander. Harpalus attempted likewise to corrupt De-
mofthenes. But his attempts at firfl were incffeltual:
Afterwards, however, Demosthenes having one day ex-
prefled great admiration at the fight of a sumptuous cup
that had belonged to one of the kings of Persia, of
which Harpalus had got poffeffon, the Persian sent him
that fame night the cup, together with twenty talents,
the value of it. This coming to the knowledge of the
people, threw them into a violent rage against Demos-
thenes; who, to avoid the effess of their displeasure,
fled from Athens, and remained in exile till some time
after the death of Alexander, residing for the most part
at Trezene.-In the opinion of Pausanias, it is far from

:being

being sufficiently proved, that Demolfhenes really gave
way to this temptation of Harpalus.

Alexander, in the mean time, desirous of indulging

his eyes with another view of the ocean, descended to it
by the river Elea; and after coasting along the Persian
gulf to the mouth of the Tigris, he remounted that ri-
ver, till he arrived at the place where his army was en-
camped. At his return he issued a proclamation, per-
-mitting such of the Macedonian soldiers as were unable
any longer to support the fatigues of war, to return to
Greece. The troops gave an unfavourable interpreta-
tion to this indulgence of their king, believing that he
intended to fix the feat of his empire in Asia instead of
Macedonia, and that he desired to free his hands alto-
gether of his Macedonian soldiers, to whom he prefer-
red his late Persian levies. Rendered furious at this
thought, they hurried in a tumultuous manner to find
their king, and demanded of him, that since he no
longer valued his Macedonian soldiers, he would dif-
charge them all, for they were resolved to serve him no
longer. This seditious address threw Alexander into so
violent a passion, that he ordered thirteen of the ring-
leaders to be instantly seized and put to death. This
instance of authority so terrified the reft, that they durit
not look up nor utter a syllable. Then Alexander,
mounting his tribunal, reproached them, in very severe
terms, with the many marks of kindness he had bestow-
ed on them; and concluded with these words: " You
"require your discharge; I grant it; depart, and pub-

lifl to the world, that you have abandoned your king

" to the mercy of the nations he has conquered, who
" have shown greater attachment to him than you."-
Having spoken thus, he retired to his tent.

The Macedonians, now sensible of their folly, burst

out into sighs and lamentations, haften to¥ the tent of the
king, throw down their arms, and corifefs their fault
with tears. Alexander, feeing them in this situation

could

could not himself refrain from weeping. Coming out
of his. tent, therefore, he told them, that he restored to
them his friendship. Then he discharged all who were
unable longer to bear arms; made each of them large
presents, and gave orders, that the foremost feats at all
public game's should be reserved for them. Craterus
was appointed to conduct them home ; and, at the fame
time he was created governor of Macedonia in place of
Antipater; whom Alexander, in compliance with the
earnet request of his mother, who was continnally tea-
sing him with accusations againlt that officer, desired
to have near his own person.

Thence proceeding to Ecbatana in Media, he cele-

brated numberless games and feafls, at which the whole
court gave themselves up to the most extravagant ex-
cefies of drinking. These debauches proved fatal to E-

pheflion, the most intimate friend of Alexander,
324. and whom he used to call 'another self. As E-

pheftion was modest and benevolent, and em-

ployed his influence with great discretion, his death was
universally regretted. Even Alexander himself, forget-
ting his dignity, gave way to the motl tender feelings
of friendfiip, and appeared quite inconsolable. To di-
vert his grief, he undertook an expedition againfl the
Coffeians, a warlike nation; and having conquered
them, he set out for Babylon.

Before he arrived at that city, the aitrologers and

Chaldean soothsayers sent him word, that great dan-
ger threatened his life in cafe he entered Babylon - This
denunciation alarmed Alexander very much at firfl. But
the Greek philofoper having, on the principles of A-
naxagoras, demonstrated to him the folly of aflrology,
he immediately advanced towards Babylon with his
whole army. But he had (till another motive for ha-
ftening towards. that city, namely, that he might there
receive the homage of many ambafladors, who had
come thither for that purpose, from different kingdoms

of

of the world. Alexander, therefore, made his entry
into Babylon with the utmost pomp imaginable. He
received, with equal dignity and complaisance, the con-
gratulations of all the ambassadors, but particularly of
those from the states of Greece. Upon the deputies
from Corinth making himi an offer of the freedom of
their city, he could not help fmriling at the singularity
of such an offer to so mighty a prince. But on being
informed, that this privilege had never been before be-
Itowed on any stranger but Hercules alone, he imme-
diately received it with joy. Then he applied all his
attention to celebrate the funerals of Epheftion; which
were attended with such pomp and magnificence, as to
surpass every thing of the fame kind that had ever ap-
peared in the world before. Hie got together the most
Ikilful architeCts from all quarters, and bestowed great
pains on levelling the spot whereon the pile was to be
placed.

The edifice formed a square confiting of thirty divi-

sions ; in each of which was erected a similar building
to that in the reft covered and embellifihed with extra-
ordinary magnificence. Along the front were disposed
240 prows of ships; on which were placed figures of
arches and warriors fix and a half feet high; The spa-
ces between the prows were hung with purple stuffs:
Above the prows was a range of torches twenty-four
feet high, forming a fort of colonade, adorned with
fifty-three crowns of gold: The capitals of this colonade
consisted of figures in the shape of eagles: Above this
colonade itood- another representing a hunting match:
Above this appeared a fourth, exhibiting the battle of
the Centaurs. The roof of the edifice was decorated
with trophies and'urns; and on the entablatures were
placed figures representing Syrens, within which were
concealed musicians. who sung mournful airs in honour
of the deceased. This edifice was upwards of 200 feet

3 hi-gh;

high; and the whole expence of the funeral amounted
,t,o about i,5oo,0oo Sterling *.

What folly, thus to consume in empty show such an

immense fum, produced by the toil and labour of the
most useful fubjets. But not satisfied with all these
marks of honour paid to the-memory of his beloved E-
pheftion, Alexander resolved to offer sacrifices to him as
a god, and that under the authority of a response of the
oracle of Jupiter Ammon; to obtain which a proper
person was dispatched with the necessary inftruaions.-
'He himself set the example; after which, in order to
please the prince, numberless temples were every where
erected to Epheftion, and it was reckoned criminal even
to doubt of his being a god.

As Babylon was the greatest and the molt beautiful

city of the east, Alexander resolved to beautify it' fill
more, and to make it the feat of his empire. In the
first place, therefore, he gave orders to repair the bul-
wark formerly constru&ed to confine the Euphrates to
its channel, but which that river had in a great measure
demolished. This useful projet, however, as well as
that of rebuilding the temple of Belus, which had been
ruined by Xerxes, as the idol worshipped in-it had leen
by Cyrus, together with all his other projects were put
a flop to by his death.

The melancholy idea of approaching dissolution had

now laid fall hold on the imagination of Alexander. E-
very accident itruck him with terror, and carried an e-
vil presage along with it. He became a downright slave
to superstition, and was perpetually offering up facri-
sices to render fate propitious, and to obtain the know-
ledge of futurity. To divert the conutant flings of ap-

g G prehension

* The principal architet of the monument ereted by Alexan-

der to the memory of Epheftion, is said to have been named Stefi-
crates. This artifthad some time before propofed.to Alexander to
cut Mount Athos into a statue, representing him, which should in
its right hand hold a large river, and in itsleft a city containing
0o,oco inhabitants.

prehension, he employed his time in an uninterrupted
course of feafiing and drinking, particularly the latter,
in which he indulged himself to such excess, that he
thereby greatly accelerated his death. After having,
at one of these feasts, already drunk to great excess, he
resolved, nevertheless, to empty the cup of Hercules,
which contained fix bottles. But he had no sooner
swallowed it than he fell to the ground, and was seized
with a violent fever, which quickly reduced him to the
point of death. Finding that there was no hope of re-
covery left, he delivered his ring to Perdiccas, and per-
mitted all his soldiers to kifs his hand. On being ask-
ed to whom he left his empire ? " To the moJt worthy,"
answered he. He added that he foresaw with what
strange rites they would celebrate his funeral. Perdic-
cas having aked him, how soon he desired they ihould
pay divine honours to his memory ? he answered,
' When you fllall be happy." These were his last
words.-He died at the age of thirty-two, after reigning
twelve years.

Some authors, and Quintius Curtius among the
323. reft, pretended that he died by poison. But this

opinion is by no means properly supported; and

it is far more probable that he died of excessive drink-
ing.

As soon as his death was known, nothing was heard

butweeping and lamentation. The vicors and the van-
quilhed equally bewailed his death. The Persians ex-
tolled him as the mildest and the jufteft of their mo-
narchs; the Macedonians proclaimed him to have been
the belt and the bravest prince in the world. The grief
of the latter was heightened by their present melancholy
Situation beyond the Euphrates, and in the Imidft of
their enemies. They foresaw, too, the wars and divi-
sions that must unavoidably arise from his having na-
rned no successor. Syfigambis mourned his death as
sncerely as he had done that of her own son; and find-

ing

ing, herself, by this event without further resource or
hope, she gave way to the suggestions of despair, and
starved herself to death.

The officers, after disputing for seven days, at last a.

greed,that Arideus, the brother of Alexander, ihould
be declared king; and that his person (for he was a
poor weak man) ihould be intruded to the care of Per-
diccas.-The body of Alexander, after being embalm-
ed by the Chaldeans, was, according to his own direc-
tions, conveyed to the temple of Jupiter Ammon. But
two years intervened before the necessary preparations
could be gotten ready.

Alexander's character is marked by numberless ble-

miiles. On due consideration, however, it may per-
haps appear to some readers, that his great and good
qualities predominated over his vicious and bad.

He was born with the finest natural parts; and his

magnanimity and lofty sentiments were almost without
example.-He early discovered marks of the greatest
generosity; but he as early gave proofs of an unequal-
led ambition. He received a perfect education under
the most skilful of masters, Arillotlewho took great
pains to cultivate his genius; and he instructed him not
only in the fine arts, but in the most sublime sciences.
The scholar's progress corresponded with the zeal and
lkill of his inftruEtor.

While young, he discovered very singular prudence

and found means, during the absence of his father, to
pacify some dangerous commotions that had broken out
in Macedonia. At the age of twenty years, he subdued
his most formidable enemies, namely, all the hates of
Greece combined against him. In the opinion indeed
of some, the first years of his reign were the most glo-
rious of his life. He supported the fame character in his
expedition against Darius; which was not undertaken
with a youthful rafhnefs,but with all the vast prepara-

G g 2 tiors

tions that the greatness of the enterprise required;
magnanimity, prudence, temperance, courage.

To judge how far he poifeffed every talent of a com-

plete general, it is only necessary to contemplate his pas-
sage of Granicus, his battle at Issus and Arbela, and
his siege of Tyre. We Ihall there perceive his skill at
drawing up an army in battle order, his presence of
mind in .the heat of action, his intrepidity, in the midst
of danger, and his firmness and constancy under difap-
pointments. His father Philip studied to subdue his
enemies by stratagem and circumvention, Alexander
praaifed open force and bravery alone. His behaviour,
after the battle of Issus, is perhaps the action of his
whole life that did him the mofl honour; for, on that
occasion, he gained a more difficult vi&ory over his
own passions than that over the Persian monarch.

His conduq- to the wife and daughters of Darius, who

found in his very camp an asylum for their honour and
virtue, places him in a most amiable point of view, and
bespeaks him truly great. It likewise does honour to
Alexander, that he was susceptible of the moif tender
and constant friendship: a character which he invari-
ably maintained to the last period of his life; and he
was rewarded, by finding several sincere and real friends,
a happiness rarely incident to persons of high rank.-
His familiarity with, and his kindness to, his soldiers, con-
vinced them that they were beloved by their king; and
gratitude for that honour, prompted them to exert their
utmost efforts to please him, and to obey his commands
with the highest ardour. Nothing was wanting to ren-
dler the glory of Alexander complete, had he known
how to set proper bounds to his ambition. But, infa-
tuated by an uninterrupted and dazzling course of pro.
fperity, he soon became entirely different from what he
had formerly been.

Aiter the siege of Tyre, we perceive the good qua-

lities

lities of Alexander to be daily degenerating. On fee-
ing him expose his own life, and that of his troops, in a
journey through the burning deserts of Libya, with the
absurd view of procuring himself to be acknowledged the
son of Jupiter -Ammon, we are amazed at his folly and
imprudence. We are shocked to fee him give himself
up in Asia to such immoderate exceifes of drinking. By
this vice, equally despicable and dangerous, we fee him
instigated to dip his hands in the blood of a friend who
had saved his life. We likewise fee his understanding
so much asserted by his intemperance, that he is not a-
Ihamed to vilify the glory of his father, and to underva-
lue his acions. This was equally vain-glorious and un-
candid. For on due consideration we flall perceive,
that Philip was riot only the sole author of his own
power, but likewise of that of his son. He transmitted to
him the kingdom of Macedonia enlarged exceedingly
on all fides: he left him matter of Greece; and above
all, he put into his hands. a powerful army of veteran
soldiers, admirably disciplined, and commanded by a
great number of brave and experienced officers. Nor
can it be disputed that Philip gave the molt indubitable
proofs of his ability to effeEt the conquests effeted
by his son; while, on the other hand, it is not so clear
that Alexander could have performed what his father
performed.

But what numberless actions of violence and- injustice

have we not to arraign him with, after he had subverted
the Persian empire by his victory at Arbela and the
death of Darius ? Thenceforward he lhows himself an
inprovoked persecutor of nations who desired only to
live in 'peace. He appears no longer in the light of a
conquerors still less in that of a hero; he is a downi-
right usurper, a robber, a scourge sent by the Almighty
Difpofer'of.all things to execute his vengeance on man-
kind.

For his carrying the war into Afiaj he had indeed'a

G g 3 very

very specious pretext, namely, to revenge the number-
less miseries brought upon ihe Greeks by the kings of
Persia. But what pretence could he alledge for spread-
ing ravage and deftru&ion among nations who had ne-
ver injured him, and to whom the very name of Greece
was unknown; and for putting to the sword all the in-
habitants of cities, guilty of no other crime, than the
defending of their lives and liberties, with the bravery
inspired by the most natural of all passions, felf-prefer-
vation ? But Alexander placed his glory in making him-
self the terror of mankind; and his extravagent ambi-
tion confined itself neither by rule nor measure. On
hearing the philosopher Anaxarchus give it as his opi-
nion, that the universe contained an infinity of worlds,
he is said to have wept, because it was impossible for
him to conquer any more of them than one. His rash-
ness too deserves to be numbered among his faults.
We fee him on all occasions exposing his life like a
simple volunteer; advancing the first to the assault,
climbing along lteep and dangerous precipices, and
conitantly fludying to perform the most hazardous and
daring exploits. Such is far from being the glory at
which a sovereign ought to aim. He lhould always
bear in mind, that he is responsible for his life to his
soldiers and to his fubjeds.

Eminent Writers, PhiloJfphers, Arti/s, &c.

THIS third age of Greece produced a great number

of Philosophers. At the head of all these Socrates de-
serves to be ranked; but as we have already spoken of
him at great length, we ihall fay no more of him here,
but pass on to others, and begin with

Plato, a native of Athens, and the most famous dif-

ciple of Socrates. Plato did not confine himself, like
his mailer, to the subject of morals alone, but studied
every branch of philosophy. His thirfl after knowledge

prompted

prompted him to travel into Egypt, were he learned
from the priests various branches of knowledge gene-
rally unknownr. His accurate notions about the exist-
ence of God, and the immortality of the foul, are gene-
rally thought to have been communicated to him in that
country. We shall have occasion afterwards to mention
his journeys to Syracuse at the request of the younger
Dionysius. At last he fixed his constant residence at.
Athens, where he delivered his lessons in the fine gar-
den called the Academy. Hence his disciples got the
name of Academicians.

Among his principal tenets may be reckoned the fol-

lowing: That there is but one world :-That there is
but one God, the author of all things :-That the foul
is immortal:-That men ought to resist their passions:
-That after this life the good and virtuous shall be
rewarded, and the wicked and vicious punished. Plato
delivered his doctrines in the form of dialogues. He
appears to have possessed a strong imagination. His style
is extremely florid and sublime, and is particulary di-
ftinguifhed by a delicacy known to the -Greeks by the
name of Atticifn. His works abound with the most
lofty sentiments, and with the most useful maxims for
the conduEt of life, and for the science of government.
He declined engaging in the affairs of the republic;
preferring the calm unruffled life of a philosopher. He
was very highly esteemed for the mildness of his man-
ners; and was so much admired on account of his vast
extent of knowledge and his sublime sentiments, that he
was honoured with the name of the 'Divine Plato. Even

kings desired to be direEted by his counsels.
348. He died at eighty years of age. His nephew,

Speufippus. succeeded him in his school. But

his scholars, after his death, distinguished themselves
into two sects; the followers of the one taking the name
of .Academicians, and continuing to teach in the fame
place where Plato had taught; and reasoned under

G g 4 that

that of Peripateticks, who walked and reasoned under
the ihade of the pleasant groves of the Lyceum; and
thence obtained that appellation. Plato defervedlike-
wife to be ranked in the class of rhetoricians, on account
of the excellent principlek of rhet6ric-laid down in his
dialogues, and especially ib the Gorgics.

Arifiotle was a native of Stagira, a city of Macedonia.

He came to Athens at the age of seventeen, and tfudied
philosophy under Plato with such industry and success,
that he became the foul of his school. On the birth of
Alexander, Philip wrote him, that he intended to make
him.preceptor to his son. " I account," fays Philip, in
his letter, " the favour of the gods greater in fending
" me this son during the life of Aristotle, than in be-
' flowing him upon me at all."

After spending several years on the education of A-

lexander, he returned to Athens, opened a school in
the Lyceum, and became the founder of the Peripatetic
fe&.- His lecures drew together a valf crowd of
hearers. He carried to a wonderful degree of perfec-
tion the art of dialectic whereof Zeno was the inventor.
But he did not confine himself to matters of philosophy.
He gave lefOins on rhetoric, and composed a treatise on
that subj¢&, which has been justly regarded by the
learned of all-ages as the most accurate and complete
that has ever. appeared. It is on this account that Ari-
flotle, as well as his matter Plato, is numbered among
the rhetoricians.

Aristotle met with the fate of most great men. He

attracted the envy of his cotemporaries, who accused
him of impiety; and one Eurymedon appeared as his
prosecutor. To disappoint the malice of his enemies,
and to avoid the unhappy fate of Socrates, he fled to
the island of Euboea,. where he ended 'his days. His
works, after remaining more than 2oo years buried in
oblivion, during which time they had passed through
various private hands, had suffered much by damp and

other

*

other accidents, and had been greatly corrupted and
obscured by ignorant transcribers, were at length disco-
vered by the famous Sylla at Athens when he sacked
that city, and were by him brought to Italy. When gene-
rally known, they were jufily adopted as the most per-.
sea' standard on every topic of which they treated. The
surprising diversity of those fubjeEs, the profound eru-
dition, the acuteness, and the singular accuracy with
which every' point is there handled, sufficiently evince
the comprehensive genius of the' author. A- course of
observations and experiments, for many ages, has indeed
produced the discovery of various secrets of nature, of
which Aritfotle seems to have been ignorant, and which
no force of genius ever could divine. But in every
matter of science, those who are the best acquainted with
his philosophy, and with that of the most approved mo-
dern philosophers, are struck with amazement at his
vast superiority.

Xenocrates succeeded Speufippus in the school of

Plato. Being a man of a gloomy austere disposition,
Plato, whose scholar he was, used to advise him to facri-
fice to the Graces. His contempt of riches is much
talked of. He carried it so-far, as voluntarily-to reduce
himself to poverty. Having been sent by the Athenians
in quality of deputy to negociate tome matters with
Philip King of Macedon, that crafty prince attempted
to corrupt him by presents, but found all his endeavours
ineffeaual. Alexander made the fame attempt with the
fame fuccels. Xenocrates refused a present he offered
him of fifty talents ; but, apprehensive left that prince
might interpret his refusal as an effe& of pride, he ac-
cepted of thirty minas. The Athenians entertained the
highest opinion of his integrity; insomuch, that one
day,. when he was to have given testimony about a cer-
tain affair, the judges dispensed with demanding his
oath, satisfying themselves with his simple affirmation.
He was so fond of solitude and study, that he seldom

appeared

appeared abroad. His ledures on virtue were attended
with amazing effed. They often reclamed the Athe-
nian youth from every kind of debauchery.

*Diogenes lived in the time of Alexander the Great,

and was of the fedt of the Cynics, founded by Antift-
henes, a disciple of Socrates. The philosophers of this
set lived a most rigid life; wearing no other cloaths
than a cloak; and carrying about with them no other
conveniencies than a fort of knapsack, a staff and a kind
of two-eared bowl of wood or metal. Diogenes diftin-
guifhed himself more than any other of this feet by his
cynical behaviour; which he carried to such an extra-
vagant pitch, as to become ridiculous. He walked bare-
foot, and lodged in a tub. But under this beggarly
equipage, he entertained a more than kingly pride,
and a Sovereign contempt for all mankind. The reader
has already seen his answer to Alexander the Great.
He is celebrated for many witty sayings, and for ome
excellent maxims of morality. But his conduct evin-
ced, that he was at no pains to pradtife those precepts
· himself; for never did man carry impudence in point
of morals to a greater pitch. This impudence, his con-
temptuous airs, and his satirical remarks, were his dif-
tinguifhing charateriftics. Hence came the name of
Cynic, a Greek word derived from the name of dog, to
denote, that the philosophers of this cast took delight in
railing, or rather barking and snarling like dogs, at the
reft of mankind.

Zeno was the founder of the set of Stoics. He was

originally a disciple of Crates, a cynical philosopher.
But disgusted at the impudence of that fed, he attached
himself to Xenocrates and Polemon, and established a
new fed at Athens, namely that of the Stoics, as already
observed. This fed derived its name from a gallery in
which they taught, called in Greek Stoa. Zeno soon
acquired great reputation. He was much esteemed
by the Athenians for the purity of his precepts, which

he

he himself praEtifed with the greatest exa&nefs; and
for the zeal with which he inculcated the principles of
virtue.

Cleanthus, Chryfippus, and Poflidonius, were fcho-,

lars of Zeno. They all valued themselves on their per-
set contempt of riches. Zeno was the inventor of dia-
lectic, the art that teaches us to deduce certain conclu-
sions from certain principles. The Stoics piqued them-
selves much on their excelling in this art; but their rca-
soning often. degenerated into sophistical arguments.

The Stoics maintained; that the sovereign good con-

fitted in living virtuously according to the ditates of
conscience. In other words, they placed all happiness
in the pracice of virtue.-Their chief aim was to ren-
der themselves insensible to the miseries incident to hu.-
man life. For that purpose they laboured to convince
themselves. that " every thing that happens isfor the
" bei;" and thence argued, that our diftincions be-
tween good and evil are merly chimerical.-A perfed'
Stoic, therefore, did not regard even pain as an evil.
Their Philosophy was calculated to render them entirely
devoid of passion and of frailty. But it flould seem,
that, to reform nature, they meant to extinguish it alto-
gether; for they muff have known that passion is cone
ftitutionally inherent in man. It muff, however, be al-
lowed, that the Stoics were, of all the ancient philofo-
phers, the mots virtuous both in point of principles and
of practice, and that some of the greatest and wvifeft men
of antiquity were formed in their school.

The Peripatetics entertained nearly the fame opinion

with the Stoics as to the chief good ; but they esteemed
riches and health to be good, and poverty and disease
to be evil.

Erpicurus was founder of the Epicurean fed of philo-

fophers. He was a native of a village in Attica, and
.opened his school in a delightful garden at Athens,
where he was attended by a vast concourse of hearers, and

arrived

arrived at a ditinguifhed reputation. None oi his ma-
ny works having been transmitted to us, it is from the
poem of Lucretius that we learn the system of his phi-
lofophy. Lucretius may be ranked at the head of those
poets, who would have been happier to have been born
without genius, than to have perverted their talents to
subvert religion and found reasoning.

Epicurus maintained, that pleasure was the Sovereign

good. By pleasures, according to Cicero, he meant the
pleasures of sense, such as the contemplation of beautiful
objects; eating and drinking; shows and diversions:
Cicero thinks, that he did not believe in the existence
of gods, although he spoke in very pompous terms of
the refpe& to be paid them. He maintained, that the so-
vereign evil confiited in pain; to which, although his
sage was liable, yet he said, that he found sources of
happiness even in pain itself. On the other hand, fn
point of the moral duties of man, he delivered very ad-
mirable precepts, and extremely opposite to those we
should expec from a philosopher who placed the fove-
reign good in pleasure. But the most extraordinary cir-
,cumftance of all is, that he lived a pure and irreproach-
able life.

Pyrrho, a philosopher of the fee of Sceptics, was a

native of Elis in the Peloponnese, and lived in the time
of Alexander. He maintained, that, with respeCt to
the qualities of every subjea about which the human
mind is conversant, there is ground for affirmation and
denial; that therefore, there can be no certainty; and
we must of course never form a positive decided judge-
ment of any thing, Hence this doctrine has obtained
the name of Pyrrhonifm. From those principles he de-
duced the' most pernicious consequences; that nothing
was in itself honourable, shameful, just, or unjust ; these
diftinAions depending entirely on human institution.
This was opening a door to every fort of crime. It
would therefore have been for the honour and happiness

of

of mankind, that these opinions had gone out of the
world with their author. But such is the depravity
of the human heart, that even in our days they find
abettors and supporters ,,aong men of genius and
learning.

In this third age of Greece flourished Menander the

poet who 'is regarded as the father of polite comedy.
He was perfeCly free from the faults of Aristophanes,
who refpe&ed neither decency nor modefry, nor even
the gods themselves ; and who gratified the malevolence
of his audience by scurrilous refletions against the best
men in the tfate. In the judgement of Quintilian, Me-
hander outflone all those who had applied to comedy
before him; his humour being exquisite, graceful, and
delicate. From a despair, no doubt, of equalling him,
Terence, who applied to the fame study, satisfied him-
self with translating, in a manner, the productions of
Menander, and with presenting them to the Roman
people, set of with all the graces and purity of the
Latin tongue,

Protogenes, the famous painter, flourished in the time

of Aristotle, with whom he was conne&ed by the most
intimate friendflhip. He was a native of Cauna, a city
on the sea-coast of Rhodes. His excellency in his pro-
session induced the Athenians to employ him in several
pieces of work, which afterwrrds attracted universal
admiration. His masterpiece was his Jalifus the son of
Apollo, and a great hunter.

Praxiteles, the celebrated tfatuary, likewise lived in

this age. He wrought principally on marble. His ma-
iferpiece was a statue of Cupid, which he gave as a pre-
sent to the courtesan 'hryne, of whom he was very
fond. She set it up at Thefpia her native country, whi-
ther numbers of the curious repaired to view it *.

Polycletes,

* This- is supposed to be the antiqze mentioned in De7'hout's Meo

moirs. He tells, that having gone to Italy, when young, with
)e Foi:, they saw at Pavia, in the collefion of Isabella D'EJle, a

ftattue

Polyclets, another flatuary, and a native of Sicyon.

was famous for his statues of brass. His masterpiece
was a Doriphorus, the name of those who served in the
Persian king's guards. This statue was so much admi-
red for the extraordinary justness of its proportions, that
it was called the Canon or Rule, and as such was care-
fully fludied by succeeding sculptors.

Apelles, the celebrated painter, was a native of the

island of Cos, but resided for the most part at Ephesus.
He is placed at the head of all the ancient painters, and
is said to have contributed no less to the perfeCtion of
painting by his writings on that subjet, than by his ad-
mirable performances. The particular in which he prin-
cipally excelled, was the grace, or an easy noble air,
tempered with sweetness.; but which is more easily felt
than expressed. He executed several portraits of Alex-
ander; whereof that which represented him launching
the thunder was the most highly finished. His engaging
manners even procured him the friendship of the Mace-
donian hero, who did not disdain to visit him frequent-
ly, that he might fee him work, and enjoy the pleasure
of his conversation. Alexander prohibited any other
person than Apelles from presuming to paint him. The
singular merit of Apelles exposed him to much envy,
and Itirred up many enemies againit him during his stay
at the court of Ptolemy King of Egypt. On returning
to Ephesus, he revenged himself upon his detractors
by his famous piCture of Calumny, which was reckoned

one

ftatne of a sleeping Cupid executed by M. Angelo; which, after the
host attentive consideration, appeared supremely excellent, and fil-
led them with inexpreffiblc admiration. After admiring it for some
time, another statue of a Cupid was Shown them, still foiled with the
earth out of which it had been digged. On comparing this with
the former, all present were a(hamed of their firfl judgement, and a-
greed, that the ancient statue seemed to be an animated fubltance,
and that the modern, compared with it, was but a block of marble
without exprcffion.

one of his capital performances. His Venus rising from
the sea was accounted his masterpiece.

Lysippus, the famous flatuary, likewise lived in the

time of Alexander. He was a native of Sicyon. He
said, that Polycletus's Doryphorus at first served him in-
flead of a master: But having afterwards consulted the
painter Eupompus, which of the preceding sculptors was
the most worthy of his imitation, he received for answer,
( None of them, but Nature herself." Lysippus fol-
lowed the advice, and carried the art of flatuary to the
summit of perfection. It is well known that Alexander
prohibited any other person but iLyfippus from attempt-
ing to make his statue, as he had forbidden any body
but Apelles to draw his portrait: For he did not doubt
that the singular merit of those artists, as it would im-
mortalize their own names, would bestow additional
fame even on his. Lysippus is said to have wrought
with much ease and quickness, and to have executed
more works than any other itatuary whatever. His two
capital performances were, if?, The statue of a man
rubbing himfeif after coming out of the bath; which
Agrippa afterwards caused to be placed before his baths
at Rome. 2dly, A statue of Alexander in brass, of ex-
quifite beauty: The Emperor Nero, from a molt de-
praved taste, resolved to have this last statue gilded.

THE

# BOOK IV. Containing the History of the FOURTH AGE of GREECE. From the death of Alexander the Great till Greece became a Roman province, some time after the destruction of Corinth.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

o
ANCIENT GREECE.

BOOK IV.
Containing the Hifzory of the FOURTH AGE of

G RE EC E.
From the death of Alexander the Great till Greece became

a Roman province, some time after the deftruciion of Co-
rinth.
T HE beautiful days of Greece, so fruitful in great

men and in great actions, are now past; and

the few traces of ancient virtue that shall still appear,
may be compared to bursts of lightning in a dark night,
which fiine but for a moment, and serve only to make
the gloom more conspicuously dismal.

We {hall now fee the chief officers of Alexander, to

the number of ten or twelve, making war on each other
for the space of twenty years, to procure an independent
establishment in some portion of his vast empire. Some-
times pretended friends, sometimes declared enemies,
they embrace now one fide, now another, just as inte-
reft or caprice inclines them. We shall fee Macedonia

H h change

change its master five or fix times. We shall perceive
that Alexander, by puflhing his conquests to so immense
an extent, was the occasion of the utter ruin of his own
i'amily, and of the total extirpation of his relations;
that murder and deftruEtion were the fruits of his con-
quests, about which his generals laughter one ano-
ther with the most ihocking cruelty; and that the fRates
of Greece were victims of their quarrels. To enter
on a detail of the various events resulting from these
disputes among Alexander's captains, would be in es-
fct to write the history of all the then known world in-
itead of that of Greece. We lhall therefore confine
ourselves to the particulars immediately refpeding that
country, and pass over the reft in silence; which we do
wvith the greater. pleasure, as those other tranfatlions
'would present little else to the reader than one continued
scene of murder and the balc'fe perfidy.

The Greeks still make lome efforts for regaining their

former independency. But these are only the weak ex-
ertions of expiring liberty ; and the princes to whom
they apply for protection, instead of delivering them
from their miseries, take advantage of their weakness
to enslave them the more, and to make them fubfervi-
cnt to their own defigns.-At last the Romans; whose
power insensibly swallowed up that of all the otherftates
in this hemisphere, fubjecdld them imperceptibly, pro-
claiming themselves all the while to be the deliverers of
mankind, and that they never made war but to reinstate
nations in their natural rights and liberty. But they
loon changed their tone, and dicated their pleasure as
conquerors and obvereigns. The detrution of Co-
rinth at last convinced the Greeks of the necessity they
were under of submitting to that warlike people; who,
under various pretences, totally subdued all the fates of
Greece, and added the whole of that country to the reft
of their great empire.

CHAP,

# CHAP. I. Affairs of Greece, from the death of Alexander the Great to the reduction of Sparta by Antigonus, after the battle of Selosia.

CHAP. I.
AfFairs of Greece, from the death of Alexander the Great

to the reducsion of Sparta by Antigonus, after the battle
of Selafia.
rHI-IE generals of Alexander, after much altercation

and dispute, at length agreed to divide among

them the provinces of his empire in the following man-
ner. Macedonia, Epirus, and Greece, were afligned
to Antipater; Thrace, and the neighbouring provinces
to Lysimachus; Egypt, Arabia and Libya, to Ptolemy
the son of Lagus, whose successors in that government
were on that account called the race of the Lagida;
Lycia, Phrygia, and the provinces of Asia Minor, were
given to Antigonus; Caria to Caffander; Lydia to Me-
nander; Little Phrygia to Leonatus; Armenia to Neop-
tolemus; Cappadocia 'and Pamphylia, provinces not yet
thoroughly conquered, to Eumenes; Syria and Pheni-
cia to Laomedon; the two Medias to Perdiccas and
Atropatus; Persia to Peuceftes; Babylonia to Archon;
Mesopotamia to Arcefilas; Parthia and Hircania to Phra-
taphernes; Badcriana and Sogdiana to Philip. -ligher
Asia and the Indies were left to those put in poflifiion of
them by Alexander. Seleucus, the son of Antiochus,
was made general of the hore ; and Caifander, Ion ot'
Antipater, of the guards.

Of these governors several diftinguilfed themselves

by their extraordinary merit; but above all Eumenes, a
native of Thrace; obscurely born indeed, but whose
magnanimity and elevated sentiments amply fipplied
that defect, if it may be accounted one. His eminent
abilites procured him the esteem, first of Philip, and
afterwards of Alexander, with whom he poffelfed a high
degrre of credit.

1- h - Sttatira,

Statira, the widow of Alexander, and daughter of

Darius, soon followed her unhappy father to the grave.
Her death was brought about by the procurement of
Roxana, who fufpeaed her to be with child. Perdic-
cas was an accomplice in this murder.

The Greek colonies fettled by Alexander in high

Asia, weary of living at such a distance from their native
country, resolved to return home; and uniting to the
number of 2o,ooo men, prepared for their departure,
without asking permission of Perdiccas. But intelligence
of their resolution coming to the ears of that governor,
he dispatched against them a general called Python; who
having found means to bribe 3000 of them to desert to
him, easily defeated the reft; of whom the greater part
were, in consequence of orders from Perdiccas, cut in
pieces by the Macedonians.

In the mean time, the news of Alexander's death ha-

ving reached Greece, occasioned an universal joy among
the Athenians, who immediately resolved upon war,
and used their utmost endeavours with the reft of the
states of Greece to persuade them to enter into a ge-
neral confederacy for their common liberty. A power-
ful fleet is immediately fitted out; all the citizens able
to carry arms are inlifted; and an army under the com-
mand of Leofthenes is sent against Antipater. Demoft-
henes, then in exile at Megara, having employed his
eloquence to prevail on the states of Sicyon, Argos, and
Corinth, to accede to the confederacy; the Athenians,
itruck with this instance of his generosity, recall him
from banishment, and on his return march all out of
the city to meet him, to welcome him back, and to
show him every mark of honour and diftindion. It is
observable, that Phocion opposed this war. Antipater,
informed of these tranfacions, took the field with no
more than 13,000 Macedonians and 600 horse; and ad-
vanced-towards Thessaly, a fleet of I o galleys attending
him along the coast. But the army of the Athenians

and

and their allies being more numerous than his, defeated
him in the first engagement, and obliged him to re-
treat.

The Athenians having next year formed the siege of

Lamia in Macedonia, both besiegers and besieged be-
haved at first with great bravery. But Leonatus arri-
ving to the assistance of Antipater, an engagement en-
sued ; wherein the Greeks, by means of their cavalry,
of which the-greater part was raised in Thessaly, ob-
tained the vicory, flew Leonatus, and obliged the city
to capitulate. Antipater however escaped out of Lamia,
and put himself at the head of his troops; but carefully
avoided another engagement, till Craterus should come
to his assistance with a frefl reinforcement of troops.
These arriving soon afterwards, formed, on their junc-
tion with those of Antipater, an army of 40o000 foot,
5000 horse, and 3000 bowmen; while that of the Athe-
nians amounted to no more than 25,000 men and
3500 horse. A battle ensuing, the Greeks were de-
feated; owing almost entirely to the want of discipline
among their soldiers. The allies having applied to An-
tipater for terms of accommodation, received for an-
fwer, that he would treat separately with each of the
flates. Upon this the negociation was broken off; and
the allies, instead of of remaining united, having dispersed,
Antipater presented himself with his army before each
of their cities separately, and diEated his pleasure to the
inhabitants.

The Athenians, thus deserted by their allies, upon

hearing that Antipater was advancing against them from
Thebes, deputed Phocion to go and meet him. Anti-
pater insisted, that the Athenians should submit them-
selves entirely to his mercy; and with this hard condi-
tion they found themselves obliged to comply. But
Antipater afterwards condescended to enter into an al-
liance with them, on condition of their delivering up to
him Demosthenes and Hyperides; of their restoring the

H h 3 government

government to its ancient f ate, when the public em-
ployments were conferred on the wealthier fort alone;
of their receiving a garrison of his troops ; and of their
repaying him the expences of the war.

After this, hearing that Demosthenes and Hyperides

had fled, he dispatchcd Archias inpurfuit of them ; who
finding Hyperides in Egina, dragged him from the
temple, whither he had betaken himself for fanchiary,
and sent him to Antipater, by whom he was put to
death. Archias having likewise discovered Denmothenes
in the island of Calauria, where he had taken refuge in
the temple of Neptune endeavoured to persuade him
to go along with him to Antipater. by afluring him
that lie would do him no harm. But Demosthenes,

justly distrustful both of the servant of the tyrant,
322. and of the tyrant himself, drank off the poison

that he constantly carried about with him, which

in a few moments afterwards put a period to his glorious
life.

Demosthenes was the prince of orators, as we have

already had frequent occasion to observe, and as may be
more fully seen from the comparison drawn up by Quin-
tilian between his eloquence and that of Cicero. HI-e was
likewise a profound politician, aatuated by the warmest
zeal for the interest of his country, and the most vio-
lent deteflation of every thing that favoured of tyranny
Had the Athenians followed his advice, Philip never
would have been able to arrive at the fovereighty of
Greece.

But it was the most extraordinary circutnfance of all

in the character of Demosthenes as an orator, that he
never made a vain or ostentatious parade of his genius,
nor ever indulged himself in any flourish with the sole
intention of ihining. His constant aim was to engage
the attention of his audience to the merits of his cause,
and convince their judgements. Some time after his

death

death the Athenians erected a statue of brass to his me-
mory.

The Athenians soon became sensible, that, by. sub-

jeeing therfelves to Antipater, they had assumed a very
severe and imperious master. As the virtue of Phocian
compelled in a manner the admiration of this new ty-
rant, several exiled citizens were permitted to return on
the intercetfion of that celebrated Athenian. But a great
number of the poorer inhabitants voluntarily abandoned
the city. The governm ent however of Antipater was
exercised with great jultice; and public employments
were conferred on persons of merit alone. At the fame
time it is true, that men of fadtious dispositions, from
whom Antipater apprehended disturbance, wereexclu-
ded from all offices in the state ; a measure, howeverj
that might perhaps redound no less to the happiness of
Athens than to the quiet and security of the tyrant.

Eumenes, in the mean time, was put in pol'felion of

Capp; docia.-Ptolemy, Craterus, Antipater, and An-
tigonus fall out, form confederacies against one another,
and Craterus perishes in the dispute. Perdiccas dies in
an expedition againif .Egypt.-Antipater likewise dies,
after naming Polifperchon his fucceifor in the govern-
ment, in preference to his own son Caffander, who was
by no means deflitutc of merit. This behaviour of An-
tipater, in choofing, preferably to his own son, Po-
lifperchon a stranger, but the oldest: of all Alexander'.
generals, and a man of such experience as the nation
flood in need of, cannot be too highly commended.
But Caiander, provoked at what he called his father's
injustice, rcfolved to form a party againit Polifperchon,
and engaged in his favour Ptolemy and Antigonus ; of
whom the latter, having the command of the provinces
of Asia Minor, was the most powerful of Alexander's
futccefobrs. ['olifpherchon, on the other hand, laboured
to strengthen his party; and the better to dispose
Greece to afli(t him, he re-eftablifed the fRates in their

H h 4 ancient

government to its ancient f ate, when the public em-
ployments were conferred on the wealthier fort alone;
of their receiving a garrifln of his troops ; and of their
repaying him the expences of the war.

After this, hearing that Demofhlenes and Ilyperides

had fled, he dispatched Archias inpurfuit of them ; who
finding Hyperides in Egina, dragged him from the
temple, whither he had betaken himself for sanctuary,
and sent him to Antipater, by whom he was put to
death. Archias having likewise discovered Denmothenes
in the island of Calauria, where he had taken refuge in
the temple of Neptune endeavoured to persuade him
to go along with him to Antipater. by afluring him
that he would do him no harm. But Demosthenes,

justly distrustful both of the servant of the tyrant,
322. and of the tyrant himself, drank off the poison

that he constantly carried about with him, which

in a few moments afterwards put a period to his glorious
life.

DemoRthenes was the prince of orators, as we have

already had frequent occasion to observe, and as may be
more fully seen from the comparison drawn up by Quin-
tilian between his eloquence and that of Cicero. H-e was
likewise a profound politician, actuated by the warmest
zeal for the interest of his country, and the most vio-
lent detestation of every thing that favoured of tyranny
Had the Athenians followed his advice, Philip never
would have been able to arrive at the sovereignty of
Greece.

But it was the most extraordinary circumstance of all

in the character of Demosthenes as an orator, that he
never made a vain or ostentatious parade of his genius,
nor ever indulged himself in any flourifi with the sole
intention of shining. His constant aim was to engage
the attention of his audience to the merits of his cause,
and convince their judgements. Some time after his

death

death the Athenians eretred a statue of brass to his me-
nory.

The Athenians soon became sensible, that, by sub-

jecing themselves to Antipater, they had affumred a very
severe and imperious master. As the virtue of Phocian
compelled in a manner the admiration of this new ty-
rant, several exiled citizens were permitted to return on
the intercession of that celebrated Athenian. But a great
number of the poorer inhabitants voluntarily abandoned
the city. The government however of Antipater was
exercised with great juitice; and public employments
were conferred on persons of merit alone. At the fame
time it is true, that men of faCtious dispositions, fron
whom Antipater apprehended diflurbance, were exclu-
ded from all offices in the state; a measure, however,
that might perhaps redound no less to the happiness of
Athens than to the quiet and, security of the tyrant.

Eumenes, in the mean time, was put in poileffion of

Cappndocia.-Ptolemy, Craterus, Antipater, and An-
tigonus fall out, form confederacies against one another-
and Craterus perishes in the dispute. Perdiccas dies in
an expedition against .Egypt.-Antipater likewise dies,
after naming Polifperchon his successor in the govern-
ment, in preference to his own ion CaTfander, who was
by no means deftitutc of merit. This behaviour of An-
tipater, in choofing, preferably to his own son, Po-
lifperchon a firanger, but the oldefl of all Alexander's
generals, and a man of such experience as the nation
flood in need of, cannot be too highly commended.
But Cafflander, provoked at what he called his father's
injustice, rcfolved to form a party againlt Polifperchon,
and engaged in his favour Ptolemy and Antigonus ; of
whom the latter, having the command of the provinces
of Asia Minor, was the most powerful of Alexander's
fucceflbrs. t'olifpherchon, on the other hand, laboured
to strengthen his party; and the better to dispose
Greece to assist him, he rc-eftabliled the states in their

H h 4 ancien:

ancient independency, and recalled such citizens as
were in banishment. But Nicanor, arriving in the
mean time at Athens on the part of Caffander, took pof-
session of Pyreus. Soon after, Alexander, the son of
Polifperchon, having come thither likewise, under pre-
tence of afifting the inhabitants, but really to make him-
self master of the place, found the inclinations of the
citizens much divided.

The moderation of Phocion proved his ruin. Wish.

ing always to at as a mediator, he made-it a rule to be-
have with candor and with mildness to the enemies of
his country. This was at last imputed to him as a crime.
He was most unjustly accused of keeping up a treason-
able correspondence with Nicanor; and was, on that
account, degraded from his office of general. Phocion
having presented himself before the people, with an in-
tention to convince them of his innocence; they refu-
fed to hear him, and condemned him to die. Every
person of sense and virtue was Ihocked at feeing the
man, who, by way of diftinaion, used to be called the
hone/? man, treated in so cruel and unworthy a manner.
His friends took their last farewell of him in tears. Pho-
cion himself behaved on the occasion with the fame tran-
quillity that had distinguished his most glorious days.
and with that confidence which innocence alone inspires.

After begging of one of his friends to intreat
319. his son, in his name, to pardon this piece of in.

justice in the Athenians, he swallowed the hem-
lock juice.

We shall be the less surprised at this glaring instance

of injustice, when we confider, that. all power was
at that time in the hands of the most base and unworthy
members of the state; who being without any perion
of sense and spirit to direc them, gave themselves up,
without controul, to ditates .of caprice and passion.
-To the injuflice and folly of such tumultuous assem-
blies, as that by which Phocion was condemned, did the

most

most virtuous men of this republic in former times owe
their ruin.

Phocion was educated in the school of Plato; and was,

perhaps, one of the mos virtuous men that ever lived.
-Though almost all his life at the head of armies, his
love of mediocrity lill remained with him, and no man
ever carried disinterestedness to a higher pitch. Inflex-
ible in every point that -regarded the intereRs of the
commonwealth, as well as his own conduE in life, he
constantly preferred the good of the slate to all concerns
of his own; and private life, although he was of the
mildest and most benevolent. temper, yet he never in
any particular would depart from the stoical peculia-
rities in his chara&er to conform himself to the luxu-
rious manners of the age. His exemplary ibbriety pre-
served him vigorous and healthful to a very advanced
age; and when eighty years old, he commanded ar-
mies. The temper of his wife, too, was perfecly cor-
respondent to his own. An Ionian lady having made
an ostentatious display of her fine cloaths and jewels be-
fore her, "As for me, (said the),I esteem my husband,
" who has commanded the Athenian armies these
" twenty years, as my finefl ornament." Phocion was
chosen general no fewer that four and forty times. But
it was a fixed maxim of his, that the jufleff wars weaken
a slate, and that peace ought to be the objet of every
wife government. It was not till some time alter his
death, that his ungrateful country, ashamed of her
treatment of him, ereced a -ltatue of brass to his me-
mory, in order as much as possible to wipe away the
ignominy of so unjust and so disgraceful a condemnation.

With every virtue that could dignify a private cha-

ra&er, Phocion pofleffed in an eminent degree the most
important qualifications of a complete fatefman and of
a flilful general, united in his person the political abi-
lities of 'lThemiftocles and the military talents of Mil-
tiades; ard he might have been as serviceable to his

country

:country as those great men, had not facion excluded
him from the command in the most critical times, and
prefered to him persons who were hardly worthy of be-
ing his scholars, either in the science of government or
of war.

The Athenians, finding themselves now in a defence-

less situation, were obliged to submit to Caffander, to
put him.in poffeflion of the citadel, and to receive from
him a governor, on whom, according to the language
of the age, they bestowed the appellation of Tyrant. The

man advanced by Callander to this dignity, was
319. Demetrius Phalerius, who was much esteemed at

Athens for his eloquence, and who first inter-

sered in the affairs of government about the time that
Harpalus had deserted from Alexander.

During their fubjeEion to Caffander, the Athenians

enjoyed a fiate of much tranquillity under the admini-
ftration of Demetrius, who, so far from abusing his
power, behaved with such moderation that they hardly
perceived him to be their mafler. He not only aug-
mented the revenues of the republic, but retrenched in
every department, except that of religion, all expences
- which feetmed calculated solely for luxury and oftenta-
tion. He remedied the abuses that prevailed in the
matter of raising sepulchral monuments, and restrained,
as much as poflible, extravagance in furniture and in
dress; and the poor citizens profited greatly by his
prudence and attention. Demetrius diftinguifled him-
self as highly in his philosophical as in his political capa-
city. All the ancient authors are unanimous in praising
his virtue and the wisdom of his administration: and
they rank him among the greatest men that Athens ever
produced.

Polifperchon, hearing that Catflnder had gotten pof-

feJifon of Athens, marched and laid siege to that city;
but the besieged made so brave a resistance, that he was
forced to relinquish the enterprise.

Eulmenees

Eumenus havingi been about this time defeated in an

engagement by Antigonus, was taken prisoner, and soon
after put to death. Of all the officers of Alexander,
this was the wifelf and the moit virtuous; the belt corn
mander, the molt artful politician. He seems to have
been on the whole the most accomplified man of his
time, and the worthiest of becoming Alexander's fuc-
ccflr. But he had the misfortune to lead an army
:compose.d of different nations, furnished him by the
governors of provinces, each of whom aspired to be
commander in chief. He remained to the last inviolably
attached to the royal family. No consideration what-
ever could fiake his integrity; and he appeared, upon
all occasions, to be aauated by the jultelt fentirents
of honour. But these extraordinary qualities rendered
him the more obnoxious to the Patraps, who envied the
superior accomplishments of tb ikilful an officer, efpeci-
ally as he owed his advancement not to birth or in-
trigue, but to his singular merit alone.

Olympias having been, by 'olifperchon, recalled in-
to Macedonia, made herself mistress of that kingdom,
and put: to death Arideus, who had borne the empty
title of king for the space of fix years. Euridice the
wife of Arideus, Nicanor the brother of Catlander, to-
gether with a great number of Caifander's other friends,
were likewise the vicilms of the cruelty of that princess.
But those cruelties did not long remain unpunished.
Caffander having besieged her in Pidno, and obliged her
to surrender at discretion, the relations of the persons
fte had caused to be murdered, demanded vengeance for
those murders in the alemrbly ofthe Macedonians. She
was accordingly condemned, and put to death
by the hands of her accusers themselves ; the 317.
soldiers sent for that purpose nor daring to lay
hands upon her.

Caffander having led his army into EBotia, was
moved with coinpalion for the Thebans, who, since

the

the deftruEtiqn of their city by Alexander, wandered
about from place to place, without any fixed habitation.
Caffander resolved to rebuild their city. Several states
of Greece contributed to forward this generous and
humane undertaking. The Athenians, in particular, re-
built a part of the walls; and Thebes soon recovered its
former splendor. After this Caffander having marched
against Argos, that city surrendered to him without
making any resistance; and those in the territory of
Messene followed its example.

About this time Demetrius, the son of Antigonus,

began to make a figure. Plutarch draws an advan-
tageous characer of this prince, and distinguishes him
by the title of Poliorcetes, which signifies, the taker of
cities. He was the handsomest man of his time. His
majestic air, tempered by a pleasant affable look, firuck
the fpe&ators at once with awe and pleasure. He em-
ployed his leisure in giving moit magnificent feasts and
entertainments. But as soon as business called him
to the cabinet or the camp, none exceeded him in
diligence and acivity, nor better supported fatigue and
pain. He behaved with the highest refpea to his pa-
rents, by whom he was most tenderly beloved.

Seleucus having conquered Nicanor, and reduced un-

der his power Media and Sufiana, made a public entry
into Babylon. From this period is dated the ara of the
Seleucidx,, by which the Orientals reckoned their chro-
nology, as the Christians do by that of Christ. Seleu-
cus rendered himself beloved by his fubjeas, by the
mildness of his government, by.his juflice, and by his
humanity. Demetrius the son of Antigonus attempted
in vain to expel him from the province of Babylon. Se-
leucus, indeed, having been absent in Media, Demetrius
attacked and reduced the castles of Babylon; but was
Loon after obliged to retreat to his father in Asia Mi-
nor.

Trlrle

The Macedonians growing weary of the divisions that

prevailed among the generals of Alexander, required,
that the young king, now about fourteen years old, who
,was the son of Roxana, and bore the fame name with
his father, should be set at their head. Caffander, dread-
ing left that might interfere with his ambitious designs,
put to death privately both the young prince and his
mother; and next year, in concert with Polifperchon,
he dispatched, in like manner, another son of Alexan-
der, called Ikercules, then a boy about seventeen years of
age, who had been born to that prince by Barfine, the
widow of Mnemon the Rhodian. Antigonus, on the
other hand, secretly put to death Cleopatra the filter of
Alexander the Great, and widow of Alexander King
of Epire. Thus the generals of Alexander had the
cruelty to-extirpate the family of their sovereign, that
they might have no malter, and might hold their govern-
ments in perfect independence. Ambition never flops
at the most deteflable crimes. But the prosperity of
those monRiers was of ihort duration; while, on the
contrary, Seleucus and Ptolemy, who a&ed on prin-
ciples of juflice and clemency, became the founders of
lasting empires.

While Athens enjoyed a state of perfet tran-

quillity under the administration of Demetrius 306.
Phalerius the deputy of Caffander, Deinetrius
Poliorcetes appeared off Pyreus, and blocked it up with
a fleet of 350 ihips. The Athenians being taken un-
prepared, with their harbour unguarded, Demetrius
entered the harbour without opposition and intimated
to the Athenians by a herald, that he was come to set
them at liberty, and re-establish their ancient form
of government. The Athenians thinking it befl to sub-
mit, sent ambassadors to treat with him, whom he recei-
ved in the most polite and obliging manner. De-
metrius proceeded to lay siege to the fortress of Muni-
chia, took it, dismissed the Macedonian garrison, and

rated

rafed it to the ground. Then he made his entry into A-
thens, and re-established 'the democratical form of go-
vernment, which had been interrupted for the space of
thirteen or fourteen years.

As Demetrius Poliorcetes entertained a high e-

fieem for Demetrius Phalerius, he sent him, at his own
requelt, to Thebes. For though the Athenians had
erecled 300 statues to his memory, that philosopher was
very justly apprehensive of the change which this revo-
lution might produce in the disposition of that fickle
people. The Athenians, with a view of making their
court to the conqueror, condemned their late virtuous
governor to death, used every means to rendered his me-
mory odious, and overturned all the falues they had a
little while before ereCted to his honour. On the other
hand, they heaped the most extravagant honours on
Demetrius Poliorcetes and his father Antigonus, call-
ing them their kings and tutelary gods, iand carrying
their pictures in the proceflion at the feafl of Minerva.
What a worthless, unaccountable, and degenerated
people 1 Demetrius Phalerius took refuge with Caffan-
der; and after Caftander's death, he put himself under
the protection of Ptolemy Soter in Egypt, who was the
protector of all men of genius and learning. Demretrius
soon gained the friendship of that prince, and employed
himself, during his retreat, in the composition of several
works on the subjec& of government.

Demetrius Poliorcetes departed from Athens with a

numerous fleet, to make the conquest of Cyprus. Ha-
ving made good his landing in the island, he immedi-
ately advanced against Salamina; defeated Menelaus
who defended that city; and battered its walls with ex-
traordinary warlike engines, and particularly the Hele-
polis, to which however the besieged found means to set
iire in the niight. Ptolemy informed by Menelaus of
,he dangcr he ran of losing the island, hastened to its re-

lief

lief with a powerful fleet. But he was totally defeated
by Demetrius in a fea-fight. The consequence of this
victory was the reduction of Salamina: of which, when.
Antigonus received intelligence, he was seized with such
a transport of joy, that he sent his crown to Demetrius
and gave him in the letter the title of King. The E-
gyptians, on the other hand, bestowed the fame title on
Ptolemy.

No man was more active or laborious in war than

Demetrius; who being uncommonly skilful in the me-
chanic powers, had an extraordinary turn for iieges, and
for the construEtion of engines. His galleys of fifteen
benches of oars, and the engine called hi!cpolis, were
firiking proofs of'his mechanical genius.

After gaining the vicory.juft mentioned, De-
304. metrius resolved to besiege Rhodes, the capital

of the island of the fame name, a very rich tra-

ding city, forming by itf,-lf a powerful slate, firmly at-
tached to Ptolemy. Demetrius failed against it with a
numerous fleet and an army of lo,ooo men. The en-
gines used by him in this siege are much celebrated.
The Rhodians took the wisest precautions for making a
vigorous refifance. Nothing could exceed the violence
of the assaults made on the city by Demetrius, except,
perhaps, the efforts of the besieged to sustain those as-
faults, and to repulse the enemy. The belieged made
much use of engines, by which they threw firebrands
and darts. Demetrius, finding his attacks on the fide
of the harbour ineffectual, attempted it next on the land
fide, where he made use of an helepolis which exceed-
ed in size any that had hitherto appeared. It conlifted
of nine stories. each furnifled with catapulta and balif-
tae; it bore likewise two battering rams of a monqfrous
size, fortified with iron ; which, when moved by the u-
nited firength of a Iooo men, had a prodigious force.
]3ut while he was assaulting the city with this dreadful
engine, several transports, loaded with provisions, arri-

v?4

ved to the relief of the Rhodians. Demetrius, after car-
rying on the siege for the space of a whole year, and
performing incredible acions of personal valour, was at
last obliged to raise it, and to agree to a treaty with the
Ithodians, extremely honourable for thelatter. For it
was thereby declared, that the republic of Rhodes flould
remain in possession of all its rights, privileges, and li-
berties, without being subjea to any power whatever.

The celebrated painter Protogenes happening to be

at Rhodes 'during the course of this famous sie'ge,
quietly prosecuted his business, without being in the
least disturbed by the noise of arms or the alarms of
the siege. Upon Demetrius asking him how he came
to enjoy such tranquillity ? " Because," answered Pro-
togenes, " 1 knew well that you had declared war a-
" gainft the Rhodians, not against the arts." Deme-
trius went often to fee him when at work. The mafier-
piece of this painter was, as we have mentioned above,
the piEture of Jalifus, which even Apelles himielf ad-
mired; and in which a dog was represented panting and
foaming at the mouth as if after a hard chace. It is
reported of Protogenes, that after having long endea-
voured to paint the foam issuing from the mouth of the
dog, without being able to execute it as he desired; lo-
sing patience at last, he suddenly threw the. sponge that
he made use of for rubbing away what seemed amiss, on
the canvas, which exactly produced the effec that the
painter desired.

Caffander about this time laid siege to Athens. De-

metrius hastened to the relief of that city with a
303. numerous fleet, and drove Caffander from At-

tica. On this occasion the Athenians lavished

upon him the highest honours, and the most extrava-
gant flattery; afligning him for an apartment a quarter
of the temple of Minerva; which Demetrius, whose
debauches dishonoured his warlike exploitsr polluted

with

with every fort of profanation, -even erecting in it altars
to his courtezans. But not satisfied with that, he obli-
ged the Athenians to furnish him without delay with
the fum of 150 talents; which was no sooner delivered
to him, than he beflowed it in a present on Damia his fa-
vourite courtezan. At this time Demetrius procured him-
self to be declared commander in chief of the Greeks, by
an assembly of their fates holden at the Isthmus of Co-
rinth.

In the mean time Antigonus aimed at nothing less

than to dispossess the other successors of Alexander,
namely, Caffander, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolemy,
of their respective governments. But those other go-
vernors perceving his intentions, formed a confederacy
againit him and his son Demetrius. A great battle was

fought in the neighbourhood of Ipsus in Phrygia,
302. where Antigonus was slain, and the confederates

obtained a signal vitory.

In consequence of this vi&ory, the confederated prin-

ces added the dominions of Antigonus to their former
possessions; and, after much controversy, they resolved
to divide the whole empire of Alexander in the follow-
ing manner: Egypt, Libya, Arabia, and Palestine, were
assigned to Ptolemy ;-Macedonia and Greece to Caf-
sander ;-Bithynia and Thrace to Lyfimachus;-and
Asia, as far as the river Indus, to Seleucus. This last
territory, which comprehended all the provinces of the
ancient Persian empire, was called the kingdom of Syria,
because the Seleucidse, its kings of the race of Seleucus
resided at Antioch, a city of Syria.

In the mean time Demetrius appeared before Athens,

and demanded admittance into that city. But the un-
fortunate situation of his affairs encouraged the Athe-
nians to refuse to comply with his request. They re-
turned him for answer, that they would receive within
their gates no king whatever.

I1 i About

About the fame time Caflander died, leaving two sons,

who quarrelled about the fucceflion to his kingdom;
Demetrius having efected a reconciliation with Seleu-
cus, applied himself to the re-eftablifiment of his affairs.
He marched againtt Athens, full of refentmett for the
ungrateful treatment he had met with from its inhabi-
tants; and he blockaded the city so closely, that he soon
reduced them to the last extremity, ahd obliged them
to open their gates, and to receive him as their conque-
ror. Having assembled the inhabitants in the theatre,
he surrounded it with armed men. But after throwing
the Athenians into the most violent terror imaginable,
he suddenly assumed an air of affability, and declared,
That he freely forgave them. From Athens he marched
against the Lacedemonians, with an intention to subdue
that warlike people; and coming to an engagement
with their king Archidainus, who had marched out to
oppose him in the neighbourhood of Mantinea, he gain-
ed a great vidory. In a second engagement near Spar-
ta, he cut in pieces 20o Spartans. After this, it was
not doubted that Sparta, which Ihd never hitherto
been in poffefiion of any enemAy, lhould be taken by
Demetrius. But some other affairs suddenly requiring
his appearance in another quarter, Sparta escaped once
more.

It was about this time that Seleucus built on the banks

of the Tigris the city of Seleucia, which afterwards be-
came so famous.

Pyrrhus the renowned King of Epire, who in the fe-

quel distinguished himself as the best general of his time,
began already to appear. He was the son of Eacides
king :of the Moloffi. Having, while yet an infant, nar-
rowly escaped from the hands of the rebels who had de-
throned his father, he was carried into Illyrium, and
there educated. After being restored to his kingdom,
he was again driven out of itby the Mololfi, who had
taken advantage ot his absence to fife in rebellion, and he

was

was obliged to take refuge with Demetrius his brother
in-law, with whom he was present at the battle of Ipsus,
where he greatly distinguished himself.

He went afterwards to the court of Ptolemy; where

he displayed extraordinary skill in every kind of manly
exercises, became a favourite of the whole court by his
generous and obliging behaviour, and ihowed that he
was possessed of remarkable abilities. He had great
command of temper, was mild and accessible, delighted
every body by his affability, and in point of military
skill was generally preferred even to Demetrius. But
he was of a lively impetuous disposition; and his restless
temper and unbounded ambition never would permit
him to remain in quiet. Here he took to wife Antigo-
na, the daughter of Berenice, the wife of Ptolemy;
and having by the intercession of that princess obtained
a fleet and some money from Ptolemy, he with that as-
fiftance regained possession of his kingdom. After this
he made an alliance with Lysimachus; and attacked Ma-
cedonia, then in poffeflion of Demetrius, on the one
fide, while Lysimachus attacked it on the other. The
army of the latter, disgusted by the haughtiness of his
deportment, deserted from him, joined Pyrrhus, and
proclaimed him king of Macedonia. But he soon loft
that kingdom, and was obliged to return into Epire.

Cineas, a native of Thessaly, who had been a scholar

of Demosthenes, and was a man of an excellent under.
standing, was the favourite and confident of Pyrrhus.
This man frequently represented to Pyrrhus, in the most
striking manner, the inutility of his ambitious projects;
and proved to his conviction, that it was as'muchin his
power to enjoy, at the time he was arguing with him,
the quiet' and good cheer which Pyrrhus himself pro-
sessed to be the end of all his undertakings, as it would
be after he should have exposed himself to the number-
less toils and dangers that he was continually meditating.
But though Pyrrhus was obliged to assent to his opinion,

i 2 yet

yet he found it impossible to restrain his turbu-
280. lent ambition; which after a variety of other

exploits, prompted him to undertake an expedi-

tion even into Italy against the Romans, with whom,
he fought three battles.

After gaining, by the meahs of his elephants, the

firfl battle, Pyrrhus sent Cineas to Rome with offers of
peace which by the advice of Appius Claudius weie
rejected by the senate. Cineas, on his return, gave
his master the most lofty idea of the Roman people, de-
scribing the senate as an assembly of so many kings.
The RLomans, in their turn, sent ambassadors to Pyr-
rhus, -to convince him of his folly in making war upon
them, and of the danger in which it might eventually
involve him. Pyrrhus made. the most tempting offers
toFabricius, who happened to be one of the ambaffa-
dors, to engage him to enter into his views: but Fa-
bricius discovered by his answer a greatness of foul in-
finitely superior to all corruption. " Do you retain
" your wealth," said he, " and 1 will preserve my po-
' verty and integrity." Pyrrhus, however, perfilfed
in his pradices on Fabricius, and made more tempt-
ing offers still to bring him over to his fide. But that
generous Roman reje.ed them all with the fame firm-
ness and magnaminity. Next year Fabricius trafmitted
to Pyrrhus a letter, written by the physician of that
prince, wherein he offered to poison the king his ma-
fler, provided the Romans would reward him suitably
for his pains. Pyrrhus, struck with so high an inflancc
of Roman generosity, set all his prisoners at liberty
without a ransom, and offered more advantageous terms
of peace than before ; to which however, the Romans
would by no means hearken.

A second battle was then fought between Pyrrhus and

the Romans near the city of Afculum; where both
parties exerted extraordinary efforts of bravery, and

'
. . ' 'the

the night alone put an end to the engagement. The
loss was nearly equal on both fides, but the belt troops
of Pyrrhus were cut off.

About this time happened a famous irruption

of the Gauls into the more polished and fruitful 278.
countries of the southern parts of Europe. A
vail swarm of those barbarians, leaving their native re-
gions of the north, proceeded southwards, and appear-
ed very unexpectedly on the frontiers of Macedonia;
where Ptolemy Ceraunus, who then pofleffed that king-
dom, having ventured to give them battle, was totally
defeated and slain. The vicorious Gauls, after this
success divided their fbrces into two parties: one of
which took the rout towards Thrace; while the other
under Brennus, direEted their course to Greece. Bren-
nus having made himself marer of the pass of Thermo-
pyla after tome opposition he advanced to Delphos, with
an intention to plunder the rich temple of Apollo. But
the Greeks anxious for tle preservation of so sacred a
place, quickly assembled a powerful army, charged the
Gauls with their usual bravery, further heightened on
this occasion by all the fury of religious zeal, and ob-
tained a complete victory. Brennus, out of'defpair for
the loss of the battle, killed himfclf. Such of the
Gauls as remained, endeavoured to retreat by the
fame road that had conducted them into Greece; but
they were mostly destroyed, either by famine or by the
sword.

The Syracufans having applied to Pyrrhus for afilt-

ance against the Carthaginians, that prince left Italy,
pased over to Sicily, and took poffeflion of Syracuse;
where having received money and a fleet from the Sy-
racufans, he fell upon the Carthaginians, and ruined
their power in that illand. Encouraged by an uninter-
rupted course of prosperity, Pyrrhus began to meditate
the conquest of Africa, intending to make his son He-
ienus sovereign of Sicily. But his good fortune had

1 3 greatly

greatly altered his temper. He was now grown over-
bearing and tyrannical: And his sole aim being to pro-
cure money to support the expence of his luxury and
extravagance, he employed the most oppressive mea-
fures for that purpose; bellowed all offices on his own
favourites; and, instead of judging according to the
laws, was guided by interest and caprice alone. This con-
duEt soon alienated from him the affection of the people;
and Pyrrhus perceiving himself to be the object of pub-
lic hatred, became a downright tyrant, put to death
under various pretences the most illustrious citizens,
and rendered himself detested by all the Sicilians. Ha-
ving undertaken another expedition into Italy, at the
infigation of the Samnites and Tarentines, he plunder-
ed on his way the temple of Proserpine at Locri. But
being overtaken by a violent tempest, his superstition
was alarmed, and he sent back the riches he had thence
abstracted.

Pyrrhus gave battle to the Romans a third time, near

Beneventum, and was defeated. But this disaster by
no means discouraged him. For it was a distinguishing
circumstance in the charater of Pyrrhus, that he re-
mained firm and undismayed in the midst of the greatest
misfortunes. Though he had now but a fmnall army re-
maining, and no money at all to support it, he never-
thelefs passed over into Macedonia, where Antigonus
the son of Demetrius was then reigning, attacked that
prince, defeated him, and in a {hort time reduced all
the cities of Macedonia.

While the other states of Greece ignominiouly bowed

the neck beneath the yoke 'of Alexander's successors,
Sparta alone appeared to be re-animated by the ancient
spirit of the country, and by that noble intrepidity
which had formerly procured her the pre-eminence over
all her neighbours. Cleonymus, the son of Cleomenes
king of Sparta, provoked at some part of the behaviour
of his fellow-citizens, solicited Pyrrhus to march with

an

an army against Sparta. That prince complied with
the invitation; and entering Laconia with an army
of 25,000 men, ravaged and plundered the country a-
round. The Lacedemonians sent ambassadors to treat.
But Pyrrhus, without coming to the point, amufedthe
ambassadors with flattering speeches and compliments,
and advanced that fame night to the very gates of
Sparta.

Though the Spartans, who expeced nothing less,

were much surprised at this ftep, yet they were by no
means discouraged, but laboured for the remaining part
of that night with the utmost expedition to throw up
entrenchments. In this work they were aflifted by their
wives and young women; who, after completing a third
part of the entrenchment by themselves, presented arms
to-all the young men, and exhorted them to acquit
themselves as they ought. Next day Pyrrhus made dif-
positions for attacking the city; but met with a far
more vigorous resistance than he had expe&ed. A
young Spartan, qs a very handsome person, named
Acroates, the son of King Areus, diftinguiflhed himself
particularly on this occasion. All the Spartans indeed
fought with the most remarkable bravery; and after a
long contest repulsed the troops of Pyrrhus. Next day
the attack was renewed; and the Spartans instead of
failing or being discouraged, seemed rather to be infpi-
red with additional valour. Their women attended
them during the whole engagement, supplied theni with
arms and drink, and carried off the wounded. But
this desperate resistance only made Pyrrhus. redouble his.
efforts. At length he was flocked at the dreadful car-
nage occasioned by his obstinacy, and resolved to re-
tire.

Pyrrhus, solely intent on war, marched, upon the

invitation of Arifteas, the head of a fation in Argos,
against that city, which was diftrated by intestine difd
fenfions. Areus king of Sparta laid an ainbufcade for

?* i ij .h.^%

him on his way thither, and cut in pieces his rear
guard, together with Ptolemy his son. Pyrrhus, exaf-
perated by the loss of his child to a degree of despair,
throws himself into the midst of his enemies, drives his
horse against Evalcus the commander of the Laaede.
monian cavalry, transfixes him with a javelin, and com-
mits a frightful slaughter among the belt troops of the
enemy around the body of Evalcus. Pyrrhus on all oc-
cafions was terrible in battle, but that day he surpassed
himself. In this engagement the Spartans loft the flower
of their soldiers.

As loon as Pyrrhus arrived from Argos, he was ad-

mitted into the city by Arifteas and his faction. The
Argives fled to the citadel, and begged assistance of
Antigonus, who lay encamped hard by the city. King
Areus having come likewise to the relief of the Ar-
gives with a choice body of Spartan soldiers,. Pyrrhus
refol'-ed to march out and give them battle. But hap-
pening to embarrass himself in a narrow lane, where he
could neither advance nor retreat, and being at the
fame time attacked by the enemy, he throws himself
into the midst of them, and is wounded by a javelin
thrown from the hand of a common soldier. Pyrrhus
turned about to firike the soldier: but a poor woman,
who was looking at the engagement from the top of a
house, perceiving that it was her own son whom Pyr-
rhus was going to strike, discharged a large tile on the
head of Pyrrhus who fell mortally wounded from his
hcrfe, and a soldier cut off his head. Antigonus soon
got poffeiion both of the camp and army of Pyrrhus,
but behaved with great generofi'y to his son Helenus.

Thus fell Pyrrhus, one of the molt flilful command-

ers of his time. Of this wecannot doubt, since Livy
informs us, that Hannibal, on being asked by Scipio,
Whom he eflecmed the belt general that had everlived ?
made answer, That he accounted Alexander the belt
Pyrrhus the second, and himself the third. He added

that

that no general excelled Pyrrhus in the art of drawing
up an army; of choofing the most advantageous ground;
and of gaining the esteem and confidence of his soldiers.
It is certain, however, that Pyrrhus was not possessed
of all the qualifications requisite in a great commander.
He committed innumerable blunders, continually ex-
pcsed his person like a simple volunteer, blindly under-
took expeditions without proper examination or reflec-
tion, and aaed upon no fixed plan. Hence we fee
him perpetually fluctuating and changing from one pro-
jeat to another, just as his retlefs ambition inclined
him*.

Antigonus, to dissolve an alliance concluded
268.. between the Spartans and Athenians, laid siege-

to Athens, and took it.

The Achean republic, composed of twelve inconfide-

rable towns in the Peloponnese, had been subdued like
the other states of Greece in the time of Alexander. It
had remained subjed to the Macedonian power ever
since; but had often changed its master of late, having
been sometimes under the power of Demetrius, some-
times under that of Caffander, and sometimes under
that of Antigonus. At last they found means, in the
time of Pyrrhus, to expel the tyrants imposed upon
them by Antigonus; and they formed a ftrit union un-
der the form of a tingle republic governed by a general
council.

About this time Sicyon groaned under the tyranny

of Nicocles. But Aratus, the son of Nicias, one of
the principal citizens, though then only twenty years
of age, conceived the design of setting his country at li-
berty. Having concerted the necessary measures with
the utmofi prudence, he scaled the walls of the city;
and after effecting, by that means, his entry, he called
aloud on the inhabitants to assert their liberty. They

immediately

* In the year before Christ 264 the first Punic war began; and
continued twenty-two years.

immediately obeyed the welcome summons, set fire to
the tyrant's palace, and recalled such of their number
as were banished. Aratus, to render the liberty he had
thus procured to his country more durable, persuaded
the Sicyonians to accede to the Achean league. For
though. the small republics, united in that league, were
but weak; yet, by the wisdom of their general council,
and by their perfect union, they were enabled to main-
tain their independency.

Aratus, by his virtuous and prudent conduct, acqui?

red still more and more the esteem of his fellow-citziens.
He was not, however, a man of a perfec or of an equal
charater. He was in particular very deficient in mili-
tary merit. For though at some times-he acted with
great vigour and resolution, yet the view of danger of-
ten rendered him timorous and irresolute. Being cho-
fen a second time general of the Acheans, he recovered
from Antigonus the citadal of Corinth, whereof that
prince had gotten possession. This was a place of great
importance. Being situated on a hill, in the middle
of the Isthmus, which separated the Peloponnese
from the continent, it commanded the sea and land on
both fides, and in a great measure prevented all com-
munication with the Peloponnese. By there means it
gave its possessor the highest influence in the affairs of
Greece, and was therefore an object ofjealoufy among
all the neighbouring powers.

Aratus had promised sixty talents to an inhabitant of

Corinth, who undertook to condut him to the citadel,
by a small path cut out of the rock on which the for-
trefs was built. But being unable to advance the whole
fum immediately, he was obliged to pawn the greeteft
part of his plate, together with his wife's jewels, for
the balance. This was an inflance of magnanimity,
comparable, in the opinion of Plutarch, to any of the
most shining actions of Grecian heroism. For here A-
aatus not only sacrificed his whole estate to the welfare

?. 9?

of his country, but likewise exposed his life to most
imminent danger. Aratus resolved to make the attempt
in the night, taking along with him 400 soldiers.
He fucceded in the enterprise, drove out the e- 243
nemy, and took possession of the citadel. The
Corinthians thereupon joyfully opened their gates to
him, acceded likewise, by his persuasion, to the Achean
league, and put a garrison into the citadel. This daring
and successful exploit procured Aratus great reputation,
and induced the Megareans, together with several other
fates, and even King Ptolemy himself, to join the A-
chean league. The Acheans, sensible that the sole aim
of Aratus was their common advantage; that he was a
professed enemy of every species of tyranny, and high-
ly desirous of restoring their cities to their ancient liber-
ty; continued him without interruption in the chief mi-
litary command.

About this time the Romans began to make their

power refpetable even among the Greeks. They sent
an embassy to the Acheans and .Etolians, to persuade
them to guarantee a treaty of peace that they had con-
cluded with Teuta the widow of one of the kings of
Illyrium. This country was then governed by a parcel
of petty princes, who pestered all their neighbours with
their piracies; and having lately ventured to meddle
with the effeEs of some of the Roman citizens, they had
provoked that republic to attack Queen Teuta, whom the
Romans obliged to abandon Illyrium entirely. On account
of this important service, the Corinthians passed a public
decree, admitting the Romans to the Ifihmick games ;
and the Athenians presented them with the freedom of
their city.

A set of tyrants having been planted in many of the

cities of Greece by the power of the Macedonian prin-
ces, Aratus directed his principal attention to the exo
tirpation of that- vermin, who oppressed and ruined the
refpeiv¢ states in which they had been placed, O¢

th'e

this account, one of those tyrants, and the most wicked
of them all, called Ariflippus, who domineered at Ar-
gos, employed many schemes to accomplish the de-
itruAion of Aratus. This Ariflippus lived in conti-
nual apprehension, and was conflantly busied in contri-
ving precautions for securing his life. For that purpose
he retained a body of armed men to guard his house
night and day. He slept in an upper chamber, to which
he mounted by a ladder; the only entry being by a
trap door, which was shut when the tyrant entered, and
his bed placed above it. It is probable, however, that
he slept never the founder for all these precautions;
while Aratus, on the contrary, appeared always in pu-
blic, without arms and without fear, attended by no
other guard than the affetion of his fellow-citizens.
That virtuous republican having at last come to an en-
gagement with Ariflippus, gained a complete vidtory
over the tyrant, who was killed in the battle. Aratus
next persuaded Lyfiades, tyrant of Megalopolis, volun-
tarily to resign his sovereignty, and to restore that city
to its former liberty.

Agis King of Sparta, though no more than twenty

years of age, laboured to bring about a reformation in
that city, where luxury and avarice had of a long while
acquired a footing, and to inforce the system eftablifhied
by Lycurgus. Such an undertaking required a man of
a very different character from Agis: who, besides his
want of years and experience, was of too mild and ir-
resolute a disposition. The youth, however, and the
people in general, highly applauded the design. But
it was opposed by the rich, who were headed by his
colleague Leonidas. The reformation therefore took
place only in part, Agis himself having set the example,
by sharing all his wealth with his fellow-citizens.

While things were in this situation at- Sparta, the A-

cheans being at war with the IEtolians, begged assist-
ance from the Lacedemonians; who sent them an army

under

under the command of Agis. The Lacedemonian aux-
iliaries joined Aratus at Corinth; but upon the Acheans
declining to come to an engagement with the enemy,
Agis returned to Sparta. On arriving at that city, he
found the people exasperated and spirited up againit
him by the machinations of Agefilaus one of the prin-
cipal citizens, who accused him of having imposed on
the people, by persuading them that an equal division
of effecits would be brought about.

Leonidas, who had been deposed, and in whose place

Cleombrotus his fon-in-law had been made king, was re-
called and replaced on the throne. Leondias highly en-
raged againfl Cleombrotus for having usurped his dig-
nity, vented againlt him the bitterest reproaches, and ex-
pelled him the city. Then he applied himself to accom-
plifl the ruin of Agis, who being decoyed from his a-
fylum, was thrown into prison. Leonidas having gained
over the Ephori to his fide, brings Agis to trial for at-
tempting to introduce innovations in the government.
Agis was condemned to death, without so much as be-
ing allowed the privilege of defending himself, and with-
out being tried by his fellow-citizens; and he was after-
wards firangled in prison. The people hearing what was
passing, were provoked at the injuflice of the proceed.
ings against their king, and made an infurredion to save
his life. But their zeal served only to haflen the fate

of that unfortunate prince; whose mother and
244. grandmother having gone to the prison and de-

manded access to him, were laid hold of and put

to death likewise. What accumulated horror ! And what
a change in Sparta !

Leonidas having died soon after, his son Cleomenes

mounted the throne. This prince being of an active
enterprising disposition, and extremely desirous of glory,
beheld with pity the citizens of Sparta abandoned to
luxury and indolence, and careless about the public

welfare

be in the hands of the Ephori, he resolved to attempt to
change the form of government; and hoping that war
ihould enable him to accomplish his designs, he took
occasion, from some ats of hostility committed by Ara-
tus on the territory of the Arcadians, to declare war a-
gainit the Acheans; and immediately taking the field
with an army, offered the enemy battle. Aratus, dif-
mayed at the boldness of Cleomenes, whom he had hi-
therto confidered as an inexperienced young man, re-
treated; and thereby incurred severe reproaches from his
own soldiers. Cleomenes, emboldened by his success
against Aratus, puffied his advantage, and beat the A-
cheans in several flirmifhes.

Having by these means greatly advanced his authority

at Sparta, he no longer hesitated to put his design in
execution. But before entering that city, he sent for-
ward privately a body of armed men, who surprising the
Ephori while at table, killed four of them. Then Cleo-
menes assembling the people, representing to them how
enormously the Ephori had abused their power; ac-
quainted them with his design of reviving the laws of
Lycurgus; and to convince them of the fincerityand
uprightness of his intentions, immediately made an e-
qual division of his own wealth, and prevailed onhis
friends and relations to follow his example. Then he
applied himself to restore the laws of Lycurgus, touch-
ing the education of the youth, the exercises, and the
public tables; and the citizens cheerfully conformed
themselves to this change of life.

At the fame time, to show his enemies that these inno-

vations had not diminished the affetion entertained for
him by his countrymen, he attacked and laid waste the
territory of Megalopolis, and carried offa considerable
booty.

Besides all this, the plainness and simplicity of his

dress, the frugality and sobriety of his table, and the as-
fability of his deportment, showed that he meant to

-form

form the citizens by his own example. But he ftudiedi
above all, to gain the confidence and affection of his
troops; and with success, for they testified great ar-
dour to fight under his command. Availing himself
of this favourable disposition in the soldiers, he toolk
the field against the Acheans, gained a great viEtory
over them, and forced them to sue for peace; which
Cleomenes consented to grant, on condition of their
choofing him commander in. chief of the forces of the
league.

The Acheans feenred disposed to comply with this

condition. But Aratus, who had now enjoyed the com-
mand three and thirty years, regarding it as an affront
resolved to engage Antigonus in the affair. For this
purpose he made application to that prince in an indi-
rect manier, by two citizens of Megalopolis; which
city being in the neighbourhood of Sparta, was much
exposed to the incursions of the enemy. Thole two
Megalopolitans represented to Antigonus, that Cleome-
nes aspired at the conquest, not only of the Peloponrefei
but of all Greece; that it was the interest of Antigonus,
to prevent the execution of these ambitious designs;
that they had good reason to believe that Aratus would
be inclined to co-operate with him in proper measures
for that end ; and that as a security for the finceiity and
attachment of the Aclieans, they would put him in pof-
session of the citadel of Corinth. Antigonus, to whom
this afforded a fair opportunity of intermeddling in the
affairs of Greece, listened with pleasure to the ptopofals
of the Megalopolitans, and promised to assist them, pro-
viding the agreement were approved of by the Acheans;
who being accordingly informed of the dispositions of
Antigonus, resolve by the persuasion of Aiatus to
continue the war. Cleomenes having thereupon seized
on several cities in the Peloponnese, the Acheans imme-
diately begged of Antigonus to come with all diligence
to their afiftanceb

That

That prince obeyed the invitation; advanced to sup-

port them with an army of 20,000 foot and I400 horse;
and after several events, of which it would be too tedi-
ous to enter into a minute detail, made himself master
of Mantinea and Orchomene, and reduced Cleomenes
to the neceflity of defending Laconia. This did not,
however, discourage Cleomenes ; who setting at liberty
a great number of the Helots, on their paying him a
certain fum of money, armed 2000 of them after the
Macedonian fashion, and carried by assault the city of
Magalopolis after a faint resistance. Then he offered to
the Megalopolitans, who had taken refuge with the
Meffenians, to restore to them their city on condition
of their renouncing the Achean league. But the Me-
galopolitans rejected the proposal, being resolved to ad-
here to their engagements though at the expence of
their city and territory. Cleomenes, provoked at their
refusal, gave the city up to be plundered, and demo-
liffied its walls.

The Acheans at length discovering, that instead of an

ally in Antigonus, they had given themselves a master,
repented when too late of their conduct.' Perceiving,
however, that submission was now their fafefl course,
they behaved to Antigonus with the grossest and basest
flattery. They even offered sacrifices to him. Aratus
no longer poffefied any power; nor could he so much
as prevent Antigonus from replacing the flatues ofthe
tyrants, which he himself had overturned. Thus was A-
ratus jufly punished for his jealousy of Cleomenes.
That gallant Spartan, early in the spring, before the
Macedonians had left their winter-quarters, made an in-
curfion into the territory of Argos, and laid waste the
country. Hitherto he had had the glory of holding at
bay the whole MlIacedonian power, and of preserving
Laconia from invasion. But in the ensuing summer,

Antigonus

Antigonus advanced against that country at 3he head of
a8,ooo mGn.

The two armies met in the neighbourhood of

Selafia, where Cleomenes had his army very 223.
strongly encamped. Antigonus immediately at-
tacked Cleomenes, who had only 2o,ooo men. The
battle began near Olympus, and both parties fought
with the greatest obstinacy. But at last the Macedonian
phalanx rushing forwards on the Lacedemonians with
their spears couched, drove them from their entrench-
ments. Most of the auxiliary troops fell in this battle;
and Plutarch fays, that of 6000 Spartans only 200 re-
mained alive. Antigonus owed his viaory in a great
measure -to the courage of Philopoemen, yet a very
young man, who fought at the head of the Achean ca-
valry.

Though the loss of this battle threatened Sparta with

utter ruin, yet that people supported their defeat with
the fame constancy and magnanimity that they had dif-
played in the moit flourilhing times of their republic-
Every individual there appeared to be more affected by
the public misfortune than by his own private loss.
Wives did not mourn the death of their bufbands, nor
fathers that of their sons; but, on the contrary, they e-
iteemed them happy in having died in the cause of their
country.

Cleomenes, unable to bear the fight of Sparta after

this dreadful misfortune, only touched at that city, and
immediately afterwards set fail for Egypt. Antigonus
arriving soon after at Sparta, took poffeilon of it as con-
queror. But his resentment being satisfied with his vic-
tory, and with the flight of Cleomenes, he treated the
inhabitants with great kindness. He overturned, how-
ever, every thing done by Cleomenes for reviving the
institutions of Lycurgus.

This fatal defeat at Selafia utterly ruined the Spartan
power, ,and deprived that people of all polibility of ever

K. h arriving

# CHAP. II. Affairs of Greece, from the capture of Sparta by Antigonus till the whole country became a Roman province.

arriving again at their original splendor. Antigonus,
after remaining a few days in Sparta, set out for Mace.
donia, where the Barbarians were committing great de-
vafiations. But falling into a languishing disorder, he
died about two or three years after.

Cleomenes arriving at Alexandria, soon procured by

his singular merit the efleem of King Ptolemy, who
loaded him with presents, and, by way of consolation,
promised to assist him with money and a fleet to regain
his throne, and to assert the liberty of his country.
Death, however, which soon after carried offthat prince,
prevented his good intentions towards Cleomenes from
taking effet.

About this time there happened at Rhodes a
z22. dreadful earthquake, which did immense damage,

and threw down the famous Colossus, a brazen

flatue of a prodigious size. .. The Rhodians, finding
themselves ruined by this disaster, 'implored the cle-
mency of the neighbouring princes. Hiero and Gelo,
Kings of Sicily, and Ptolemy King of Egypt, sent them
very large fums of money, and behaved to them with
the noblest humanity. Antigonus, Seleucus, and Mith-
ridates, followed their example; and Rhodes, by the
bounty of those princes, was soon restored to a more o-
pulent and flourishing condition than it had ever enjoyed
before.

CHAP. II.
4ffairs of Greece, from the capture of Sparta by Antigonus

till the whole country became a Roman province.
THE IEtolians, the most unpolifhed people of Greece,

who were inured to all the hardships of war, and

lived by robbery and plunder, had lately begun to make
a diftinguifled figure in that country. Taking advan-

tage

tage of the exhausted situation of the Peloponnesians,
who were greatly reduced by the late war, and since the
battle of Selafia were desirous of peace and -quiet, they
made an irruption into the territory of Mefene, and
committed great ravage and devastation. Upon this
Aratus marched against them with the Acheans. But
having been deafeated near Caphia, that general became
more timorous and irresolute than ever, and the Ache-
ans were obliged to apply for affiltance to Philip the
young King of Macedon, who had fucceededto that
kingdom on the death of his father Antigonus.

About this time, too, discord prevailed at Sparta,

where one of the Ephori was killed in an insurreCtion
of the inhabitants, because he and his colleagues fa-
voured the cause of Philip.---That prince, upon the
solicitation of several cities who complained to him of
being harraffed by the AEtolians, having come to Co-
rinth, where a general assembly of the Acheans was
then holden, procured war to be declared against the
.Etolians. This happened during the siege of Sagun-
tum by the famous Hannibal, who passed from thence
into Italy.

Cleomenes in the mean time ended his days mifera-

bly in Egypt. Having been rendered fufpeled to the
new king, who minded nothing but his pleasures, he was
thrown into prison. His friends found means to deliver
him from his confinement, set him at their head and
attempted to excite a rebellion in the city, by invi-
ting the people to assert their liberty. But no pcrfon
daring to join them, they were seized with despair; and
to avoid the flame of a dilgraceful public puniflment,
agreed to kill one another. When the king was in-
formed of what had passed, he mos inhumanly ordered
the mother and children of Cleomenes to be put to
death; and the body of that brave but unfortunate
prince to be affixed to a cross.

Philip having made preparations for attacking the ]E-

r- k tolians,

tolians, engaged several of the princes of Illyrium to as-
sift him, and, among the reft, Demetrius of Pharus, a
bold and enterprising, but a rash man, who on being
expelled his own territories by the Romans, had chosen
the court of Ptolemy for an asylum. The Acheans
likewise applied for afifiance to their allies ; but the peo-
ple of Acarnania and Epirus alone granted them the
succours demanded. Philip setting out from Macedo-
nia with an army of 15,000 men, entered Etolia, and
reduced a great umber of towns. On the other hand,
Dorimachus the IErolian general ravaged the country
of Epirus.-Philip being joined at Caphia by a body of
troops under Aratus the younger, formed in conjunc-
tion with him the siege of Pfophis, a city of Arcadia;
and having in the height of winter made himself matter
of the fort, which by its situation was accounted impreg-
nable, he delivered it to the Acheans, to whom it was
a place of very great importance. After this Philip
proceeded to lay waite the country of Elis.

The Acheans in the mean time were very harshly u-

fed by Apelles, who having been formerly Philip's tutor,
was in great favour with that prince. This man intend-
ed to make the Acheans altogether dependent on the
pleasure of Philip's ministers. But on the reprefenta-
tions of Aratus, Philip commanded him to do no bufi-
nels which regarded that people, except in concert with
their general. Hitherto Philip had displayed much
mildneis and affablity, and a ikill in the art of war much
above his years. But we shall soon fee him aaing in a
very different manner.

Sparta was at this time diftraAed by intefline co.m-

motions, and a prey to a set of petty tyrants, who con-
tended with one another for the throne. One of those ty-
rants, named Cbilo, having entered the city at the head
of a body of armed men, under pretence of his title to
the throne being preferable to that of Lycurgus, put to
death all the Ephori.

Apelles,

Apelles, intent on prosecuting his designs againlt the

Acheans, and finding continual opposition from Aratus,
resolved to rid himself of that patriot. To effect his ruin
he pratifed so many arts on Philip, that at last he
made him suspicious of Aratus. Philip} however, was
soon sensible of the want of the prudent counsel of that
great man; and therefore having given him an oppor-
tunity of jutifying himself, he rei.ored him to his confi-
dence and friendship. Apelles thereupon refutned his
practices; racked his brain to invent calumnies against
Aratus; and even took secret measures to disappoint
the enterprises of Philip, in order to bring his enemy
into disgrace. That prince having at present the IEto-
lians, Lacedemonians, and Eleans, on his hands all at
once, resolved to attack them by sea, to oblige them to
divide their forces. Having made a descent on- Ce-
phalonia, an island in the lonian sea, he besieged the
city Palea. But by the fault of Leontius, a man de-
voted to Apelles, he was obliged to raise the siege.
Apelles and Leontius, who aded in concert, were con-
tinually suggesting schemes to Philip, which but for
the prudent counsels of Aratus, must have infallably
ruined his affairs.

Philip having returned to the continent, secretly

marched by an unfrequented way through rocks to-
wards Thermse, 'a considerable city, where mofl of the
riches of the .Etolians were deposited, and where they
kept their fairs. Arriving before the city, he immedi-
ately attacked it, and entered it with his army, found
an immense booty. The Macedonians, calling to mind
the outrageous behaviour of the _ZEtolians at Donona,
resolved to take their revenge here. They let fire
therefore to their temple, and destroyed a great number
of their statues. Philip concluded this expedition by
a very skilful retreat; which he effeted without any dif-
order, and with very little lois. Ploybius informs us,
that Aratus was the contriver and the conductor of this

K k 3 enterpriza;

enterprize. That great man was singular in this refpec,
that he could form an extraordinary plan of this kind,
and execute it more skilfully in concert with another
general, than by himself alone. The whole army be-
llowed the highest applause on the conduEt of this expe-
dition, except Leontius alone, the confident of Apelles,
and one of Philip's principal officers; who was so heart-
ly vexed at its success, that he could not refirain himself
from breaking out into the most insolent reproaches
against Aratus.

Philip departing from Leucades, arrived at Corinth,

disembarked his troops, and proceeded by the way of
Argos to Tegeutn in Laconia. The Lacedemonians
were much surprised on hearing that this young prince,
whom they imagined to be at a great distance, was in the
heart of their country. Philip indeed usually accoin-
plifhed his marches with such diligence, that the Greeks
were amazed at it. After ravaging Laconia, Philip
returned to Corinth. In the mean time, Apelles and
his son. having, by their insolent conduct, quite ex-
h;aufted the patience of that prince, were, by his orders,
apprehended and put to death*

The .iEtolians, greatly exhausted by the war, grew

at last very desirous of peace. On the other hand,
Phiiip not only prevailed on the allies to continue the
war, but after making a journey into Macedonia, re-
turned himself into Greece, and laid siege to Thebes in
Phthiotis, which he took after a vigorous refiflance.
Ar lafI however, upon the earnest solicitations of the
peopl c i: Chios, Ilhodes and Byzantium, to grant
peace to the lEtolians, he marched with his army to
Nalpactus, xThere he entered into a conference with the
27Ltolian deputies, and at last concluded peace with
them, on condition that each party should retain pof-

session

4l' In the year 218 before Chris ille second Punic war began, and
continued fcvcntecn years.

session of the places then in their hands.- In this
year happened the famous battle between Hanni-
baland the Romans, near the laKe Thrafimene, 217.
where the latter were totally routed with great
slaughter.

The temper of Philip, in the mean time, appeared to

be greatly altered. He gave himself up to every fort of
debauchery; treated the cities and states in alliance
with him' with unsupportable haughtiness ; and after
receiving the check at Apollonia from the Romais, he
seemed determined to vent his resentment for that de-
feat on his confederates, by ravaging the country of
Messene. Aratus having remonitrated pretty finartly
against this extraordinary condut, was from that mo-
ment, regarded by Philip as an impertinent censurer;
and was basely poisoned by the procurement of that
prince, who by this time, was hardened in cruelty, and
hesitated at no crime, however base or deteflable. Such
was the end of this illustrious patriot, and such the
reward received by him from Philip for the many im-
portant services he had rendered him. 'Ihe Acheans
and Sicyonians contended for the honour of raifinga
tomb to his memory ; but the latter prevailed, on
account of his being a native of their city. His 21 .
funeral was celebrated with the highell magnifi-
cence, and the Sicyonians even offered sacrifices at his
tomb as the saviour of their city, and the restorer of
the Achean republic.

Philip next seized on the city of Issus belonging to

the Illyrians, and took by firatagem its citadel, which
was thoughtimpregnable. lThe omans, whose affairs
began now to wear a better aspect by the reduction of
Syracuse and Capua, taking umbrage at the growing
power of Philip, formed the scheme of stirring up against
him of new the iEtolians, then accounted the nmof
powerful people of (;reece. For that purpose, Valerius
Levinus having been dispatched in the quality of am-

K k 4 baITador

baffador to the the _JEtolians, exhorted them by a long
oration to enter into alliance with the Romans, whose
power he highly extolled. His advice being seconded
and his arguments enforced by Scopas one of their
chiefs, the treaty was agreed to. Then the iEtolians
invited several other states, and particularly the Spartans,
to accede to this alliance; but they were zealously op-
posed by the Acarninians, who, having declared for
Philip, used their utmost endeavours to prevent the
Spartans from embracing the confederacy.-Thefe re-
presentations, however, were, ineffedtual.

Sparta was at this time diftradted by two factions.

That of Machanidas having prevailed, and made him
2nafter of the city, he declared against Philip, and at-
tacked the Acheans, who thereupon implored the pro-
tection of that prince. Philip came to their afiftance,
and defeated in two engagements the ,Etolians, who
were -supported by king Attalus. But Ptolemy king of
Egypt, the Rhodians, and Athenians, apprehensive left
Philip flould make a conquest of all Greece, sent am-
bafadcors, earneflly desiring him to make peace with the
,Etolians. This produced a conference to deliberate on
the terms of peace. But the aEtolians, insisting on con-
ditions more agreeable to the situation of conquerors
than of the conquered, Philip called on the amabffadors
present to bear witness, that the IEtolians themselves had
frustrated their good intentions. The conference was
thereupon broken ofF.

A few days after, Philip being joined by the Ache-

ans, advanced towards the city of Elis, were the Eto-
lians had a garrison, and laid wafe the neighbouring
country to provoke the enemy to come to an enage-
ment. His operations had the desired effect. The ene-
my, among whom were 4000 Romans commanded by
the proconsul Salpicius, attacked him; and the battle
was very bravely and obitinately fought. Here Philo-
poznen, who led the Achean cavalry, Rtruck dead with

his

his lance the commander of the AEtolian cavalry, by
whom he had been attacked. Philip feeing his army
giving ground, threw himself into the midst of the Ro- .
man infantry. By this rash action he occasioned a
dreadful carnage; and it was with the utmost difficulty
that the Macedonians disengaged and saved their king.
Philip, after laying waite the country, and carrying off
a great booty, was obliged to march into Macedonia to
protect it agaiunf the Barbarians, who had lately made
a desperate incursion into that kingdom.

Next year, Sulpitius and king Attalus joining at Lem-

nos, advanced with their combined fleet towards Eubcea
laid siege to Orea, and took it by the treachery of the
commanding officer. Intending next to attack Chalcis,
they proceeded to that place; but thinking it too well
fortified, they desisted from that undertaking. Besides
its strong situation on the land-side, that city derived
great security from its lying on the famous strait of Eu-
ripus, where the waves are always violently agitated,
sometimes from one quarter, sometimes from another,
occasioned by an irregular current which renders the
bay extremly unsafe for shipping. Then Attaluslaid
siege to Opontum; and, in spite of the great expe-
dition made by Philip to relieve it, took it before his
arrival.

In the mean time Machanidas, tyrant of Lacedemon.

having levied a considerable army, formed a scheme for
making himself matter of all the Peloponnete; and ad-
vanced into the territory of Mantinea. The allies, too,
were ready to take the field, and Philopoemen being
chosen general of the Acheans; assembled their troops,
and, after exhorting them to second his zeal by their
obedience, ardour, and courage, led them on to ac-
tion.

This celebrated hero is commonly called the lafl of the

Greeks, because it is obterved, that after him Greece
produced no leading man worthy' of her former glory.

As

As he will make a considerable figure in the fequcl, it
may not be improper here briefly to lay before the rea-
der the most diftinguihing particulars of his charaE&er,
Philopoemen was a native of Megalopolis, a city of Ar-
cadia. He had received an excellent education, having
been carefully intruted in the philosophy of Arcefi.
laus, chiefly calculated to inspire men with a spirit of
patriotism, and to prepare them for itate employments.
-Philopoemen had early proposed Epaminondas for his
model. From his infancy he showed a strong propen-
fity for war, discovering a peculiar fondness for men
distinguished by their military exploits, and for all war-
like exercises. As soon as he was able to bear arms,
he entered himself among the troops usually sent into
Laconia to pillage. During the intervals of leisure, he
applied himself to the exercises proper for strengthening
the body, such as hunting and agriculture, often hold-
ing the plough with his own hands. For, in those times,
the most polite nations set the highet value on tillage,
and the greatest men employed themselves in the manual
labour requisite in husbandry.

Philopcemen took great delight likewise in the Rudy

of philosophy, and in perusing the poems of Homer
and the life of Alexander, which furnished him with the
most animating lessons of bravery. He applied himself
particularly to the Rtudy of tadicks, on the art of draw-
ing up an army in battle order; and he often amused
himself with putting his precepts in practice on all the
varieties of ground through which he happened to pass
with his troops. When Cleomenes king of Sparta at-
tacked Megalopo!is, Philoponmen signalised his courage
very highly in the defence of that his native country.
He likewise difiinguifhed himself at the battle of Sela-
fta. 'After that, he went to Crete, an island than a-
bounding with men skilful in the art of war ; and having
there completed his education in the military art, he re-

turned

turned into his native country, and was soon after cho-
fen general of the Achean cavalry.

As soon as he received the command, he applied

himself to restore a firict discipline among the soldiers,
employing for that purpose earnest remonstrances, and
when these, failed, severe chastisement. He accustomed
the young men to all the exercises of war; rendered
them expert at the necessary military evolutions: and,
by distributing prizes among thole who made the greatest
proficiency, he kept up among them a spirit of diligence
and emulation. At the battle of Elis, mentioned above,
he gave a signal proof both of his valour and military
ikill. Aratus had raised the Achean republic to that
pitch of power at which it then flood. Philopaemen
was destined to make them soldiers. He introduced
great alterations in the armour uted by the troops,
which he made heavier than it was before. He taught
them a new method of fighting; and accustomed them
to close engagements.

He considerably refrained the luxury and expensive

turn of his fellow-citizens, in point of equipages and
dress. But finding it impossible to reform them altoge-
ther, he endeavoured to direct their taste to' the objets
most worthy of men generally exposed to war, namely
the to purchase of fine horses, elegant arms, helmets
adorned with beautiful feathers, and embroidered coats
of mail; hoping, by these means, to heighten their va-
lour and love of arms. In this Caesar followed his ex-
ample. As for himself, he carried his simplicity, in
point of dress, so far, that he appeared to be nothing
less than the general of an army. Plutarch tells us,
that Philopcemen happening one day to arrive alone at
the house of a friend, by whom he had been invited to
dinner, the mistress of the house, though (he knew of
his coming, was so far from imagining that a person in
his dress was the general of the Acheans, that she mif-
took him for a servant, and, begged the favour of him

to

to afift in doing some affairs in the kitchen, because
her husband was from home. Philopcemen very readiy
granted her request; and laying aside his cloak fell to
cleaving wood. The husband arriving in the mean
time, cried out in amazement, " How, my Lord Phi-
cc lopcemen, what means this " " I'm only paying
" (answered he) the penalty for my poor appearance."

Philopeemen, after visiting the cities, levying troops,

and making the necessary preparations for war, assem-
bled his army at Mantinea, and gave battle to Macha-
nidas. The charge was extremly violent; and the
fate of the battle remained long doubtful. Both parties
fought hand to hand with great obstinacy. The right
wing of the Achean army at last giving way Machani-
das pushed his advantage. While he was intent how-
ever, on pursuing those that fled, Philopoemen fliilfully
took poffeflion of the poftl relinquiflled by Machanidas,
gave a different turn to the engagement, charged the
enemy on their return from the pursuit, and put them
to flight. Perceiving at the fame time, Machanidas
jumping a ditch, with an intention to make his escape,
he aims his javelin at him, and strikes him dead in the
ditch. The conquerors, after cutting off his head,
pursued the remainder of his army all the way to the
city of Tegeum which they took by assault. In this
battle the loss of the Lacedemonians amounted to more
than 4000 men, while that of the Acheans was very in-
considerable. The latter, sensible that they owed this
viAory entirely to the skill of their general, ereeted a
statue of brass to his honour.

At the Nemean games, which were clebrated soon

after, Philopemen happening to enter the theatre, fol-
lowed by the young men who compored his phalanx,
just as the musician Pylades was singing to his lyre the
following lines of an old poet.

i' 7The palm. of liberty for Greece I won,"

the

the audience immediately looked at Philopcemen, and
gave -a great shout.

Sparta, in the mean time, groaned beneath the yoke

of a more cruel tyrant still than Machanidas, namely,
Nabis; who besides the other vices common to all ty-
rants, was actuated by a violent ipirit of avarice, which
prompted him to torture and to banish the richer fort of
citizens, that he might seize uponf their wealth. To
maintain himself in his tyranny, he took into his pay a
large body of foreign soldiers, capable of every fort
of mischief; by whole help he put - to death all those
whom he fufpeated to be his enemies.

Nabis having received from Philip king of Macedon

the city of Argos, in pledge for some money wherewith
he had supplied that prince, there praaifed the most
ihocking cruelty. Having invented a machine in the
form of a statue resembling his wife, the breast, arms,
and hands of which were stuck full of pegs of iron, and
covered with magnificent garments, when !any person
refused him money, he used to tell him, that though he
himself was unable to perfwade him to comply-with his
request, hehoped his wife Apega might have more in-
fluence with him. Being accordingly introduced to the
pretended Apega, Nabis took her by. the hand, and
brought her up to the man whom flhe immediately em-
braced very violently. The man finding himself all
over pierced with the pegs of iron, uttered the moit
frightful shrieks; and to procure deliverance from such
exquisite torture, readily granted whatever Nabis insist-
ed upon.

The iEtolians finding themselves neglected by the Ro-

mans, who were then totally employed by a much more
important war, made their peace with Philip; and the
people of Epirus having followed their example, tran-
quility was for a time restored to the allies.

Philip having soon after declared war against the Rho-
dians and King Attalus, laid siege ro Pergamus, the ca-

pital

pital city of the dominions of Attalus. But failing in
his attempt, he vented his resentment, by burning the
temples, and breaking to pieces the statues that came in
his way. After this he was defeated by Attalus and
the Rhodians, near the island of Chios. Growing daily
more and more hardened against misfortunes, he pro-
fecuted the war with more fury and cruelty then before.
Having taken Cias; a city of Bithynia, he made laves
of- most of the inhabitants, aud put to death the reft,
after torturing them in the most dreadful manner. The
cities of Thrace, and the Chersonese, thereupon furren-
dered without making any resistance.

Abydos, a city situated on the narrowet- part of

the Hellespont, called in modern times the firait of the
Dardanelles, resolved to tland a siege. Philip according-
ly laid siege to it in form; but was at first vigorously
repulsed by the inhabitants. Finding his efforts from
the sea ineffectual, he changed his position, and attack-
ed it by land. The besieged, finding that the Macedo-
nians had sapped the wall, and were pushing forward
their mines very fast, sent to treat with Philip about a
surrender. But as he insisted on their surrendering at
discretion, they resolved rather to die sword in hand;
and, with that view, chose out fifty of the oldest citi-
zens, to whom they gave orders, that as soon as the
Macedonians entered the town, they should, in the first
place, murder all their women and children in the
temple of Diana; then set fire to certain galleries con.
taining the public effets; and, lastly, throw all their
gold and silver into the sea. The fifty citizens having
bound themselves to the performance of these particu-
lars by the most solemn oaths, the reft of the men pro-
ceeded to the breach, where they fought with the most
desperate bravery till the night put an end to the flaugh-
ter. Next day two of the old citizens, who had sworn
to the performance of the particulars above mentioned,
shocked at the idea of so dreadful a duty, chose rather

to

to betray the city to Philip; who, rufling in, beheld
with horror the inhabitants cutting the throats of their
wives and children; for the members of each family
mutually killed one another.

Phl2ip, whose turbulent disposition did not permit

him t' remain a moment quiet, entering Attica, com-
iitted great devastations, and thereby obliged the A-
thenians to complain at Rome. The Romans had long
been displeased with the behaviour of Philip; and defi-
red nothing more earnestly than a plausible pretence for
coming to an open rupture with him. The senate,
therefore, dispatched Valerius Levinus with a fleet to
Macedonia, that he might be at hand to support their
allies: and soon after the departure of Levinus, they
made a folemen declaration of war against Philip. In the
mean time the Macedonians marched towards Athens,
with an intention to besiege that city; but found the A-
thenians in battle array without the walls. The Mace-
donians immediately attacked them very vigorously,
and drove them into the city. But not thinking it ad-
vifble to enter the city along with them, they wrecked
their resentment on the country around, which they laid
waite with fire and sword.

About this time the iEtolians hesitated whether they

ought to declare for Philip or for the Romans. But
the former having been soon after defeated in an en-
gagement by the latter, they immediatly took part
with the Romans.

In the mean time a Rotnan fleet, joined by that of

King Attalus, failed towads Athens, and entered Pi-
reus. The Athenians were so exceedingly elevated at
this event, which relieved them from their dread of the
Macedonians, that they overturned the tfatues ereEted
by them to Philip a little while before, and abolished
the sacrifices they had eitablilhed in honour of that

princa

prince.-So easily did this fickle people pass from one
extreme to another.

The iEtolians having declared in favour of the Ro-

mans, Philip had an interview with the Roman procon-
ful Flaminius. But as they could come to no agreement,
Philip prepared for war. Naljis. till continued his ty-
ranny at Argos, tripping the wealthy of their money,
and torturing those who were fufpeded to have conceal-
ed any of their effets. Having intimated to Flaminius
and Attalus. that he was master of Argos, and desirous
of entering into an alliance with the lomans, he was
accordingly received as an ally. Flaminius and Attalus
then proceeding to Thebes, persuaded the Boeotiansto
join the confederacy likewise. 'King Attalus died short-
ly after at Pergamus. The vast riches of this prince are
much celebrated in history; and great praises are be-
flowed on him for the excellent purposes to which he ap-
plied his wealth, as well asfor the singular justice exer-
cifed by him towards his fubjeas. In a word, this king
is represented as a perfect model of a good sovereign.

King Philip and Quintius (surnamed Flaminius)

I97. came at last to an engagement in Thessaly, near
certain mountains called Cynocephalae, the army of each
amounting to about 25,000 men. Here the Romans
gained a complete vicory over Philip, who loft 13,0oo
men in the battle, of whom 8000 were killed and the
reft made prisoners; while the loss of the Romans was
no more than 70o0. In this engagement, the unevenness
of the ground prevented the Macedonian phalanx from
acing with its usual advantage. The iEtolian cavalry
contributed greatly to the obtaining of the victory. By
sustaining the impetuous charge of the Macedonians,
they prevented the oRomans rom being pushed into the
open valley, where the phalanx could have acted with
:greater vigour. After this defeat Philip sued for peace,
:referring the terms entirely to the ple:ifure of the Roman
senate. Till 'that should be known Q^uin:ius granted a

truce

truce for four months to Philip, on receiving from him
400 talents of money, and his son Demetrius as an hof-
tage.

Ten commissioners, named by the senate for fettling

the terms of peace with Philip, arriving at length in
Greece; prescribed to him the following conditions:
That all the Greek cities, both in Europe and in Asia,
fhoild be declared free, and be permitted to govern
theinfelves by their own laws: That Philip should with-
draw all his garrisons from the Greek cities at present
under his power; hlould deliver up to the Romans all
prisoners and deserters; should pay them 0ooo talents of
money at certain terms; and that his son Demetrius
1hould be sent an hostage to Rome. Thus ended the
Macedonian war.

As the Greeks were ignorant of the import of the

terms of peace granted to Philip, and talked very dif-
ferently about them, Quintius resolved to reserve the
publication of the molt important article, refpeaing
their liberty, till the Isthmian games, which were on
the point of being celebrated, and at which an infinite
number of fpeEtators, from all the different states,
would be assembled. In the instant, therefore, that
the whole fpedators were drawn up in the stadium to
fee the games, a herald appeared, and proclaiming si-
lence, read aloud a proclamation to the following pur-
pose. " The senate and people of Rome, and T. Quin-
" tius their general, having conquered Philip and the.
" Macedonians, deliver from all garrisons and impofi. ;

tions, the Corinthians, Locrians, Phoceans, Eubce-

c ans, Acheans, Magnesians, Thefialians, and Perhe-
" bians; declare these fates free, and to be subject

only to their own laws and usages-'
The fpeaators were seized with such an excess of

joy on hearing this decree, that, doubting whether
their senses had not deceived them, they desired the he-
raid to read the proclamation again, that they might be

1X 1 certain

certain about its real meaning. The decree being ac-
cordingly read a second time, was listened to with the
most profound silence; and when the reading was si-
nifhed, nothing was to be heard but the most violent
mhouts of joy and applause.

As soon as the games were concluded, the whole as-

fembly, regarding the Roman general as their deliverer,
ran about to thank him, endeavouring to kifs his hands,
or to cover him with garlands of flowers. Qiimius
tafled in that day the purest and highelt pleasure which
the mind of man can enjoy; and pleasure far superior to
any that can be attained by the most magnificent
warlike triumph; because it proceeded from an
action of goodness, humanity, justice; from the
consciousness of conferring on men the most real hap-
piness whereof they are in this life susceptible. The
different states, unable to reffrain the sentiments of gra-
titude that glowed within their breasts, exclaimed to
one another, " VWhat a wonderful nation this ! which,
" at its own expence and hazard, undertakes wars to
a afiert the liberty of the reft of mankind ; and that not
ó' of neighbouring nations only, or those situated on the
' fame continent, but that injustice may prevail in no
"quarter of tie world, and that liberty may be every
6' where established, they cross the seas, penetrate into

the remotest regions, and, at one word, restore li-
C berty to all the cities of Greece and Asia."

Ouintius caused the fame decree to be again proclaim-

ed at the Neinean games: and afterwards made a tour
through the principal cities, every where reforming, by
the. wisest regulations, abuses in the government and
courts of justice; recalling such citizens as lived in ba-
niihment, and putting an end to all intestine factions and
divisions. This conduct served not only to raise very
high. the tglory of the Romans, but contributed greatly
to the increase of their influence. The nations around
feeing the excellent purposes to which they applied their

power,

power, vied with one -another in testifying their confi-
dence in the equity and good faith of that people, and
even desired to receive magifIrates from them, under
the name of proctors. It is proper here to remark, that
the 2Etolians, naturally a reltlefs nation, were now,
while all their neighbours gratefully enjoyed the fruits
of peace, the only people who ihowed any discontent
against the Romans; boasting, that they could have sub-
dued Philip without the afifiance of the Romans.

The Romans, unwilling that Argos alone should groan

under the oppression of Nabis tyrant of Sparta, while
the other flates lived in perfet liberty, gave orders to
Quintius to declare war against Nabis. That general
accordingly, after declaring war, marched direcly to
Sparta, which Nabis had itrongly fortified, and where
he had Ihut himself up with 16,ooo men, after putting
to death all the principal citizens, whom he sus-
pe&ed of difaffttion. Nabis making a sally with I95.
his foreign troops upon the camp of Quintius,
which was pitched on the banks of the iLurotas, at first
created some disorder among the Romans. But the Ro-
mans quickly rallying, beat the enemy back into the
town. Next day Nabis attacked the Romnans again;
but after a very obstinate engagement, his men were put
to flight with great slaughter. The brother of the Ro-
man general having in the mean time t:aken pofeflion
of Githium, Nabis, very uneasy at the loss of that place,
which was of great importance to hiin. demanded a con-
ference with Qjiintius. But they could come to no a-
greement. In a second conference, Nabis consented to
relinquish Argos, and to deliver up such of the t'omans
as he had made priolners. But uintius infiflin,, that
he ihould likewile deliver up all prioners and deserters
from the martime cities under the Roman power; that
he should pay loo talents of silver, and give his son as
holtage for his future good behaviour. Nablis refufd to
agree to peace on these terms. Quintius thereupon

L 1 a calling

calling in all his detachments, prosecuted the liege molt
vigorously, vesting it on all fides with an army of
50,000 men, As Sparta was fortified with a wall on
the most accessible places only, Nabis found himfelfun-
der very great embarrassment; for being pushed on all
fides, he knew not to what quarter he ought to fend as-
fiitance. The Lacedemonians for some time sustained
the efforts of the Romans, but when the foremost
ranks had penetrated into the large streets, unable to
keep their ground any longer, they were obliged to give
way. Nabis, to avoid the imminent danger, ordered
the houses next the wall to be set on fire. The Roman
soldiers, who had got into the middle of the city, terri-
sied by the flames, hastened to join the main body of
their army; by which means Quintius, after being in a
manner master of the city, was obliged to found the re-
treat. But the attack having been renewed next day,
Nabis applied once more for peace; and was obliged
to accept of the conditions which he had formerly refu-
fed. After concluding this peace, Quintius dismissed
Eumenes king of Pergamus, who had assisted him at
the siege; and then set out for Argos, where he was
present at the Nemean games, and distributed the prizes
to the victors. His presence in their city gave the
highest joy to the Argives.

The Acheans, in the mean time, and the LEtolians,

grumbled much at the peace concluded with Nabis;
being dissatisfied that such a tyrant ihould be permitted
to remain in Greece. Quintius, after spending the win-
ter in visiting the chief towns of Greece, and every
where re-establishing justice and good order, the real
blessings of peace, went to Corinth, where, calling to-
gether deputies from all the states, he explained to
them what the Roman people had done for the liberty
of Greece, and told them, that peace had been granted
to Nabis solely from their earnest desire to preserve
Sparta from utter ruin, which mufi have been the ine-

vitable

vitable consequence of driving him to extremity. Then
having exhorted them to live in union with one ano-
ther, he embarked for Italy, and entered Rome in tri-
umph.

The IEtolians, the only people of Greece who har-

boured secret malice against the Romans, were now
very induitrious in stirring up enemies against them.
For this purpose they applied to Nabis, who being but
too well disposed to follow their seditious counsel, found
means to bring over to his fide the principal inhabitants
in the maritime towns, of which the Romans had obli-
ged him to relinquish the possession, prevailed on several
of them to revolt, and laid siege to Gitium. The Ro-
mans, hearing that Nabis had broken the peace, imme-
diately dispatched the praetor Acilius with a fleet to
Greece.

The Acheans hating Nabis, resolved to oppose him,

and made Philopoemen their general, who at first was
defeated in a battle at lea; but quickly repaired his
loss. Attacking the tyrant near Sparta, he cut in pieces
the greatest part of his army, gained a complete victory,
and besieged him in that city. The lEtolians about
this time lent an embassy to Antiochus king of Syria,
to persuade him to undertake an expedition into
Greece. The Romans, getting notice of the practices
of the ZEtolians, desired the Athenians to put them in
mind of the alliance which they had lately entered into.
But the AEtolians liitening to their resentment alone,
formed a plan for getting possession by itratagem of De-
metriades, Chalcis, and Sparta, and committed the ex-
ecution of this plan to three of their principal citizens.
Diocles succeeded in the design upon Demetriades;
Thos failed in that against Chalcis; but Alexamenes
was somewhat more successful at Sparta. Having en-
tered that city with Iooo men, under pretence of assist-
ing Nabis. he was joyfully received by the tyrant. But
drawing him aside, as if to communicate something to

L 1 3 him

him in private, he suddenly pulled him from his horse,
and then gave the figual agreed on to his attendants; who

ruihing forward, killed Nabis on the spot. Then
I92. they fell to pillaging his treasures. The Spartans

arming in the mean time, attacked the -Etolians,

and cut most of them off, together with their leader A-
lexamenes. Philopcemen, hearing of this confusion at
Sparta, quickly entered that city with a body of troops;
and calling an assembly. persuaded the Spartans to join
the Achean league. By this ftep Philopocmen acquired
great honour: and he difp!ayed singular disinterested-
ness by refusing a present sent him by the Spartans
of 120 talents, arising from the sale of the effe&s of
Nabis.

Antiochus having, by the persuasion of the iEtolians,

entered Greece, w-as defeated near the pass of Thermo-
pylae by the Ro man consul Manius Acilius. After
this victory the consul intimated to the 2Etolians, that
it was not yet too late for them to have recourse to the
Roman clemency, and to avoid the chatlifement due to
their repeated offences; for that they mightpurchafe
their pardon, by putting their capital Heraclea into the
hands of the Romans. These remonflrances proving
ineffetual, the consul proceeded to lay siege to that
city in form. As it was large and well fortified, the
besieged made an oblfinate defence, and fought with
the most deiperate bravery. Eut Mlanius having given
a general afilult about three o'clock in the morning,
while the iEtolians, wearied with fatigue, lay buried in
sleep, carried the city, and gave it up to be pillaged.
Many of the inhabitants fled to the citadel, but were at
last obliged by famine to surrender. The reft of the
nation having shut themselves up in Naupatus, were
purfoed thither by the consul, who laid clole siege to
that city, and in two months reduced the enemy to the
last extreity. lThe JEtolians, now on the point of
perifning runder the Roman power, made the humblest

Afpplications

upplications to the consul Quintius to pity their mi-
fery, and to interpose in their behalf. Quintius com-
paffionating their distress, prevailed with Manius to
grant them a truce, during which they might have an
opportunity to make their fubmiflions to the senate at
Rome.

The 2Etolians hearing soon after that Antiochus was

totally defeated by the Romans in the battle of Magne-
fia, and finding themselves unable to refit any longer,
implicitly submitted to the conditions prescribed them
by the senate; of which the principal article was, that
they flould deliver up their arms and horses to the Ro-
mans, and pay them 0ooo talents of silver.

Those Spartans who had been banished from their

country by Nabis, having taken possession of some places
on the coast, thence made incursions into the Lacede-
monian territories. By way of reprisals, the latter at-
tacked and took possession of Las, one of the places oc-
cupied by those refugees; who thereupon having ap-
plied to the Acheans for relief, prevailed with them to
interpose in the affair. The Acheans, under pretence
of the Romans having put under their protecion all the
towns on the coast, required the Spartans to deliver up
the authors of the enterprise against Las. This demand
threw the Spartans into such a fury, that they killed
thirty of those who were most intimately conneaed with
Philopcemen, renounced their alliance with the A-
cheans, and sent ambassadors to the consul Fulvius, to
beg of the Romans to take Sparta under their protec-
tion. The Acheans being informed of this, were in
their turn highly offended, and declared war against
the Spartans. The dispute was referred to the decision
of the Roman senate; both parties were heard, and a de-
cifion was pronounced in very ambiguous terms, which,
however, the Acheans pretended to interpret in their
own favour.

Philopcemen therefore putting himself at the head

L 1 4 of

of an army, advanced to Sparta, and summoned the in-
habitants to deliver up to him the authors of the enter-
prise against Las. The principal inhabitants having
gone out to make an answer. to this demand, were fu-
rioufly set upon by the refugees who happened to be in
Philopoemen's army, and seventeen of them were fain;
and next day, fixty-there more of them were condemned
to death by this exasperated multitude. Then the A-
cheans proceeded to treat Sparta like a city taken by
force, commanding the walls to be pulled down, the
foreign soldiers to be sent out of Laconia, and the laws
of Lycurgus to be totally abolished. Every particular
was executed accordingly, to the inexpressible grief of
the Spartans, who sent complaints to Rome againfl Phi-
lopoemen; in consequence whereof Lepidus wrote a let-
ter to the Acheans, severely reprimanding them for their
unlawful proceedings. The senate disapproved, in the
itrongeft terms, of the rigorous conduc of the Acheans,
and cited them to make their defence at Rome. They
endeavoured to justify themselves; but the senate pro-
nounced sentence in favour of the Lacedemonians, or-
daining, that those who had been banished by the A.
cheans flould be recalled and restored to their estates;
that all the proceedings relating to that affair fliould be
annulled; that the walls of Sparta should be rebuilt by
the Acheans; and that it should remain united with the
Achean confederacy.

About this time, the Meffenians having. by the per-

suasion of Dinocrates, renounced the Achean league,
resolved to take possession of Corona, an important post.
Of this resolution Philopoemen getting notice, took the
field, though then seventy years of age, and advanced
towards Messene. An engagement ensuing, Philopce-
men in the beginning of it repulsed the enemy. But

a firong reiuforcement arriving to the aid of the
183. Meflenians, the Achean troops were defeated, and

Philopoemen, after performing extraordinary feats

of

of valour, was grievously wounded, thrown from his
horse, taken prisoner, conduced to Messene in chains,
imprisoned, and by the advice of Dinocrates cruelly
put to death by poison. Philopcemnen received the cup
without making the least complaint, drank off the poi-
son, and expired a few moments after. The Acheans,
penetrated with grief on receiving this news, immedi-
ately took arms, with a resolution to revenge his death;
and marching into the territory of Messene, made a
dreadful ravage. The Meffenians, unable to refit the
torrent, begged for peace in the humblest manner.The
Acheans insisted on their delivering up the authors of
Philopcemen's death; and the Meffenians agreed to the
condition. But Dinocrates prevented his punishment
by killing himself. The other persons concerned in that
cruel affair were floned to death around the tomb of
Philopcemen. The Acheans performed the most mag-
nificent funeral obsequies to the memory of their brave
general, and carried his ashes to Megalopolis. The
procession resembled that of a triumph; the horse and
foot marched under arms, and the inhabitants of the
towns through which they passed came out to meet the
procession.

This year was rendered remarkable by the deaths of

three of the most famous commanders in antiquity, Han-
nibal, Scipo Africanus, and Philopcemen.

The Roman senate began now to take umbrage at.the

power and credit of the Achean league ; and to behold
with a jealous eye the ability of their generals, the
valour of their troops, the perfet union that fubfifl-
ed among their cities, and the entire liberty in which
they lived. In this disposition the Romans, with a view
of humbling them, never failed to give a favourable
hearing to the enemies of the league ; and some of its
unworthy members, such as Callicrates, who hurt them
considerably in the affair of the Spartan refugees, were
conitantly furnishing pretences to the Romans for curb-

ing

ing the republic. But it was not till after the defeat of
Perseus, the last formidable enemy to the Roman power,
that the senate resolved to dissolve the league, and to re-
duce the Acheans entirely under their power.

With this view, the Romans industriously applied

themselves to weaken them, by fomenting divisions a-
mong them, and by committing all the important offices
of the republic to men totally devoted to their pleasure;
who by that means possessed the balance of power in
their assemblies. Public officers having been by the
Romans dispatched into Asia, to take information a-
gainft all those who had supported Perseus, received
from Callicrates, a man wholly in the interest of Rome,
a lift of such of the Acheans as he fufpeced to have fa-
voured the cause of that king. Upon this information,
no fewer than looo of the most considerable citizens in
the Achean republic were seized; and the Acheans
were ordered to condut them to Rome, - What a de-
testable instance of tyranny!-- The celebrated hiso-
rian Polybius was one of this number. On arriving at
Rome, they were distributed through the different coun-
tries of Italy, without so much as being heard in their own
defence. The Acheans compaffionating the fate of their
fellow-citizens, sent several different embassies to Rome,
intreating the senate to take cognizance of the accufa-
tion against those citizens who had never been brought
to trial at home. But all their remonftrancts were in-
effecual, though successively. renewed from time to
time for the space of seventeen years. At last, how-
ever, the senate consented to the refloration of those
exiles to their native country. But during so long an
interval, so many of them had died, that of the Iooo
who had come into Italy, only 300 returned to Greece.

Some years after, great disturbances brake out in A-
chaia, by the indiscretion of their principal magistrates:

one of whom, named Democritus, declared war a-
(469 gainft Sparta, and entering Laconia with an ar-

my

my laid waste the country. The Romans sent com-
missioners to terminate this dispute, who proceeding to
Corinth conducted matters at first. with great modera-
tion; fbr Carthage not being yet taken, the Romans
chore to manage tenderly such powerful allies as the A-
cheans. This behaviour, however, served only to make
the factious Achean more unruly; and their chief Cri-
tolaus potled from city to city, exalferating his country-
men against the Romans, and endeavouring to prevent
any agreement from being concluded with the Lace-
monians.

It muit be acknowledged, that at this time the Ache-

ans were far from behaving to the Rlomans with that
caution and prudence they ought. On the contrary,
they seemed to be doing every thing to excite their re-
fentment. Mettellus, who was then in Macedonia, hear-
ing of these disturbances, sent four Romans of confider-
ation to Corinth, to exhort the Acheans not to draw on
themselves the vengeance of his countrymen. But
their remonstrances were derided, and they themselves
were driven out of the city. The Corinthians, on this
occasion, particularly distinguishe.d themselves by their
aninofity against the Romans. Critolaus in the mean
time laboured to persuade his countrymen to make war
on the Lacedemonians ; publickly boasting, that he would
make head against the whole Roman power, and that
he had engaged kings on his fide. His endeavours were
successful ; and he even found means to prevail on the
Bceotians and the people of Chalcis to join the confe-
deracy. These states seemed at present to be aduated
by a spirit of folly, which was hurrying them to their
ruin.

The Romans, informed of these tranfadions in

Greece, ordered Mummius to make war on the Ache-
ans. Metellus, who was on the spot, once more sent
them an embassy, acquainting them, that the Roman
people might yet be preVailed upon to forget their pail

behaviour

ing the republic. But it was not till after the defeat of
Perseus, the last formidable enemy to the Roman power,
that the senate resolved to dissolve the league, and to re-
duce the Acheans entirely under their power.

With this view, the Romans industriously applied

themselves to weaken them, by fomenting divisions a-
mong them, and by committing all the important offices
of the republic to men totally devoted to their pleasure;
who by that means possessed the balance of power in
their assemblies. Public officers having been by the
Romans dispatched into Asia, to take information a-
gainft all those who had supported Perseus, received
from Callicrates, a man wholly in the interest of Rome,
a lift of such of the Acheans as he fufpeaed to have fa-
voured the cause of that king. Upon this information,
no fewer than looo of the most considerable citizens in
the Achean republic were seized; and the Acheans
were ordered to condua them to Rome,-What a de-
testable instance of tyranny!-- The celebrated hiio-
rian Polybius was one of this number. On arriving at
Rome, they were distributed through the different coun-
tries of Italy, without so much as being heard in their own
defence. The Acheans compaflionating the fate of their
fellow-citizens, sent several different embaflies to Rome,
intreating the senate to take cognizance of the accufa-
tion against those citizens who had never been brought
to trial at home. But all their remonilrancts were in-
effectual, though successively. renewed from time to
time for the space of seventeen years. At last, how-
ever, the senate consented to the ref oration of those
exiles to their native country. But during so long an
interval, so many of them had died, that of the Iooo
who had come into Italy, only 300 returned to Greece.

Some' years after, great diflurbances brake out in A-
chaia, by the indiscretion of their principal magistrates:

one of whom, named Dnemocritus, declared war a-
46 gainft Sparta, and entering Laconia with an ar-

my

my laid wate the country. The Romans sent com-
missioners to terminate this dispute, who proceeding to
Corinth condu&ed matters at first. with great modera-
tion; for Carthage not being yet taken, the Romans
chose to manage tenderly such powerful allies as the A-
cheans. This behaviour, however, served only to make
the factious Achean more unruly; and their chief Cri-
tolaus posted from city to city, exasperating his country-
men against' the Romans, and endeavouring to prevent
any agreement from being concluded with the Lace-
nonians.

It must be acknowledged, that at this time the Ache-

ans were far from behaving to the Romans with that
caution and prudence they ought. On the contrary,
they feerned to be doing every thing to excite their re-
fentment. Aettellus, who was then in Macedonia, hear-
ing of these disturbances, lent four Romans of confider-
ation to Corinth, to exhort the Acheans not to draw on
theimfelves the vengeance of his countrymen. But
their remonstrances were derided, and they themselves
were driven out of the city. The Corinthians, on this
occasion, particularly distinguishe.d themselves by their
animosity against the Romans. Critolaus in the mean
time laboured to persuade his countrymen to make war
on the Lacedemonians; publickly boasting, that he would
make head against the whole Roman power, and that
he had engaged kings on his fide. His endeavours were
successful; and he even found means to prevail on the
Bceotians and the people of Chalcis to join the confe-
deracy. These tPates seemed at present to be aauated
by a spirit of folly, which was hurrying them to their
ruin.

The Romans, informed of these tranfaaions in

Greece, -ordered Mummius to make war on the Ache-
ans. Metellus, who was on the spot, once more sent
them an embassy, acquainting them, that the Roman
people might yet be prevailed upon to forget their paif

behaviour

behaviour, provided they would return to their duty,
and consent to certain cities being disunited from the
confederacy. These proposals were rejeaed in so dif-
dainful a manner, that Metellus was provoked at it.
Immediately, therefore, marching against them with his
army, he gained a complete viEtory, and took more
than i ooo prisoners. In this engagement Critolaus dif-
appeared; and it was commonly believed that he was
drowned in a marsh as he was endeavouring to make
his escape. Disus therefore, another man of a fatious
turbulent spirit, assumed the command, levied forces
from all quarters, and mustered up an army of about
14,000 men. Metellus in the mean time pursued the
rebels; and having fallen in with iooo Arcadians, put
them all to the sword. He then marched against
Thebes; but the inhabitants, terrified at the fame of
the Roman vitories, abandoned the city. Then advan-
cing towards Corinth, where Dixaus had shut himself up,
he dispatched three of the most considerable persons of
the Achean republic to persuade their countrymen to a-
void ere it was too late their impending ruin. But the
multitude favouring the faaion of Dieaus, threw those
citizens into prison.

Things were in this situation when Mummius arrived.

Metellus then returned into Macedonia. Mummius
immediately assembled his troops, and formed his camp.
The besieged made a sally, attacked the Romans, and
killed many of them. This inconsiderable advantage
proved their ruin. Diseus, elated by his success, was
mad enough to offer battle to the consul; who to in-
crease his presumption, declined the engagement, as if
through fear. The Acheans, deceived by this stratagem,
advanced with the most foolish confidence against the
Romans; who at last marched out to meet them, and
gave them battle nearly about the narrowest place of the
isthmus. The Acheans, at the fame time that they were
engaging the Roman legions, finding themselves char-
ged from an ambuscade by all the consul's cavalry, were

in

in a moment overpowered and put to flight. Diaus in
despair hurrying to Megalopolis his native city, killed
his wife, set fire to his hioufe, and drank poison. The
Acheans, now without a leader, had not the courage to
rally, but fled on all fides. Most of the inhabitants re-
tired from Corinth in the night. Mummius entering the
city, gave it up to be pillaged; put to the sword all the
men that remained in it; fold the women and children for
slaves; and after taking away the finest fiatues and pic-
tures, set fire to the houses, reduced the whole city to ashes
and razed the walls to the foundations. Thus
perished Corinth the fame yearthat arthage was 146.
taken and destroyed. The Romans demolished
the walls of all those cities that had taken part in the revolt.

The ruin of Corinth made so terrible an impreflion.

on the Acheans, that their courage entirely deserted
them. The senate pretended, that they had treated the
Corinthians thus severely, on account of their having
violated the law of nations, by abusing the ambaffa-
dors sent them from Rome. But the truth is, that the
Romans, not chufing that any state should be able to re-
sift their power, resolved to destroy Corinth,. whole very
firong and advantageous situation rendered it a moit
convenient hold for any of their enemies; who, with
proper ikill and resolution, might there baffle for a long
while the whole Roman power. The Romans drew im-
mense riches from the spoils of this city. Among the
pictures found in it, there was one representing Bac-
chus, executed by the celebrated Aristides. This piece
was reckoned infinitely superior to all the reft, and was
ordered to be given to Attalus for about 3200 1. Ster-
ling, But Mummiusthinking it a matter of dangerous
example to fell a piture at such an extravagant price,
refused in spite of the complaints of Attalus to deliver
it, and sent it to Rome, not indeed for his own private
use, but as a public ornament. It was accordingly pla-
ced in the temple of Ceres. That illustrious Roman

gave

gave upon this occasion a striking proof of his difinte-
reftednefs, integrity, and great knowledge in the art of
war ; but at the fame time he showed himself to be mi-
ferably deficient in point of taste for the fine arts; for
we are told by Velleius Paterculus, that to make those
employed in the transportation of the Corinthian statues
and picures to Rome more than ordinarily careful about
so precious a trust, he threatned, that if any of them
iwere spoiled or amissing, he would oblige the bearers
to furnish others at their own expence.

After this memorable period, the Ptomans sent com-

mifioners into Greece, who abolished in all the Itates
the popular form of government, and created magi-
:tiraes dependant-on the oRoman commonwealth. But
in other refpets the Greeks were left in the full enjoy-
ment of their laws and liberty. At last, however,
Greece was reduced into the form of a Roman province,
and was governed by a prxetor sent thither annually.
lhenceforth, therefore, it bore the name of the province.
)f Achaia; the Acheans being in those latter times the
most powerful people in Greece.

As Athens has all along made the most confi-
I46. derable figure in the hiftoiy of Greece, we will,

before concluding, briefly take notice of the most

remarkable misfortunes experienced by that city after
the Romans made themselves matters of Greece.

Mithridates, king of Pontus, having subdued all Asia

:Minor, dispatched into Greece an army of 12o,ooo
men under Archelaus; who by means of so great a
force soon reduced Athens, and obliged the other states
of Greece to submit to Mithridates. Archelaus fixing
his residence at Athens, possessed himself of all authori-
ty, and exercised a cruel tyranny over the inhabitants.
Their miseries, however, under this new master, were
but flight in comparison of those they were soon to un-
dergo.

'The celebrated Sylla being charged with the condua

of

of the war againaf Mithridates, passed over into Greece
with five legions. All the cities, except Athens, imme-
diately on his arrival opened their gates to him. The
Athenians were not at liberty to follow their own incli-
nations. The tyrant Ariftion,,under whose yoke they
then groaned, was daring enough to oppose the Roman
troops, and to sustain a siege against Sylla. That ge-
neral immediately invested Pireus, where Ariftion
had taken post; and though the walls were sixty feet
high and very strong, Sylla attacked them with the
greatest vigour; employing for that purpose a vast
number of engines, and neither regarding danger nor
expence. Being in want of wood, he cut down the
trees of the Lyceum which formed most beautiful and
delicious walks ; and to supply himself with money, he
plundered the treasures of the temples of Delphos and
Epidaurum.

If the attack was desperate, the defence was no less

so. Both parties behaved with the greatest courage and
resolution. Every day produced new assaults and new
sallies, in which a vait deal of blood was spilt. The A-
thenians displayed on this occasion all the admired intre-
pidity of their ancestors. They burnt part of. the Ro-
man machines, and overturned others by means of mines
which they carried under the spots whereon they stood.
The Romans animated by Sylla discovered no less ar-
dour. On their fide they employed mines lilkewile, and.
thereby threw down a considerable part of the wall.
Having thus made a large breach, they immediately
gave an assault, but after a long and desperate dilpute
were repulsed. The Athenians during the ensuing
night shut up the breach by a new wall.

Sylla was beginning to despair of success, when an

idea struck him of reducing the city by famine. Con-
verting therefore the siege into a blockade, he soon
brought every horror of famine upon the miserable A-
thenians; who after devouring all the herbage, roots,

and

and the flefl of their horses, were obliged to eat the
leather of their shoes. Some of them are even reported
to have had recourse to the shocking expedient of eating
human flelh. Finding themselves at last under an absolute
necessity of capitulating, the people and senators, by the
most earnest solicitations, prevailed on Ariftion to fend
deputies to obtain the best terms they could from Sylla.
But those deputies, instead of suing in the humble manner
that became a people in their situation, having entered in-
to a pompous description of the exploits of the ancient
Athenians, were interrupted by the haughty Roman,
who calling them in derision preachers, and desiring
them to reserve their fine rhetorical flourishes for them-
selves, informed them, that he had not come thither to
learn the heroic ations of their ancestors, but to chaf-
tife them for their rebellion; and he difmnifed them
without further ceremony.

Sylla getting intelligence soon after from his spies, of

a part of the wall low enough to be scaled, gave orders
to fix ladders there the following night. The Romans
by these means made themselves masters of the city,
and put all they met to the sword. The carnage was
dreadful, few of the miserable inhabitants having efca-
ped. Sylla gave up the city to be plundered; and then
proceeded to invest the citadel, which was soon forced
to surrender for want of provisions. Ariftion some time

after was put to death. Sylla having next made

' himself nafter of Pireus, demolished its forti-

fications, and burnt to the ground the arsenal, a build-
ing much admired for its elegant architecture.

Sylla, after beating the generals of Mithridates in two

great engagements at Cheronea and Orchomene, re-
duced Macedonia and Greece under the Roman power
in the fame manner as they had been formerly. Then
passing over into Asia Minor, he conquered lonia and
several other provinces, whereof Mithridates had taken
poifeieion in that country.

Greece

Greece, by beoming a Roman province, did not

lose that ardent desire of liberty which was always its
principal characeriftic; In the Roman .civil wars be-
tween Cazfar, and Pompey,.the Athenians warmly em-
braced the fide of the latter, which appeared to be
founded on republican principles; and after the death
of Julius Caesar, they ereced itatues to the memory of
Caflius, who had been the molt adtive of the confpira-
tors against Cefar.

Greece, though stripped of her political power, still

preserved her fovercignty in the fcienccs and fine arts ;
and, in that refpecr, received honiage from her very
conquerors. The most illustrious men among the Ro-
mans repaired thither to be instruCted in the molt va-
luable branches of literature. Athens, therefore, that
nursery of learning and of science, still remained the
central point in' the republic of letters, and continued
to be frequented by all who desired to acquire that atti-
cjzin so highly valued by. the ancients, and that standard
taste which enabled them to eftimatc, with peculiar ac-
curacy, the real beauties of every work of genius or art.
Here too, and here only; were to be leacrnt tlhe true
principles of eloquence. All therciore who applied
rhemfelves successfully to public fpea:kiug, and Cicero
in particular, repaired to Athens to itudcy under the
ablest matters of oratory. T'hither dlidl the tlne Cicero
fend his son to hear the lecturs of 'Cratlp)us; every
Roman of any rank or conlider;itioi, foilnswdc the fame
course.; and Greek le;irning, according to tlie icfimony
of Plutarch, was accounted lo rcqu i ile a branch (i e-
ducation among that judicious p-XOpl!e, that a RomnJn
who did not underhland the Grrek langu ge, never ar-
rived at any high degree of eitimation.

Such of the emperors as had a taste for the sciences,

Titus, Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, Lucius Verus, and
some others, used every meins to entice to their court
the most diftinguiihed philosophers of Greece, not orll.to

M Im jeloy

enjoy their conversation themselves, but that they might
diret the education of their children. Even in the de-
cline of the Roman empire, and during the fourth and
fifth ages of Chriflianity, Greece still continued to be
the resort of the philosophers of all nations. We fee,
from ecclesiastical hitfory, that St Basil, St Gregory,
and St Chrysostom, those bright luminaries of the
;church, went to Athens to imbibe, at the source, the
mofi important branches of knowledge. It is remark-
able too, that a few detached beams from the setting fun
of Grecian gen ius lighted up the dawn of learning and
of science in VWeltern Europe, after it had remained for
f'veral centuries involved in the deepest gloom of Go-
thick ignorance. This propitious event was the confe-
quence of an apparently heavy calamity, namely, the sack-
ing of Constantinople by Mahomet II. about the middle
of the 15th century. By that revolution many eminent
philosophers and artifis having been induced to abandon
their native country, fettled in Italy, where they reflo-
red the knowledge of the fci:nces and fine arts. And it
will reflet immortal honour on the taste and munifi-
cence of the truly noble house of Medicis, that, to the
princely encouragement afforded by them to those
learned and ingenious emigrants, Europe is chiefly in-
debted for the revival of polite literature.

Besides Athens, several other cities were famous for

being the residence of the arts and sciences, such as A-
lexandria, Byzantium, Rhodes, and Ephesus.

Eminent Yr'iters, Philosophers, ArtifJs, &c.

Panatiur, the Stoic philosopher, was descended of

one of the most illustrious families in Rhodes; but his
love of knowledge induced him to reside at Athens,
where he attached himself to the Stoic school, then ve-
ry much in fashion. The fame of his knowledge soon
reached Rome, where the greatest men then applied
.he~mfelves to the study of Philosophy. Panaztius was

drawn

drawn thither by the invitation of some of the most il-
luftrious Romans, and formed a very intimate friend-
ship with Lelius and Scipio; the latter of whom hdo
noured him with marks of the greatest confidence, and
prevailed with him to accompany him in his expeditions,
Panwtius composed a treatise on the moral duties of
mankind, highly valued by Cicero, who made much
use of it in composing his Ofices.

Epidtetus, a native of Hieropolis, a city in Phrygia,

was likewise a follower of the Stoic sect. He was equal-
ly famous for the sublimity of his sentiments and for
the purity of his morals; in which last rcfpe&, the Stoics,
notwithstanding their exterior severity, and their rigid
dotrines, were far from being altogether irreproach-
able. He was, when very young, the slave of one of
the officers of the Emperor Nero's bed-chamber. But
having been driven from Rome in the reign of Daii-
tian, he retired to Nicopolis; where, in spite of his po-
verty, he lived for several years in general esteem. He
returned to home in the tine of Hadrian. The lead-
ing maxims of his philosophy may be comprehended in
this short sentence, "Suffer patiently, and be moderate
"in your pleasures." The only part of his works now
remaining is his Mlanuel; and for this we are indebted
to his scholar Arrian. Nothing except Christianity it-
self can be more pure ai!d fubliile than the doEtrines of
his philosophy. The celebrated Monsieur Palcal, who
had studied it with great accuracy, has compoted an ab-
fira& of it with a difiindtnefs and precision worthy so
great a genius. As this piece is curious and scarce, 'swe
flall here present the reader with the fubitance of it.

Epicdetus, fays he, is one of the few philosophers

who had the juflef notions of the dut es of human life,
He desires, above all things, that -Cold Am!ighty may
be constantly the chief objct of our consideration; that
we be thoroughly persuaded of his perftet jullice, and
cheerfully fubulit to all his cdifpenfations, fromn an entire

. m n convictiog

conviction of his infinite wifdomn. He assures us, that
this disposition will prevent all murmurings and comn
plaints, and enable us, to bear with patience the most
pain'ful accidents of life; Never fay, "I have loft such
· a thing ;" fay rather," I have restored it ;" My son
dies, " 1 have restored him ;" My wife dies, " I have
c; given her back " and so of every other poifeffion
VWhile the Almighty indulges you in the uses ofit, be.
careful of it, as being the property of another. You
imufi neveri desire that things ihould be disposed accor-
ding to your fancy or pleasure ; but be always assured
that they happen for the best: Constantly regard your-
.elf as being in this world a kind of player, who musk
perform fuchl a part as it pleases your master to allot
-you: lRemain on the theatre so long as he appoints;
appear rich or poor as.your charaicer requires, and en-
deavour to- play your part as well as possible; but frill
remember, that to alfign the part is the business. of your
maiter: Reflea daily on death, and the most lamentable
miseries of life; this will preserve you from thinking.
basely, and from desiring any thing too earneilly. He
proceeds to point out how a man ought to behave on
many different occasions. He advises him to be humble
and modes ; to conceal his good resolutions, and to
accomp!if them privately; because nothing diminishes
their value so' much as otlentation: He repeats again
and again, and constantly endeavours to enforce thi3
maxim, " That the whole desire, the whole study of

l man, fiould be to difeover the will of God, and to
" follow it."

temsctrius P-al? '.reus has been already mentioned as

'chief magiltrate of Athens. It only remains to fay a
few words of him here as an. orator. H11 was the fcho-.
lar of TheophraPfus, from whom he learned a florid and
h1ighly ornamented style. He excelled in that species of
eloquence which employs the graces of declamation and
eaurtiful ihining. exprelions, but is devoid of solidity

and

and vigour. Being, however, much applauded for the
pleasure he gave the ear and imagination,hehada great
number of imitators. It is for this reason that he is
said to have contributed greatly to the decline and cor-
ruption of eloquence at Athens. To please was the
whole aim of the oratory of Demetrius ; which, there-
fore, was better adapted to amuse the fancy than to
convince the understanding.

To the number of Greek orators may perhaps be

added several fathers of the church; such as, Saint Ba?
fil, Saint Gregory, and Saint Chryfo/lomn, whose writings
contain a beauty of style, a solidity of reasoning, and a
vehemence of expression, well calculated for touching the
heart and moving the pafflons.

Polybius, the famous historian, was a native of Mega-

lopolis. He learned eloquence and philosophy under
his own father Lycortas, a man greatly diftinguified
for the firmness with which he supported the interests
of the Achean republic against the ambitious designs of
the Romans. Philopemen was his matter in the art o'
war. His merit was known at Ptome, where many of
the principal citizens cultivated -his acquaintance; and
particularly the two sons of Paulus iEmilius; .of whom
the youngest, the son by adoption of Cornelius Scipia
the son of the great Africanus, and the deRfroyer of
Numantia and Carthage, profited much by his instruc.
tions.

Polybius is believed to have.compofed the grieatef

part his history at Romd. This history contained not
only the Roman tranfacti6ns, but those of all the then
known world, from the firit Punic War to the ruin of
the kingdom of Macedonia, comprehending altogether
a space of fifty three years. Polybius therefore called
it an universal history, and divided it into forty books
of which only the five first now remain. The loss of the
reft is very much to be regretted; for we should have
found there a representation of the grandest and molt

WM n 3 i.nteresting

Interesting scenes ever displayed on the theatre of the
world. There, we should have seen, particularly in the
period of the second Punic war, the two moll warlike
and powerful nations then in the world, engaged in the
most serious and important contest; Rome on the very
brink of deftrution; and Carthage finally vanquished
and undone. There, too, we should have found an
account of the wars of the Romans with Philip King of
Macedon, with Antiochus King of Syria, with the IlE-
tolians, and with King Perseus; in a word, the great
chain of events that conducted Rome to the utmost
pitch of power, and enabled her to swallow up all the
tates and kingdoms in our hemisphere. This loss is so
much the greater, that Polybius bellowed the utmost
care, attention, and industry, to procure the belt infor-
mation with refpea to sacs. That he might not be
millaken about the situation of places, he himself travel-
led to the spots where the principal engagements defcri-
bed by him happened. Besides all this, Polybius a-
bounds with the jufteft refletions; and every where
delivers the most solid maxims of policy; two particu-
lars that constitute the chief excellence of every hifto-
rian, and from which a reader derives the molt valuable
inftrudion. It is true, that his digreflions are generally
tedious; but the faEs they contain are so curious, that
it were rigorous to find fault with them.

Polybius having returned into the Peloponnese after

the deftrudion of Corinth, had an opportunity of de-
fending the memory of his master Philopemen from an
accusation of his having been an enemy of the Roman
people. l-e acquitted himself on that occasion with such
eloquence and force of argument, that a decree was pas-
fed, forbidding the statues set up in honour of that he-
*.o to be demoliflhed or hurt. Polybius was likewise
chosen by the Roman commissioners to visit the con-
quered towns, and to fettle any disputes that had arisen
a:mong them. This commiflion he executed with such

admirable

admirable prudence and equity, that itatues were, in
different places, ereaed to his honour. After this he
went back to Scipio at Rome, with whom he lived till
the death of that illustrious Roman, when he once more
returned to his native country, and there ended his days
at the age of 82 years.

Dionysius the HalicarnaJian was, as his name imports,

a native of Halicarnassus, a city of Caria in Asia Mi-
nor. He came into Italy about the time of the battle
of AEium gained by Augustus against Anthony. His
principal work, intitled, The Roman Antiquities, was
divided into twenty books, of which only eleven now
remain, and comprehended the molt abstruse part of
the Roman history, which it deduced from the found-
ing of Rome. During the residence of Dionysius at
Rome, he formed an acquaintance with the most learn-
ed men then in that city, and studied very carefully the
works of the most esteemed historians. The learned
discover in Dionysius a profound erudition, a most a-
cute spirit of criticism, a mind void of prejudice, and
an ardent love of truth. We are particularly obliged
to him for the knowledge he has given us of the religion
and manners of the Romans. His style is simple and
elegant; and he appears more solicitous about fiowing
his learning than about the ornaments of eloquence.

Didorus Sicuhts lived in the time of Julius Caesar and

Augustus. His work intitled, The Hiforical Library,
comprehended forty books, of which only fifteen now
remain. The five first immediately follow one another,
contain the history of the fabulous times and treat of
what happened previous to the siege of Troy. The next
seven books comprehend the history of the Persians and
Greeks, from the expedition of Xerxes into Greece
till the death of Alexander. And the three last give
us the history of Alexander's successors. Diodorus is
a very valuable historian; and though he appears to
have given rather too much credit to the traditions of

M m 4 the

the priests, yet we have great reason to regret the loss
of the reft of his history. His style unites simplicity
with perspicuity, and his works abound with judicious
reflections.

Plutarch, the celebrated biographer, was a native

of Clierne in Boeotia, and lived in the reign of the
emperor Nero. He performed several journeys into
Italy, to colle: materials for his Lives of lllzftrious
.Men; and he numbered among his friends the greatest
men of Rome, who took delight in hearing him reason
in Greek on matters of philolophy. At last he fixed
his constant residence in his native country, where he
was honoured with the first employments, and difchar-
ged those, as well as all the duties of private life, with
admirable care and prudence; showing himfelfto be a
good father, a good husband, a good cnafter, and a
good citizen; and his virtue was rewarded with the
fweetefl harmony and peace in his family.

His works are, his Lives of lliJfirious gMen, and

his )ficourfes on MAorals. The last contain very use-
ful maxiims for the conduit of life, fublimenotionsa-
bout the divinity and immortality ofthe foul, and are
interspersed throughout with curious anecdotes. But
The lives of Illi/r-ious men is the work that has immor-
talized the narme of Plutarch. It is looked upon as the
most proper book in the world, to form men either for
private life or for public employments; and it abounds
with particulars highly worthy pbfervation. Things
are there estimated at their real value. He does not
confine himself to the 'great and shining acions alone
of the illulrious men whose lives he writes: " He does
" not satisfy himself," fays M. Rollin, " to paint the
C commander, the conqueror, the politician, the ma-
c giftrate, the orator; he introduces his reader into
tc the closets, as it were, or rather indeed into the hearts
s of those of whom he speaks; and there makes hini

-'"
- ' acquainted

" acquainted with the father, the husband, the master,
"c the friend. We seem to live and to converse with
s 'them, and to be present at their parties of pleasure,
,' their walks, their feasts, their conversations. Cicero
"c somewhere observes, that in walking through A-
"c thens, and the places adjacent, one could hardly ad-
" vance a ftep without meeting with some ancient mo-
"c mument mentioned in history, which recalled to the
"imagination the remembrance of some great man of

antiquity, and rendered him in a manner present.-
c The reading of Plutarch's Lives," continues MVrRollin,
" produces a similar effect, presenting, as it were, be-

fore our eyes, the great men of whom he speaks, and

' giving us an idea of their behaviour and manners, as
" lively and strong as if we were living and converting
" with them."

For this reason, the loss of some of those lives is the

more to be regretted.--Plutarch appears, on all oc-
cafions, ito be a great painter; and his style, though
plain and simple, is nevertheless lively and expressive
but not every where equally fupported.-Plutarch is
censured for his fondness of story telling; and indeed,
provided a [tory be curious, he never fails to -introduce
it, and to give a minute detail of it, however remote its
connection may be with the fubje( in hand. But his
reflections are always sensible and pertinent. We are
indebted to him for-having preserved to us specimens of
the writings of some of his great men.

Besides the eminent hiflorians here taken notice of,

several others of the fame country flourished in the times
of the emperors; such as Arrian, Elian, Appian, and
Herodian; but these were of an inferior rank to. those
mentioned above.

# BOOK V. Containing a succinct Account of the principal Transactions in the Island of SICILY.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
ANCIENT GREECE.

B 0 0 K V.
Containing a fuccina Account of the principal Tranfj

acEions in the IJland of SiCILY.
SICILY is situated in the Mediterranean sea to the

south-west of Italy; from which it is separated by
the Strait of Meifino, about two miles and a half over.

It is about 17o miles long and 1oo broad, and ofa

triangular form, the three angles being terminated by
as many remarkable capes, namely, Pachinum * to the
south, Pelorum t to the north, and Lilybeum r to the
weft.

As it lies between thirty-feven and thirty-nine degrees

of northern latitude, its climate is warm: and it is
healthful.-From remotest antiquity down to these times
Sicily has been always regarded as one of the most fruit-
ful spots in the world, producing corn, wine, oil, and
silk, particularly the first, in extraordinary abundance.
It was called the granary of ancient Rome and with ju-
ftice; as that great capital of the western world, when

in
? Now Paffaro. t Now Faro. : Now Boeo.

in the zenith of its power, glory, and population, de-
pended chiefly on this island for its supplies of corn.

The climate, the fertility, and the beauty of Sicily,

conspire to render it one of the mofl delicious countries
on earth. But it is fubje& to one dreadful calamity,
which proves an alloy to all its excellences, namely, a
frequency of earthquakes. These are supposed, and
with much probability, to be principally occasioned by
the convulsions which from the earliest tradition down
to our days, have been constantly agitating, though
with very different degrees of violence, the whole island
but more especially the bowels of Mount ZEtna. This
mountain is of very great extent, being nearly twelve
miles from the commencement of its ascent to its fum-
init, and it is one of the largest volcanos in the world.
Its eruptions are accompanied by severe earhquakes,
by which the whole island is violently shaken. Many
towns, with great numbers of the inhabitants, have by
there earthquakes been at different periods swallowed
up and deitroyed. In the I693 above fifty towns are
said to have been reduced to ruins, and more than

50o,ooo persons to have perished.
The more ancient history of Sicily is obscure and per-

plexed. Its fruitfulness, and its advantageous situation
nearly in the centre of the Mediterranean Sea, from
whence the navagation to the Greek islands, and to the
richest diftrids of Europe, of Asia Minor, and of Africa
was short and easy, naturally invited thither many ad-
venturers in commerce. Colonies of Phenicians, of Car.
thaginians, of Greeks, and of Italians, found means to
procure establishments there, and built cities.

These cities became as many independant states. But

their refpe&ive forms of government seem to have'been
extremly flutuating; sometimes displaying the fubli-
meft heroism and virtue, but oftener distraCted by the
folly and fury of republicanism; and frequently groan-

ing

ing under the cruel opprefiion of a parcel of petty
tyrants.

The Carthaginians in particular appear to have ac-

-quired an early footing, and to have colonized many
considerable territories in Sicily. That commercial
people, fully sensible of the importance of this island,
at length aspired at the Sovereignty of the whole coun-
try. In this pursuit they prefifted for many years
with various success, and at an immense expence of
blood and treasure: but at last they were entirly ex-
pelled by the Romans, their rivals and their mortal
enemies.

The first Greeks that passed over into Sicily were the

Chalcidians of Eubcea, who founded Leontium and Ca-
tana. After them, Archias the Corinthian led a colony
into that island, and became the founder of the city of
Syracuse about the year before Chrilt 709. Much a-
bo-ut the fame time ,the foundations of Megara were
laid by the Megareans.

In like manner, several Greek colonies fettled in the

southern parts of Italy, commonly known by the name
of Calabria; which increasing daily, and being joined
by many additional colonies of Greeks, grew at lalt si
considerable, that the country obtained the name of
Greater Greece.

These colonies, imitating the example, and aduated

by the spirit of the parent states in Proper Greece, from
whence they had emigrated, appear to have preserved
themselves in a {late of independance. None of then}
therefore ever arrived at any eminent degree of power
or territory by the fubjecion of their neighbours. They
are chiefly noted in history for luxury and voluptuous-
ness of manners.

Syracuse was the most powerful city in Sicily. Hi-

story, however, has transmitted no memorable circum-
fiance regarding it during the two firit centuries of its

existence.

existence. It only began to make a figure in the time
of King Gelon. But, for the space of 20o years after
that period, it gave occasion to many interesting events.
Of these we shall here confine ourselves to the most
considerable.

About the year before Christ 484, the Carthaginians,

at the instigation of Xerxes the famous king of Persia,
invaded Sicily with an army of 300,000 men and a fleet
of 2ooo ships; but this formidable army was defeated
by Gelon then tyrant of Syracuse.

This Gelon deserves to be ranked among the greatest

men. He was a native of Gela, a city on the southern
coast of Sicly. Upon the death of Hypocrates, tyrant
of that place, Gelon took arms againit his fellow citizens,
subdued them, and possessed himself of the sovereign
authority. Shortly after, he affected a similar revolution
at Syracuse; where after securing himself in the fu-
preme authority, he directed his attention to extend the
territory of the city, and soon became very powerful.
HIamilcar, the Carthaginian general, having laid siege
to the city of Himera, Gelon went to the assistance of
his father-in-law, who defended that place; and the fa-
ther and son joining their forces, gave battle to the Car-
thaginians, gained a complete viEtory, and made an im-
mense booty. Gelon employed the greatest part of the
spoil to decorate the temples of Syracuse; he divided
the prisoners with the greatest equity ; and assembling
the Syracufans, gave them a full account of his pro-
ceedings. By those means, he acquired their esteem
and affection to such a degree, that they voluntarily be-
flowed on him the title of King. "He was the first
'" (fays M. Rollin) whom the regal dignity rendered a
c" better man." Historians are full of the praises of
Gelon's virtues. They celebrate-particularly his since-
rity, his exact observance of his promises 'and engage-
ments, and his careful attention to promote agriculture.
He thought himself bound, as king, to defend the in-

terests

terests of the state, to enforce justice, and to prote&
innocence. He embellished and fortified the city, and
increased its territory. He never made his power to be
felt, except in doing good; and persisting in the
fame moderation to the end of his life, he died uni-
verfally regretted by his fubjets, after a reign of seven
years.

Hiero, one of Gelon's sons, succeeded him; but

proved at first a king of avery different characer, in-
dulging himself in all his passions, and giving a loose to
violence and injustice. His fubjets, therefore, regard-
ed him as a tyrant. But being, by his delicate fate of
health, exposed to frequent indispositions, he gave way
on such occasions to reflecion; resolved, at last, to
change his conduat; and, with that view, invited to his
court Simonides and Pindar, the most famous poets of
his time, who, by the charms of their poetry and con-
verfation, softened, in a great measure, his fierce and
gloomy disposition, and inspired him with more re-
fined notions of government as well as of the condut
of private life. Xenophon has taken occasion, from
this circumstance, to compose a treatise on that im-
portant fubjede, which he has intitled Hiero. He draws
it up in the form of a dialogue between that prince
and Simonides. Hiero is there introduced to main-
tain, that kings and tyrants are, on many accounts,
far from being so happy as is commonly imagined;
but particularly, by their being almost necessarily de-
prived of the greatest happiness of life, namely, a true
friend. Sinonides, on the other fide, is made to de-
scribe, in a very masterly manner, the duties of royalty;
and his whole argument tends to denonftrate, that
a king ought not to be accounted such for his own
fake, but for that of his fubjets. Hiero, during the
remaining part of his life, endeavoured, by the mildest
and nmofi engaging behaviour, to draw to his court the

filneft

finedR geniuses of his time. He died after a reign of
eleven years.

Thrafybulus his brother succeeded him, and
472. proved a downright tyrant. His haughty and

cruel behaviour provoked his fubjets to rebel a-
gainft him, and to besiege him in his palace. ' Thrafy-

bulus was obliged to capitulate ; and to save his
461. life, having consented to go into exile, he reti-

red into the country of the Locrians. The Sy-

racufans having thus recovered their liberty, ereded a
colossal statue to Jupiter the Deliverer, appointed an an-
nual festival in commemoration of their deliverance, anid
re-eftabliihed the popularform of government.

Didorus Siculus mentions, as having flourished a-

bout this time, Deucetius, who was chief of the
people properly called Sicilians. This Deucetius, as-
ter continuing for some time very powerful, and gain-
ing great advantages over the Syracufans, built a fa-
mous temple called Palici, which was made an invio-
lable asylum for all who were oppressed by a superior
power. At last, however, Deucetius's good fortune
abandoned him. He was utterly ruined by the loss of a
tingle battle with the Syracufans, and thereupon his
remaining troops deserted. Doubtful of his fate, he
boldly appeared in the market place of Syracuse, and
threw himself on the mercy of his enemies ; who, moved
with pity, and thinking it ungenerous and iiihumane
to take advantage of his present misfortunes, not only
gave him his lie, but aiigned him a handsome sub-
iiitence.

Syracuse, after enjoying her liberty for more than

fifty years, was, about the year before Christ 416, at-
tacked by the arms of the Athenians, incited to that
war by the ambition of Alcibiades. We have already,
given a full account of the particulars of this expedition
which proved most ruinous to the Athenians. (Vide
Book 11. p. 204. et, feqqc.)

By

3y the abdication of Thrafybulus, Syracuse

had now remaiped about sixty years in the posses- 406
sion of her liberty, when Dionysius, a private
citizen, formed the design of enslaving his country, and
of assuming the sovereign power. This man had already
given proofs of his courage in a war against the Cartha-
ginians,. who had, for whole ages, meditated the reduc-
tion of. this island, and .had often made attempts, during
that period, to accomplish their design.

The fruitfulness of Sicily, the wealth of its inhabi-

tants, and the beauty of its cities, were so many allure-
ments to the .Carthaginian avarice and ambition; and,
notwitlhanding the unfortunate event of most of their
invasions of it, they steadily perfidted in their resolution
to subdue it. Besid.es Syracuse, the city of Agrigen-
tum was famous for its magnificent temple, dedicated
to Olympian Jove, and for the riches of its citizens.
To give us an idea of the wealth of those citizens,
history takes notice of one of them called Gellias,
who had in his house large appartments for the re-
ception and entertainment .of all strangers who came to
the city, and wardrobes full of every .fort.of cloaths for
the accommodation of such of his guefis as had occasion
for them. ·This city,. therefore, had particularly at-
traEted the avarice of the. Carthaginians, who besieged
it with so powerful an army, that they at last got pof-
fefflon of:it.

It was about this time that Dionysius conceived the

design of enslaving his native city Syracuse. With that
view. he availed himlelf of the complaints of the other
states of Sicily against the Syracufan magiatrates; and
as. he po4reffed, in an eminent degree, the talent of
eloquence, so useful and so dangerous in a republican
government, he flood up in the midst of the assembly
of the people, and made an artful speech, calculated
to :render odious the principal magistrates, whom he

fsi n advised

advised the people to depose. In vain was he declared
at mnover of sedition, and condemned to pay a severe
fine. Encouraged by several citizens, he pushed his
accusation, spoke with more freedom than before, and
gave a most affeeaing description of the miferieswhich
the negligence of the Syracufan magistrates, to fend
timely succours, had brought upon the inhabitarts of
Agrigentum, who were forced to desert their city by
night, and to fly with their wives and children. The
Syracufans immediately deposed those magistrates, and
lected Dionysius chief magistrate in their place.
This first success increased his hopes: And as an

usurper never hesitates to praftife every art, however
criminal, to effeEt his designs, he next applied him-
self to supplant the generals of the army, and employed
for that purpose every species of fraud and deceit. He
told the people, that, instead of making use of foreign
troops, it was much more natural and safe to trust their
defence to their own countrymen; and for that pur-
pose to recall such of them as were living in exile. This
advice was the more attentively listened to, as the Sy-
racufans were then alarmed at the conquests of the Car-
thaginians. But the intention of Dionysius, in propo-
sing this measure, was to create to himself so many ad-
herents of those exiles, who would by that means owe
their ref oration to him, and would therefore be in-
clined from gratitude to support his interests. The
people alfented to his arguments, and ordered the exiles
io be recalled.

Soon after, the Syracufanrs being applied to for affit-

ance by the inhabitants of Gela, sent Dionysius to their
relief; who served them with such zeal and effec, that
they bellowed on him the highest marks of gratitude
and attachment. On returning to Syracuse, Dionysius
counterfeited the appearance of a man overwhelmed by
ditrefs and affliaion; and at last informed the people,
that he had made a discovery of a treafonablecorre-

fpondence

fpondence between their generals and Himilco, com-
mander of the Carthaginians. This pretended discovery
created in the minds of the people the utmost anxiety
and consternation. Many cried out, that Dionysius
ought to be immediately created commander in chief,
as the danger appeared to admit of no delay. The mul-
titude, accordingly, ever blind to causes and confe-
quences, and only regardful of the present, instantly
chore him commander in chief, with absolute powers
though many of the most prudent and wisest citizens
were of opinion, that by such a itep they would in effect
give away their liberty.

Dionysius, fully determined to secure himself in his

power, and to render ineffetual any change of the
public disposition, projeted another artifice for per-
fuading his'countrymen to appoint him guards. Going
therefore to the city Leontium, where there was a
Syracufan garrison, certain persons employed for that
purpose created a tumult. Dionysius cried out, that
there was a conspiracy against his life, and affeEted to fly
for safety to the citadel, which he had garrisoned with
soldiers firmly attached to his interests. An assembly
of the people being called, Dionysius described to them
in a most affecting manner the danger he had run, and
intreated them to permit him to chore a guard of 6oo
men for the security of his person. His request was
granted; and, inflead of 600, he chose iooo soldiers,
by way of lifeguard; whom, as well as his foreign
troops, he engaged to his service by.the most liberal
promises. He then sent to Gela for a part of the gar-
rifon, and assembled the fugitives and exiles. Thus re-
inforced, the inhabitants of Syracuse were no longer
able to refill him, Making therefore his public entry
into the city, followed by all his retinue, he at length
threw off the mask, and fiowed his countrymen that
obedience now was their only safety. Every heart was

IN n a thereupon

thereupon seized with terror, and Dionysius law himself
matter of the most powerful city of Sicily.

The beginnings -of his reign, however, were not free

from disturbance, and his ambition was very nigh cost-
ing hinm his head. Dionysius had marched to the re-
lief of Gela, which was besieged by the Carthaginians.
But finding himself unable to oppose the enemy, he or.
dered the inhabitants to abandon the city in the night,
and 'accompanied them, to cover their retreat. In this
march he narrowly escaped being cut off by 'some of the
Syracufan horsemen, who made a desperate attack upon
him for that purpose; but, luckily for the tyrant, were
repull'ed. The danger, however, did not end there.
Those horsemen, on being disappointed in their first de.
sign, rode forwards to the city, attacked Dionysius's
palace, plundered it and abused his wife. But things
soon assumed a different appearance. Dionysius push-
ing on to Syracuse in the night with an efcortof 500
men, defeated and cut in pieces a body of the citizens
who attempted to oppose his entry, in revenge put to
the sword all that came in his way, and gave up the
houses of'his enemies to be plundered.

The full extent of his treason soon became ap.
404. parent. His countrymen perceived, that, to sub-

port his usurpation, he had concluded an alliance

with the Cathaginians, who intimated to them by a he-
rald, that if they had a mind to obtain a peace, their
city mull remain fubjeat to the power of Dionysius.
The tyrant having now gotten the better of all oppofi-
tion, infliEted on the Syracufans all the horrors and mi-
ieries of tyranny. Sensible of their hatred, and of the
danger which con{tantly threatened his life, he resolved
to sacrifice to his safety. every person who gave him the
least uneasiness. Studying to inspire terror by the pu-
nifliments which he daily inflicted, he beheaded some ci-
tizens, burnt others, and satiated his cruelty by put-
ting to death persons of every age and of every condi-

tion.

tion. On this occasion Plutarch observes, that such
cruel tyrants are from time to time set over nations by
the unerring disposition of the Almighty Creator, to
scourge them for their wickedness and impiety.

Dionysius, after intimidating the Syracufans into sub-

jetion by his cruelty, began to take other measures for
his future security, and applied himself particularly to
fortify that part of the city called the island, which,
in cafe of necessity, might serve him for a place of re-
fuge. Then he turned his thoughts to the subduing of
such of the inhabitants of Sicily as still remained free;
and for that purpose resolved to besiege the city Herbe-
fina. But this projet had almost proved fatal to him.
The Syracufan troops, whom he had armed with a view
of making use of their assistance in this undertaking,
finding themselves in a condition to vindicate the liber-
ty of their country, revolted from the tyrant, besieged
him in the Epipolis, and set a price on his head. Here-
upon Dionysius, being likewise deserted by his foreign
auxiliaries, thought himself absolutely undone; and to
avoid falling into the hands of his enemies, conceived
the design of putting an end to his life. But from this
desperate resolution he was dissuaded by one of his
friends. Dionysius therefore intreated permission of
the Syracufans to depart from the city with his fa-
mily; which they were not only simple enough to
grant, but likewise complied- with another request of
the tyrant, to furnish him with five vessels wherein to
transport his effets.

While preparations were making for the departure of

Dionysius, the Syracufans, apprehensive of no further
disturbance from him, gave themselves up to an indo-
lent security; of which the tyrant taking advantage,
warmly solicited the Carthaginian garrisons in the towns
adjacent to come to his relief. The Carthaginians re-
solved to support him; and i2oo of them marching to-
wards Syracuse, overpowered all opposition, and effe&-

N n 3 ed

ed their juntion with Dionysius. This sudden reverse
of fortune discouraged the Syracufans, and Dionysius
having made a sally on the besiegers, and cut off a great
number of them, obliged the survivors to raise the siege,
and to disperse. Finding himself now superior to his
enemies, he sent word to those who had fled, that they
might peaceably return to the city, for he frankly for-
gave what had passed. Perceiving, however, that the
Syracufans were not to be trusted, he thought it ne-
ceffary to employ every precaution for his safety,
And therefore he took the opportunity of the enfu-
ing harvest to feize'on all their arms. Then he fit-
ted out a powerful fleet, enlited a great number of so-
reign troops, and resolved to attempt some enterprise
that might increase his power. For this indeed he pof-
sessed all the requisite courage and ability. He quickly
reduced Naxus, Catana, and Leontium, and chafifed
some of the neighbouring cities which had attempted to
oppose his progress.

Dionysius having now formed the design of ruining

the Carthaginian power in Sicily, began to make vast
preparations for putting his design in execution. In
the first place, he enticed to Syracuse, by the means of
great encouragement, a multitude of workmen, skilful
in preparing every thing necessary for a powerful arma-
ment; and that their work might proceed with more
diligence and regularity, he established proper infpec-
tors and overseers; frequently bestowed with his own
hand considerable rewards on those who distinguished
themselves most by their industry and skill; and used
to converse with them with great familiarity. All the
streets of Syracuse were thronged with artificers; and
nothing was to be heard but the noise of their work.
In a very short while, therefore, a prodigious quantity
of arms of every kind were prepared, and a great num-
ber of galleys built, forme of three, some of five benches
of oars ; so that he foQn had a fleet of 2oo galleys comr

p pletely

plztely fitted out; and a number of warlike engines cor-
responding to his other preparations.

After finishing his naval armament, Dionysius began

next to raise an army. The large pay offered by him
enticed soldiers to Syracuse from all quarters, particu-
larly from Greece; and Dionysius omitted no means
to gain the affection of those soldiers. Of late indeed
he was become quitea new man in every refpet. In-
Read of the cruel, imperious, and despotic tyrant, he
was now the humane, generous, merciful prince; and
his present conduct effaced all remembrance of his past
behaviour.

To remove as far as possible every obstacle to his

great design, he endeavoured to conciliate the friend-
ship of two powerful cities, Rhegium and Meflina. Then
he bethought himself of providing an heir to his throne ;
and with that view contracted a double marriage; ta-
king to wife both Ariftomache the daughter of one of
the richest citizens of Syracuse, and Doris the daughter
of a Locrian of diftinaion. Ariftomache was filter to
the famous Dion, for whom his brother-in-law soon
conceived such a high esteem and so strong a friendihip,
that he gave orders to furnish him with whatever money
he ihould demand. Dion was a man of a lofty, noble
foul, and had contrated a strong relifhi for the philofo-
phy and conversation of Plato, who in the course of
his travels had halted some time at Syracuse. Dion
took all the opportunities that the great confidence and
credit reposed in him by Dionysius presented, to give
that prince such counsel as he thought he flood in
need of.

All the preparations for war being now finished, Dio-

nyfius acquainted the Syracufans with his intentions of
declaring war against the Carthaginians; and at the
fame time laid before them his motives for so great an
undertaking; namely, that the Carthaginians had been
always the professed enemies of the Greeks 5 and that

N n 4 both

ed their juncion with Dionysius. This sudden reverse
of fortune discouraged the Syracufans, and Dionysius
having made a sally on the besiegers, and cut off a great
number of them, obliged the survivors to raise the siege,
and to disperse. Finding himself now superior to his
enemies, he sent word to those who had fled, that they
might peaceably return to the city, for he frankly for-
gave what had passed. Perceiving, however, that the
Syracufans were not to be trusted, he thought it ne-
ceffary to employ every precaution for his safety,
and therefore he took the opportunity of the enfu-
ing harvest to feizexon all their arms. Then he fit-
ted out a powerful fleet, enlilted a great number of so-
reign troops, and resolved to attempt some enterprise
that might increase his power. For this indeed he pof-
sessed all the requisite courage and ability. He quickly
reduced Naxus, Catana, and Leontium, and chastised
some of the neighbouring cities which had attempted to
oppose his progress.

Dionysius having now formed the design of ruining

the Carthagininn power in Sicily, began to make vast
preparations for putting his design in execution. In
the firit place, he enticed to Syracuse, by the means of
great encouragement, a multitude of workmen, Wkilful
in preparing every thing necessary for a powerful arma-
ment; and that their work might proceed with more
diligence and regularity, he eftablified proper infpec-
tors and overseers ; frequently bestowed with his own
hand considerable rewards on those who distinguished
themselves molt by their industry and flill; and used
to converse with them with great familiarity. All the
streets of Syracuse were thronged with artificers; and
nothing was to be heard but the noise of their work.
In a very short while, therefore, a prodigious quantity
of arms of every kind were prepared, and a great num-
ber of galleys built, some of three, some of five benches
gjf oars ; so that he fogn had a fleet of 200 galleys cornm

l, pletely

pictely fitted out; and a number of warlike engines cor-
responding to his other preparations.

After finishing his naval armament, Dionysius began

next to raise an army. The large pay offered by him
enticed soldiers to Syracuse from all quarters, particu-
larly from Greece; and Dionysius omitted no means
to gain the affe&ion of those soldiers. Of late indeed
he was become quite a new man in every refped. In-
Read of the cruel, imperious, and despotic tyrant, he
was now the humane, generous, merciful prince; and
his present condu& effaced all remembrance of his past
behaviour.

To remove as far as possible every obstacle to his

great design, he endeavoured to conciliate the friend-
ship of two powerful cities, Rhegium and Messina. Then
he bethought himself of providing an heir to his throne ;
and with that view contrated a double marriage; ta-
king to wife both Aritlomache the daughter of one of
the richest citizens of Syracuse, and Doris the daughter
of a Locrian of diftin&ion. Ariftomache was litter to
the famous Dion, for whom his brother-in-law soon
conceived such a high esteem and so strong a friendih-ip,
that he gave orders to furnish him with whatever money
he should demand. Dion was a man of a lofty, noble
foul, and had contrated a firong relifl for the philofo-
phy and conversation of Plato, who in the course of
his travels had halted some time at Syracuse. Dion
took all the opportunities that the great confidence and
credit reposed in him by Dionysius presented, to give
that prince such counsel as he thought he flood in
need of.

All the preparations for war being now finihled, Dio-

nyfius acquainted the Syracufans with his intentions of
declaring war against the Carthaginians; and at the
fame time laid before them his motives for so great an
undertaking; namely, that the Carthaginians had been
always the professed enemies of the Greeks ; and that

N n 4 both

both the honour and the interest of the Greek cities
called loudly for their deliverance from the yoke of bar-
barians. The Syracufans very highly applauded the
magnanimous intentions of Dionysius; immediately be-
gan hostilities, by putting to death and plundering the
effects of all the Carthaginians found in their city; and
dispatched a herald to Carthage to make a public decla-
ration of war. This piece of news greatly alarmed
the Carthaginians; who were the more affeQed by it,
that they had lately suffered much by a plague. They
were not, however, discouraged: but made preparations
for a vigorous defence.

Dionysius had already a powerful army on foot, a-

mounting to 8o,ooo foot and -0ooo horse, which was be-
fides daily increasing ; and his fleet consisted of 2oo gal-
leys. At the fight of so formidable an army, most of
the Carthaginian cities in Sicily voluntarily opened their
gates to the Syracufans; but some of them resolved to
sand a siege. On the other hand, the Carthaginian ge-
neral Imnilco, dispatched against Syracuse a finall fqua-
dron of ten galleys, which entering the harbour in the
night, deltroyed a good number of hips. Dionysius
was in the mean time employed in besieging Metya,
which made a very obstinate resistance. But having
taken it at lait, he put all the inhabitants to the iword,
and gave the city up to be plundered.

The Carthaginians assembled all their troops, advan-

ced towards Palermo with a land-army of 30,000o foot
and 4000 horse, and a fleet of 400 galleys. With these
p nverful forces Jnilco laid liege to Ieffina, and took it
after a very brave defence on the part of the besieged.
)Lionvfius, unable to make head against an army so much
fjperior to his own, was deserted by many of his allies,
and obliged to retreat to Syracuse. Having in the
mean tine levied frefli troops, Dionysius once more
took the field. Imilco having separated himself from his
lcer, IDionyfius gave orders to his admiral Leptinus im-

..--- "-'- mediately

mediately to attack the Carthaginian fleet; but this at-
tempt proved very unfortunate. Leptinus was fur-
rounded by the superior number of the Carthaginian
galleys; and Mago, who commanded them, cut in pie-
ces such of the Syracufans as endeavoured to save them-
selves by swimming. In this engagement, the Syracu-
fans loft more than lo,ooo men, and upwards of Ioa
galleys.

Dionysius, on receiving the news of this defeat, re-

turned in haste to Syracuse. Imilco, after spending
some time in resitting his fleet and allowing his army to
repose themselves, failed towards Syracuse, and entered
the harbour with an air of triumph; while his land ar-
my marched up to the city on the land fide, and offered
battle to the Syracufans, who dared not to accept the
challenge. imilco therefore meeting with no refinance,
laid waite the country, made himself master of the fu-
burb of Acradina, and prepared to besiege the city.
But while he lay encamped before Syracuse, Polyxenus
one of Dionysius's brothers-in-law, arrived to his assist-
ance with thirty ships. She byracufans thereupon re-
fume their courage, attack the Carthaginian fleet, and
after a (harp engagement take eighty of their galleys,
and re-enter their city in triumph.

Dionysius happened to be absent from the city, taking

measures for a proper supply of provisions, at the time of
this engagement. The Syracufans, emboldened by
their success, formed the design of shaking off the ty-
rant's yoke. But Dionysius arriving in the mean time,
congratulated with the Syracufans on their good for-
tune; and aflired them, that he would take such mea-
fures as should very soon bring the war to a happy con-
clufion. At the very time, however, that he was giving
them rhefe flattering hopes, one of the citizens named
Theodorzis, a man of a daring impetuous disposition,
flood up and made a speech to the affcmbly; wherein,
after describing to them in a lively manner the various

instances

intfances of tyranny committed by Dionysius, and the
cruel oppression under which he had made the Syracu-
fans to groan, he exhorted all present inltantly to assert
their liberty. But Pharacides the Lacedemonian, who
commanded the fleet, sanding up next, desired the assem-
bly to advert, that his countrymen had ient him thither
to aflift the Syracufans and Dionysius, not to make war
on Dionysius. This speech cooled the ardour of the
conspirators, and threw them into great consternation ;
for they did not doubt that Dionysius would very fpee-
dily make them feel the effets of his refentmcnt. But
they were happily miftakeh. Dionysius had already
learned, by experience, that severe measures tended ra-
ther to irritate than to reclaim ; and had resolved for
the future to endeavour to make himfelfto be beloved,
and not feared, by his fubjeas. On this occasion there-
fore he studied, by a mild and complaisant behaviour,
and by the force of presents, to gain the affection or
the people, even going so far as to invite several of them
to eat at his table.

The affairs of the Carthaginians were now in a very

bad situation, the plague having broken out in their ar-
my. The Syracufans taking advantage of this unhappy
circumstance, attacked them by sea and land, threw
them into the greareft disorder, funk many of their
ships, and hmade a dreadful fiaughter in their camp.
Imilco, desirous of saving the remains of his troops, of.
sered Dionysius a great fum of money for permiflion to
depart in peace with such of his ships and soldiers as yet
remained. But Dionysius refused to grant such per-
mission, except so far as regarded the natives of Car-
thage alone. Imilco therefore being obliged to leave
the reft behind, the Syracufans, the following night, a-
gain attacked the camp of the miferabie barbarians,
who finding themselves betrayed by Imilco, betook
themselves to flight, but were mostly cut in pieces by
the Syracufans. Thus was humbled the pride of the

Carthaginians,

Carthaginians, at the very time when they entertained
the most sanguine hopes of subduing the whole island of
Sicily.

Though the Carthaginians were now dispersed, and

quiet was thereby restored to Syracuse; yet Dionysius
was far from enjoying the general calm, living in con-
Rant dread of attempts against his life. As he distrust-
ed the foreign troops in his service, he placed them in
Leontium, and committed the care of his person to a
troop of slaves whom he had set at liberty.

It was about this time that the Gauls, who had lately

burnt Rome, sent ambassadors to make an alliance with
Dionysius, who happened then to be in Italy. Having
there gained a great victory over the Greeks of that
country, and taken many of them prisoners, Dionysius
set them all at liberty without ransom, and by that act of
generosity made so many firm and zealous friends of
them.

Dionysius entertained a violent resentment against the

inhabitants of Rhegium for the provoking answer they
had returned, when he begged of them to give him some
lady of their city to he his wife. They told his ambaffa-
dor, that they could let him have no other than the
daughter of their public executioner, who if he pleased
was at his service. In revenge, Dionysius laid siege to
their city. The besieged finding themselves unable to re-
fill him, proposed terms of'capitulation. But Dionysius
intending to ruin them entirely, refused to raise the
siege, except on condition of their paying him a fum, a-
mounting to nearly L. 8o,ooo Sterling ; of their deliver-
ing up to him all their ships; and of their putting into
his hands Ioo hoflages. After having by these means
disabled them from making any great refitance, he con-
trived iome pretence for attacking them anew the fol-
lowing year, when he again besieged their city. The
inhabitants perceiving that the tyrant aimed at nothing
less than their utter destruCtion, defended themselves

-witkh

with great obstinacy. But after fuflaining the siege for
eleven months, being at last reduced to al.1 the horrors

of famine they were forced to surrender at dif-
388. cretion. By this time the inhabitants were half

dead of hunger, and presented the most meagre

ghastly figures imaginable. Dionysius made 6000 of
them prisoners, and obliged such of them as had any
money or effecs remaining to pay him a ransom. But
his cruelty did not flop there. He resolved to take ven-
geance on Phyton the chief magistrate of the town for
the brave defence he had made. He therefore caused
the son of that gallant officer to be thrown headlong into
the sea in his father's fight; and then ordered the father
himself to be whipt through the town ; to be insulted in
the most flocking manner; and then to be thrown into
the sea likewise.

The extraordinary paflion of Dionysius for poetry and

the Belles Lettres has been particularly noticed by hifto-
rians who tell us, that he took great delight in the
conversation of men of genius, and was so remarkably fond
of the arts and sciences. So far, no doubt, his taste was
highly commendable. But he carried his love of poe-
try to a ridiculous height ; aftecting to compose himself
-without pofefiling any of the requisite talents; and dif-
covering greater joy at having written a few stupid ver-
fes, than at obtaining the most important viaory. It is
hardly poflible to carry this 1fecics of folly to a higher
pitch than Dionysius did. He employed his time in
composing tragedies, infited that his pieces should be
called excellent, and would susser no competitor on that
point. So that he may be said to have exercised his
tyranny even over the mind. For a man of his rank,
to imagine that his honour was concerned in being ac-
counted a fine poet, was certainly an inllance of folly
greatly to be pitied; and he surely did not reflect, that
si-me talents, lwhich are highly effimable in a private per-
.bn, may ill become a prince, especially if he piques

himself

himself on excelling in them. As all courts abound in
flatterers, Dionysius found mnany persons about his who
encouraged -his ridiculous vanity in this particular, by
bestowing the most extravagant encomiums on all his
poetical producions;

But not satisfied with being thought the best poet in

his own kingdom-, he desired that his fame might be
spread abroad; and for that purpose dispatched his bro-
ther Thearides to the Olympic games, to contend in his
name for the prize of poetry and of the chariot races;
that his merit in the poetical way might be publihfed in
that great aflembly of all the Greeks. But the success
was very far from answering his expectations. For
though his brother pitched on a man of a most agreeable
voice, and whho was very skilful at bestowing on verses
all the graces ofelocution, to re-ad the poems of.Diony-
fius, yet the audience quickly discovered their real me-
rit, hissed without ceremonyi those miserable compofi-
tions, and were very merry-at the expence of the poeti-
cal talents of Dionysius. Nor was he more fortunate in
his chariot-races. His horses being as unikilful in that
exercise as their nafter was in the art of poetry, ran on
with an ungovernable i-mpetuosity, and broke the cha-
riot in pieces against the goal.

The unfavoui-rable reception of:his poems at the Olym-

pic games by no -means cured 'Dionysius of his folly. He
believed hiri.felf-to be as excellent a poet as ever. His con-
ceit on this point was fo-extravagant, that it was not only
very dangerous for any person to censure his compofi-
tions, but even not to appear full of admiration when
he read them. In this refpe&t his courtiers perfecly
complied with his -humour. But he was one day tb
provoked at the.poet Philoxenes for declaring his ienti.
ments too freely -about one of his pieces, that he ordered
him to be thrown into prison. In consequence, how-
ever, of the earnest interceflion of all the firil people at
court, the honest poet was loon released from -his con-

finemenrt

finernent. Dionysius being extremely desirous of pro-
curing the approbation of his brother poet, insisted with
Philoxenus the very day he was set at liberty, when he
happened to be at table with him, to give his opinion
of what he esteemed his best piece. But Philoxenus,.
who was incapable of flattery, instead of answering Dio-
nyfius, addrefled himself to his guards, crying out

G Come, carry me back to the Qyarries ;" the name of the

public prison. The prince perceived the meaning of
these words; but restrained his anger, and ceased to urge
Philoxenus any farther.

The pafilon of Dionysius for composing increased

daily; and is said to have again sent some of his verses
to the Olympic.games; where they met with the fame
reception as the former. The news of this disgrace
threw him into a kind of fury, which he vented on some
of his belt friends, whom he accused of combining with
thole who had ruined his reputation; and he even put
several of them to death. To divert his uneasiness, he
refolvedto undertake some new expedition, which might
likewise procure him money to supply the expence of
the public works he was carrying on about the city and
harbour of Syracuse. He therefore formed a plan of
attacking Epirus, in the hopes of getting poffeflion of
the immense riches deposited in the temple of Dodona;
and he began with an invasion of Tuscany, where he
plundered a very rich temple. But he seems to have
proceeded no further in that enterprise. Afterwards he
made i veral attempts to drive the Carthaginians entire-
ly our o: Sicily; but w:is unsuccessful, for he loft a bat-
tle, which put an end to all his projets on that head.
He was, however, amply consoled for this misfortune
by the prize adjudged him by the Athenians for one of
his tragedies represented at some of their public feftivalso
This is a proof that Dionysius, by his unwearied appli-
eation to poetry, had at length arrived at some eminence
in that profession. The news of this success gave him

so

so much pleasure, that he resolved the whole city fliould
flare in it; and for that purpose he ordered public re-
joicings. He likewise gave a most magnificent feast on
the occasion to his friends; but in the height of his

joy, he eat and drank to such excess as brought
372. on a surfeit, whereof he died in a few days,

after a reign of thirty-eight years.

It cannot be disputed that Dionysius was an artful po-

litician and a brave commander. But his ambition and
his cruelty reflect great dishonour on his memory. He
showed himself on many occasions to be a man abfo-
lutely void of all religion; and seemed to. insult the gods
by the pleasantry with which he accompanied his facri-
legious ads. As he was one day plundering a temple
of Jupiter, a cloak of gold placed. on the latue of that
god having attra&ed his notice, he immediately ordered
it to be taken away ; faying, that such a cloak was too
heavy for summer and too cold for winter ; and he ordered
a woollen one to beput in its place, which he iaid was con-
venient for all seasons : he jelted in the fame manner on
the golden beard of Efculapius, which he likewise took
away; observing, that it was improper for the son of
Apollo to have a beard while his father was with-
out one. As the silver tables which he found in the
temples bore this inscription, " To the good gods," he
used to fay, that it was but just to profit, by their good-
ness. He even boasted of his impiety ; for Cicero tells
us, that as Dionysius was once returning with a fa-
vourable wind to Syracuse, after plundering the temple
of Proserpine at Locri, he desired his friends to obtfrve
"what a favourable voyage the gods bellowed on the
" impious !'

Dionysius paid very dear for his dignity and fovereiggn

power by the constant apprehension in which he lived.
To secure his life he had recourse to the moit extraor-
dinary precautions. Hifitory takes notice of foime of
those. MWe are informed, for example, that he always

wor-'CS

wore a coat of mail under his robe; and that he spoke
to the people of Syracuse from the top of a tower.
Hearing that his barber boasted of having permiflion to
put his razor on the tyrant's throat, he caused him to
be put to death, and obliged his own daughters to ihave
him. But when they were grown up, thinking it un-
safe to trutf the razor even in their hands, he found out
the expedient of singeing his beard with nut-shells. H-is
bed was surrounded by a wide and deep ditch, over
which was a draw-bridge; and every night, after care-
fully examining all the corners of his chamber, and pro-
perly securing the door, he uied to remove the draw-
bridge before retiring to reft. His treatment of Da-
mocles, who used to tell him that he was the happiest
man in the world, is well known. He desired him to
lit down at a table covered with the most magnificent
and delicate dishes, in a chamber filled with the sweetest
perfumes, where he was attended by a number of slaves
ready.to obey the finalleft signal; but behold, directly
above his head hung a naked sword by a single hair!
Could there in effect be a more lively image of the situ-
ation of a tyrant ? But it is fit to observe, that Diony-
flus took these extraordinary methods to secure his life
only in the beginning of his reign, and before his power
was firmly established, when alarmed by daily coiilpira-
cies. Afterwards he converted with his subjects in the
most open and familiar manner; and was always of easy
access to every body.

Dionysius the younger was the son of Dionysius the

elder by Doris of Locri. The Syracufans, now of a
long while acculsomed to fubjetion, admitted him
peaceably to assume the sovereign power that had been
enjoyed by his father, who, it must be acknowledged,
had rescued Sicily from the Carthaginian yoke, and had
greately augmented the naval strength of the Syracufans.
But the son was as peaceably disposed as the father had

been

been acive and enterprising, less indeed from wisdom
and moderation than from his natural indolence.

In the beginning of his reign, Dion, of whom we

have made some mention already, thought it his duty as
brother-in-law to the father to aiflf the son with his ser-
vice and counsel; and therefore offered to take the com-
mand of an expedition into Africa, to divert the storm.
with which the Carthaginians were threatening Sicily.
This propofil of Dion was by no means relished by the
other courtiers by whom he was envied and disliked;
A striking instance of a very general truth, that a man
at court is not always at liberty to do the good he de-
fires. Perhaps this maxim held more true at the court
of Dionysius than at any other. For it was composed
of a parcel of young debauchees, who studied to keep
that prince immersed in effeminacy and sloth, and
wholly employed in the most shameful pleasures. We
are told that fometimnes they would keep their young
prince engaged in an unintermitting icene of riot and
intoxication for months together. These courtiers prac-
tifed, therefore, every art to exasperate Dionysius against
Dion, whom they represented as an impertinent cenfu-
rer and a mil:anthrope. It is true, indeed, that Dion
was a man of a very stoical and auflere charater; and,
that his most intimate friends complained of the severity
of his temper. This did not, however, prevent him
from being highly efeemed oh account of his great abi-
lities and the superiority of his understanding. Dion
thought, that the mofl essential service he could at pre-
sent render either to his country or to his prince, was to
cultivate the understanding of Dionysius; who, though
his education had been much neglected, was not void of
parts. He fludied therefore to inspire him with just ideas
of virtue, honour. and the other most important duties
of life; and to conned him with men of genius and in-
tegrity, who might inftrud him in an agreeable man.
ner, and as it were by tealth. Dion began this com.

D0 a iiendable

mendable work with giving Dionysius a very advanta-
geous account of the fine parts of Plato, at that time in
great renown, describing him not only as a man of won-
derful genius, but as a most agreeable companion, and
a profound ftatefinan. By these means he inspired Dio-
nyfius with an earnef desire to be acquainted with that
excellent philosopher.

Dionysius accordingly dispatched several messengers

to invite the philosopher to his court. But Plato, who
was not ignorant of that prince's real charater, was ex-
tremely backward to comply with this invitation, from a
belief that his lessons would have but little effeEt upon
him.-Dion at last, who had been a scholar of the phi-
lofopher's, was obliged to join his request to that of the
prince; and he showed Plato so clearly the great need
in which Dionysius flood of his inflrudions, that he at
lafi consented to undertake the journey, and accordingly
set out for Sicily. Dionysius received the philosopher
with every mark of honour and refpet; and treated
him with the greatest kindness. A wife prince cannot
indeed put too high a value on a man capable of in-
ftrueting him in his duty, and of telling him the truth.
The poffcftion of such a man is a treasure of ineitimable
value.

Plato assiduously applied himself to fulfil the business

for which he had come into Sicily; and by his mild and
insinuating behaviour soon gained the confidence of Di-
onyfius, inspired him with a love of virtue, and made
him sensible how unworthy his past conduct had been of
a king, who ought to be uniformly employed about the
happiness of his people. Ais inclinations, therefore,
took a different turn, and he now fludied nothing so
much as to be acquainted with his duty. Capable at
-.ngth of diftinguifling men of genius, he took no plea-
sure in any other company; and from the conversation
of such men, he soon learned several of the most va-
luable branches of knowledge. His courtiers, a set of

nB

men who apply themselves principally to copy after their
master, quickly followed his example; by which means
the fludy of arts and sciences became the reigning taste
at the court of Dionysius. [hat prince,' contracting in-
sensibly the habit of refleEtion, employed his attention
about the duties of royalty; and for that purpose ap-
plied himself to the study of history, which furnished
him with many examples of princes who had excelled
both in the science and in the pracical part likewise of
government.

The courtiers were not alarmed while Dionysius con-

fined himself to the study of the sciences. But percei-
ving, that in conformity with the lessons of Plato, he had
resolved to discharge the duties of his station himself,
and to examine every thing by the rules of his own
judgenent, they began to dread his becoming too clear-
fighted, and therefore exerted their utmnolt efforts to
bleak off his intercourse with Plato. They, in the first
place, openly declared their suspicion, that a design was
formed of inspiring him with a love of philosophy, to
give him a disgust at the crown; insinuating that Dion
would not be displeased to advance to the regal dignity,
in his place, one of his nephews, sons of the late king
by his filter Ariftomache. They next endeavoured to
depreciate Plato in the opinion of Dionysius, telling him,
that the philosopher studied to acquire an unbecoming
ascendant over him; and that he engaged him in a
course of life unsuitable to his rank and to his years;
and laflly, to render Dion fufpeded, they advised hint
to take measures for the security of his throne and life.

These, and many other insinuations of the fame kind,

had but too great an effect on the weak mind of Diony-
flus, and soon rendered him extremely suspicious. Ha-
ving so far gained their point, the courtiers, to complete
their design, next put in practice a moil abominable in-
poflure, by forging letters in the name of Dion to the
Carthaginian ambassadors, advising the ambafiadors;

0 o whten

when they had a mind to treat with Dionysius, to call
him, Dion, to aflift at the conferences, becauie he
could be of service in procuring them a more advanta-
geous and durable peace. These letters having been
secretly shown to Dionysius, were to him sufficient evi-
dence againit Dion, whom he ordered to be immediate.

ly apprehended and carried to Italy. These or-
372. ders were punaually executed.-Dion appear-

ing a little while after in the Pcloponnefe, all

his money and effects to a very confie;rable amount
were, by permission of the tyrant, sent thither to him by
his rclations.

Dionysius next desired Plato to remove to the citadel,

under pretence of doing him honour, but in reality to
prevent his following Dion. For, according to Plutarch,
th;it prince entertained a fort of tyrannical regard for
Piato, desiring to engross his whole affection himself,
and unwilling that the philosopher should esteem Dion
more than him. A war breaking out about this time
againit Dionysius, very luckily furnished Plato with a
plausible pretext for deiiring to be lent back to Greece.
Dionysius at taking leave pressed him to accept of ma-
ny valuable presents, which, however, the philosopher
obstinately refused.

As Plato was returning, on this occasion, to his na-

tive country, he happened at Olympia to fall in with
certain foreigners, among whom he lodged for tome
time. Though the philosopher told them his name on
their first meeting, the foreigners, from his plain unaf-
sected behaviour and converlation, were far from sus-
peding that he was.the famous Plato, of whom they had
heard such extraordinary things. l'is isa very striking
proof of the fingul.ir modeity of ilato, and plainly
hilows us, that he was far from making a parade of
his knowledge, or of agitating in common conversation
any of the queilions handied by him in the academy.
But on the present occasion his ielf-love was amply re-

compenfed;

compenfed; for these foreigners having accompanied
him to Athens, and lodged for some time in his house,
at last begged the favour of him to introduce them to
the celebrated philosopher of his name. Plato then
finding it impoflible to conceal himself any longer, told
them, smiling, that he himself was the man whom they
desired so much to know.

Dion having gone to live some time at Athens, ap-

plied himself diligently to the itudy of philosophy, and
contracted an intimate friendship with the philofbpher
Speufippus. the nephew and scholar of Plato, a man who
knew perfectly well how to unite the purest principles
of philosophy with the ease and politeness of common
life.

Dion, while at Athens, defrayed the expence of the

public games, which it fell to Plato's turn to exhibit.
He afterwards visited several other of the cities of
Greece, fiudying by all means to cultivate the acquaint-
ance and conversation of such of the citizens as were
best acquainted with the nature of the constitution of
each particular slate; and he was every where received
with the highest marks of diftintdion.

Dionysius, apprehensive left Plato, on his departure,

should depreciate him in the opinion of the Greeks, in-
vited to his court the molt learned men of Italy, in or-
der to faow that he fill retained his love of letters.
With those Italian literati he afftSed to hold frequent
conversations; in which he took every opportunity to
display his own learning, by repeating the lessons he had
received from Plato on various fubjets of philosophy.
But his flock was soon exhausted. Senfille now, by
experience, of the advantages he had derived from the
society of Plato, he grew very desirous of prevailing on
that philosopher to return to court, and pradifed every
means for that effect.

Dionysius wrote to all his acquaintance, and, among
the reft, even to Dion himself, intreating them to use

03 their

their endeavours to persuade Plato to gratify his desire
of another visit from him; and Plato at last was pre-
vailed on, though with the utmost reluctance, to comply
with his request. 1 doubt the behaviour of that cele-
brated philosopher may not in this infance appear al-
together so prudent as from his charader might have
been expeEted. Two galleys were dispatched by Dio-
nyfius to bring Plato to Syracuse ; where, as soon as
he arrived, that prince treated him with all imaginable
respect, and made him his principal confident. But
Plato zealous to effeCt the recal of Dion, which Dio-
nyfius had previoully engaged to grant, began to urge
that fubjeet, and prefied it on several different occasions;
but Dionysius as often declined, under various pre-
tences, to comply with his desire. This behaviour
quickly produced a mifunderfanding between the
prince and the philosopher; but both were careful to
conceal their real sentiments from the world. At lat,
however, Dionysius, unable to restrain himself any
longer, ordered all the lands belonging to Dion to be
fold, and applied the price of them to his own ule.
Then he commanded lodgings to be provided for Plito
wihthour the caltle, and among the guards, to whom the
phil,.)pher wVs very ooilnoxius, on account of his fre-
quent exhortations to Dionysius to dififs them, and
to renounce the tyranny. Plato, perceiving that his
lile was now in danger, made earncit applications for
XLave to return to Greece; which at lait he was ha;ppy
enough to obtain. Dionysius, deprived of the wife
counells of that admirable philooplher, returned by de-
grees to his former life; and his court very soon became
tne residence of diflipation and riot.

Dion hearing that the tyrant had fold his poffcffions,

and had so treacherously broken his promise, openly
proclaimed his resentment, and reollved to punish him
by force of arms. To this he was warmly urged by
the Syracufns, who irtreated himl to come to their re-

lief

Ties; and aflured him, that the whole city would join
him as soon as he should make his appearance among
them. Dion therefore privately enlisted about 8oo
foreign troops, all hardy veterans, completely armed;
embarked them at different times, and in small parties,
and fixed on the island of Zacinthia as the place of gene-
ral rendezvous. The historian who has related this en-
terprife, justly observes, that it was one of the most da-
ring that could well be imagined. It is truly amazing,
that a man with no more than two transports, and 8oo
soldiers, {hould venture to attack a prince supported by
a navy of 400 ships of war, an army of io,0oo men, a
vast quantity of warlike stores and provisions, and who
was sovereign of one of the strongest cities then in the
world.

Dion having landed at Minoa, a small town in Sicily,

to refresh himself and his soldiers after the fatigue of
the voyage, was informed, that Dionysius was then
absent from Syracuse, and had undertaken an expedi-
tion towards the coast of Italy, attended by 80 galleys.
His soldiers thereupon immediately dtfired to be led
directly to Syracuse. The news of his arrival having
spread abroad, his finall army was greatly increased in
its march ; and on his arriving within half a league of
the city, he found himnfeif at the head of about 5000
men. The most considerable citizens went out to meet,
and to conduc him into the city; and the populace
tore in pieces those infamous creatures of the tyrant
who had served him as spies and informers.

Dion entered Syracuse at the head of his army drawn

up in battle array ; attended by his brother Megacles on
the one hand, and by the Athenian Callipus on the
other. He immediately ordered the Syracufans to be
informed, by public proclamation, that he and his bro-
ther were come to deliver them, and all the inhabitants
of Sicily, from slavery and tyranny; and mounting an
Eminence he made them a speech, exhorting them to

0 0 4 exert

exert their utmost efforts for the recovery of their liber.
ty. l'he Syracufans named him and his brother com-
manders in chief, with sovereign authority.

Dionysius having returned soon after, and entered

the citadel from the sea, the Syracufans inftently took
arms. The tyrant thinking his aftfairs desperate, sent
ambazTadors to treat with Dion and the Syracufans;
who returned for answer, That before they would liften
to any proposals he mult abdicate the tyranny. Divers
conferences having ensued upon that subjet, Dionysius
endeavoured to protract them as much as poflible, that
he might have time to concert proper measures; and at
last he took a convenient opportunity to make a sudden
attack upon the wall with which the enemy had fur-
rounded the citadel. The Syracufans, who guarded that
post, seized with a panic at the suddenness of the attack,
betook themselves to flight. Dion advancing in great
haste to the place, used his utmost endeavours to rally
his soldiers, but in vain. Throwing himself, however,
into the midlt of the enemy, he made a dreadful llaugh-
ter of them. But his courage urging him too far, he
was wounded in the hand, thrown down, and with
difficulty rescued by his soldiers out of the midit of the
tyrant's men. As his wound was not dangerous, he in-
ftantly rian in quett of his foreign troops, who were in
Acradina, and led them on to the charge. Tlefe be-
ing :ill well difkiplined veteran soldiers, made a vigorous
atr:,ck on the troops of Dionysius, already fatigued by
the engagemcnt, cut in pieces the greatest part of them,
ant' put the rel to flight.

Di)onysius, alarmed at this victory of Dion, sent him

letters, by a herc. l, .so artfully and maliciously expressed,
as .o cre.-tc suspicions among the Syracufans, of their
having rt:pofed too high an authority in Dion. The
Syracuilaii; fell into the fiare. Forgetting, at once, all
the important services performed by Dion for their ad-
-Vantage, they gave credit to the injurious insinuations

I, . ..* * *
*o -

of the tyrant. In these circumstances, Heraclides, one
of the banished citizens, arrived at Syracuse with seven
vessels, to aflift his countrymen against Dionysius. He-
raclides was a man of great bravery, and of an infiinua-
ting address; but secretly an enemy of Dion, by whose
evil genius he seemed to have been, at this critical time,
conduted to Syracuse, to throw a thousand obstacles in
the way of that great man, and to obscure the glory of
his actions.

Heraclides, immediately on his arrival, was, by the

Syraculans, created high admiral of their fleet; and tho9
he openly behaved to Dion with great respect and de-
ference, yet he laboured under hand to prepofefs the
people against him, and gave a malicious interpretation
to all his aations, Dionysius, in the mean time, off:red
to Dion to deliver up the citadel, together with the
troops, arms, and every thing else contained in it, if
the Syraculans would permit him to retire in peace to
Italy, and allow him the revenue of certain lands for
his fubfitLence. These terms having been rejrcted by
the Syracufalns, Dionysius soon after took the opportu-
nity of a favourable wind to set fail for Italy, with all
his treasures and nmolt valuab.le effeis, comnmitting the
defence of the citadel to his ion Apollodorus.

As soon as the flight of Dionylius was known, 1T-era-

clides proposed, in the public afl-mbly, to make a new
distribution of the lands belonging to the city. But
this proposal being opposed by Dion, the Syracufans
were further confirmed in their unjust fuLpicions of
him; and no longer setting any bounds to their ingra-
titude, they trampered with the forcign troops to induce
them to abandon Dion. But these foreigners, far more
faithful to their commander than his own countrymen,
for whom he had performed such important services,
reje&ed their proposals, and throwing themselves round
Dion, resolved to convey him fately out of the city.
Dion, extending his arms, used the amoft asseting gef.

rtures,

ftures, to move the compassion of his fellow-citizens.
But perceiving all his intreaties to be ineffetdual, and
dreading left outrage might succeed to ingratitude, he
ordered his troops to march with very close ranks, and
like men prepared to attack their enemies. Dion, after
escaping in this mauner from Syracuse, took refuge
among the Leontines, who received him with much
kindness and humanity.

The soldiers of the tyrant being, in the mean time,

extremely harassed by famine, were on the point of de-
livering up the citadel to the Syracufans. But Nipfius
arriving with supplies of corn and other provisions
from Dionysius, they altered their resolution, and re-
solved to continue the defence of the citadel. The Sy-
racufans, manning their galleys, attacked the fleet of
Nipfius, and funk several of his ships. Elated with this
success, they gave themselves up to rejoicing and de-
bauchery, disregarding the admonitions of their com-
manders, who warned them of their danger. Nipfius,
informed of what was pafling, seized the wall that fur-
rounded the citadel, and dispatched his troops into the
city, with permifion to pillage it. The soldiers attack
all that come in their way, murder the citizens, plun-
der their houses, and commit a thousand disorders.

The Syracufans, in this extremity, feeing no other ie-

medy to their misfortunes than the recalling of Dion,
sent him deputies, who, throwing themselves in tears at
his feet, implore his assistance. We mould at firfm ima-
gine, that Dion, on this occasion, would be inexorable,
and justly tell the Syracufans, that they merited their
present sufferings. But the foul of Dion was superior
to such sentiments. He received the deputies'very kind-
ly; and moved both by the miseries of his fellow-citi-
zens, and by the intreaties of his foreign troops, he
marched without delay to Syracuse. Nipfius, informed
of his coming, made a second irruption into the town,
which produced the fame murders and disorders as be-

fore ,

fore; and, to complete the destruction of the city, the
soldiers of Nipfius set fire to it in several places, whereby
many houses were conlumed.

Such was the situation of things when Dion arrived

at Syracuse. Immediately drawing up his troops in or-
der of battle, and dividing them into finall parties, he
entered the city, ahd marched against the enemy amid
the most joyful fiouts of the inhabitants, who hailed
him, as he went along, as their deliverer. After leading
his soldiers through the itreets, surrounded with flames,
he at Lift reached the enemy ; who ieeing the Syraculhns
on the point of being revenged on them by the means of
Dion, were animated with rage and despair. But the
soldiers of Dion, encouraged by the shouts of the inha-
bitants, made a most vigorous attack on the troops of
Nipfius, who were entrenched near the wall that fur-
rounded the citadel, forced their entrenchments, killed
the greatest part of them, and obliged the reft to fly for
refuge to the citadel. The remaining part of the night
was employed by the Syracufans in extinguishing the
flames.

Next day, the fiiends of Dion endeavoured to per-

fuade him to take vengeance on his enemies, and par-
ticularly on Heraclides; who, instigated by the blackest
malice, had been principally instrumental in ilirring up
his countrymen againit him. But that great man, who
was superior to all motives.of revenge, told them, that
during his long residence in the academy, he had learnt
to subdue his passions ; and that the surest mark of this
important victory, was to behave with humanity and
forgiveness towards those by whom we are injured.

Then he employed both the Syracufans and his fol-

diers to throw up a strong palifado around the citadel.
The Syracufns again elected him generalissimo: and
Heraclides, unable to remain in quiet, recommenced
his cabals against Dion. But all his malicious attempts
proved abortive,

The

The siege of the citadel being warmly pressed by Di-

on, the garrison grew mutinous for want of provisions,
and forced the son of Dionysius, by whom they were
then commanded, to capitulate; who, after delivering
up the citadel, with all the warlike flores within it, to
Dion, embarked, together with his mother and fiiers,
on board of five galleys, and failed in quelt of his father.
Dion found his wife Arete in the citadel; and their
meeting, after so long a separation, was most affedion-
ate and tender. Then he very generously rewarded
those who had fought onehis fide, proportioning his re-
wards to the merit and rank of each.

Thus did Dion restore her ancient liberty to Syra-

cufe. The fame of this revolution having quickly
spread over all Greece, and reached even to Carthage,
Dion was ranked with the wilett and moit successful
commanders. But this great man, amidst all his glory,
and while even Plato himielf was writing him that the
eyes of the whole earth were fixed on him as the fuc-
cefsful champion of liberty, frill retained his former mo-
defty and simplicity.

Dion proposed to establish, at Syracuse. the ariflo-

cratical form of government. But Heraclides perfiiting
in his seditious practices, and fl udving to gain. by every
means, the favour of the multitude, resolved to oppose
this design. Dion, perceiving that there would be no
end to dissentions and troubles in the city while Hera-
clides was alive, consented to the urgent remonllrances
of his friends, to have that fatious man assassinated.
But Dion is said to have felt so severe remorse for having
given his consent to the murder of Heraclides, that
thenceforward his tranquillity entirely deserted him, and
le funk into the deepest melancholy; which was still
further heightened by the death of his favourite son,
which happened soon after.

Callipus, an Athenian, a man of a most ambitious
Vifpofition, had conceived the design of making himself

! mailer

master of Syracuse. But perceiving that he could never
succeed in his projeEt while Dion was alive, he reiolved
to have that worthy patriot murdered, though he had
formerly lived in very intimate friendship with him. For
that purpose, he contrived means to get some
Zacynthian soldiers admitted into the house of 356.
Dion, who was murdered by them in his bed.
Immediately afterwards Ariftomache, the sifter of Dion,
and widow of the elder Dionylius, and Arete the wife
of Dion, were seized by Icetas the Syracufan, a man in
theinterefts of Callipus, were thrown into prison, and
soon after, by the influence of the fame Callipus, were
drowned in the sea.

Callipus enjoyed but a short while the fruits of his

villany. For though he got poffellion of Syracuse, and
exercised the sovereign power for- the space of a year;
yet having marched out of the city to lay siege to
Catana, the Syracufans took the opportunity of his ab-
fence to shake off his yoke: and the report of his crime
having spread over all Sicily, he became every where an
objed of detestation. Hipparinus, the brother of the
younger Dionysius, arriving, in the mean time, at Sy-
racufe, with a fleet and a considerable body of troops,
destroyed all the hopes of Callipus in that city, and go-
verned the inhabitants with despotic sway for the space
of two years. at last, by a just effec of pro-vidence,
which, sooner or later, puninhes the wickedness of men,
Callipus was put to deatii by Poliiperchon.

The most diltinguithing features of Dion's characer

were, his elevated fcntimnents ; his bravery; his ex-
tensive genius, equal to the greatelt and boldest un-
dertakings; his unshaken attachment to the real in-
terests of his country; and, above all, his singular
generosity, which induced him to forgive the ungrati-
tude of the Syracufans, for whom he had performed the
most efflntial services, and once more cheerfully to ex-
pose his life in order to restore their liberty. On the

whole

whole Dion, was, so far as we know, the greatest man
that ever Sicily produced, and deserves to be ranked
with the firit characters even of Greece. It is, however,
proper to remark, that he- had a severity and obltinacy
in his disposition, which is extremely inconvenient in
those who meddle in the public affairs of a popular go-
vernment, where a mild insinuating behaviour is ne-
ceffary for managing the minds of the multitude.

The space from the commencement of'the tyranny of

Dionysius the elder to the death of Dion, comprehends
about fifty years.

Dionysius the younger hearing that Syracuse was dif-

tradted by facions, thought the opportunity favourable
for his attempting once more to assert his rights. With
that view, having hired some foreign troops, he return-

ed to Syracuse, after a ten years absence; ex-
350. pelled Nypfius, who happened to be then in

poffeilon of the iovereign power; and remount-

ed the throne. Though his palt misiortunes might have
taught him to behave with miore moderation for the fu-
ture, yet he oppressid his fubjets more cruelly than
ever. The Syracufans, exasperated by his rigorous ty-
ranny, implored relief of icetas king of the Leontines,
whom they chote for their general, But the Carthagi-
nians about this time having invaded Sicily with a power-
ful fleet, made so rapid a progress, that the Syracufans
were obliged to apply for affiltance to the Corinthians
These republicans, naturally enemies to tyranny, and
strongly attached to Syracuse, from the consideration
of its being one of their earliest colonies, resolved to
support them, and pitched on Timoleon, a man con-
fiderably advanced in years, but an excellent general,
to command the troops which they intended to fend to
Sicily.

'Timoleon was then living extremely retired, and op-

pressed with melancholy and grief, occasioncd by the
following incident. His elder brother Timophanes, for

whom

whom he entertained a firong affection, having made
himself tyrant of Corinth, Timoleon was extremely
grieved at his conduct, and to induce him to renounce
his sovereignty, employed every motive and argument
that friendship or affection could suggest. But these
proving ineffectual, he proceeded even to threats. All,
however, was to no purpose. At last the love of his
country prevailing over the ties of blood, Timoleon re-
solved to have his brother assassinated. With this view
he demanded another conference with Timophanes,
wherein he repeated in the most asseting manner all his
former arguments; but feeing him obstinate, he burst
into tears, and covering his face with his cloak, the as-
faffins immediately dispatched the.tyrant. At first this
action was praised as the utmost effort of patriotism and
virtue; but afterwards it came to be confidered as a
most cruel and unnatural murder. Timoleon, there-
fore, was tormented with the most bitter remorse, which
was heightened by the conflant reproaches of his mo-
ther. DitfraCted with sorrow, he resolved to put an
end to his life; and it was with the greatest difficulty
that his friends diverted him from this desperate purpose.
Yielding, however, at last to their remonstrances, he
retired to the country, and for twelve years lived in the
deepelt solitude. But having been at length persuaded
to return to Corinth, he received the command of the
troops destined for Sicily.

Icetas, in the mean time, hearing of the preparations

making by the Corinthians for the relief of the Syracu-
fans, was base enough to betray the latter, and to make
an agreement with the Carthaginians, who engaged to
raise him to the sovereignty of Syracuse after the ex-
pulfion of Dionysius should be effected. Icetas at the
fame time sent the Corinthians word, that having de-
fpaired of Timoleon's coming, he had prevailed with
the Carthaginians to assist him. The Corinthians, sus-
peting his treachery, haflened the departure of Timo-

leon

leon with ten galleys. Timoleon, on landing in Sicily,
received intelligence, that Icetas had defeated Diony-
fius, and that the Carthaginians were making difpofi-
tions for preventing him and the Corinthian troops from
entering Syracute. This intelligence proved true; for
they had dispatched twenty galleys to Rhegiur to op-
pose his advancing. Timoleon therefore was under the
neceflity, either of hazarding an engagement with his
slender army against an enemy twice as numerous, or
of permitting Icetas quietly to re;,p the fruits of his
teachery, and to assume the foverciguty of Syracuse.

Timoleon having, by the interceslion of the people of

Rhegium, who wiihed well to his caule, obtained a con-
ference with the Carthaginian commanders, amused
them with various proposals, to gain time till his galleys
had passed the Carthaginian fleet, and were out of all
danger of being intercepted. Then Timoleon broke off
the conference, and soon came up with his galleys. Ice-
tas, who was then master of the city, and kept Diony-
fius blocked up in the citadel, hearing of Timoleon's
arrival, assembled all the Carthaginian forces, confit-
ing, as is reported, of 150 ships, 5o,ooo infantry, and
300 armed chariots. The whole army of Timoleon a-
mounted to no more than 2000o men.

Things were in this situation when the inhabitants-of

Adrana, a imall city of Sicily, having quarrelled among
themselves, one of the facions fided with Icetas and
the other with Timoleon. The Carthaginians hearing
of this, difpatcned 5000 men to Adrana. But just as
these troops arrived, and were busy forming their camp,
Timoleon with his fmnall army suddenly attacked them,
put them to flight killed 300 of them, and. took posses-
lion of their camp. The Adranites immediately opened
their gates to the conqueror; and Dionysius hearing of
Timoleon's success, Tent him word, that he was resolved
to surrender himself to the Corinthians, and to put them
in p0ffefiion of the citadel. 'imoleon accordingly con-

trived

trived to throw 400 men into the citadel by night, who
were by Dionysius put in possession of all his warlike
stores, and reinforced by looo men, who yet remained
in his service; after which the tyrant went on board of a
ship, arrived at the Corinthian camp, and was by Ti-
moleon sent to Corinth.

The arrival of Dionysius at that city afforded

an agreeable ihow to the inhabitants; who, from 347.
their violent hatred of tyranny, were delighted to
fee a man debased from the rank of a prince to that of
a private gentleman. The mean behaviour of Dionysius
rendered him still more contemptible: for he passed the
day in taverns in the company of sots and drunkardso
Here we have a striking instance of the extraordinary
vicissitudes of human affairs. Dionysius, bred in the
midst of opulence, was at last reduced to the most ex-
treme poverty; and after being sovereign of a very
powerful people, ended his days in the station of a
schoolmaster. Perhaps, fays Cicero jesting, being un-
able to live without exercising government, he chose to
exert his authority over a parcel of boys instead of a
great nation.

Icetas in the mean time used his utmoff efforts to re-

duce the citadel, and was extremely attentive to pre-
vent the tarrival of any reinforcement from Timoleon.
But in his absence Leon, who commanded in the cita-
del, made a rally on the troops left before it by Icetas,
killed many of them, and took possession of Acradina.
Timoleon, on the other hand, receiving a reinforce-
ment from Corinth, eluded the vigilance of the Cartha-
ginian galleys, took Messina, and then advanced to-
wards Syracuse with no more than 4000 men. In the
mean time he employed proper persons to tamper with
the soldiers of Icetas; to labour to impress them with
the idea of its being disgraceful in Sicilians to expoie
their lives in fubjeaing their native country to the yoke
of the Carthaginians, who had always llown themselves

P p t

to be their inveterate enemies; and to assure them, that
if Icetas could be persuaded to join Timoleon, the Car-
thaginians, by their joint -efforts, might be very soon
totally expelled from Sicily. These reports-reaching the
ears of Mago the Carthaginian general, he thought
Ilimfelf betrayed; and in spite of the remonstrances of
Icetas, embarked with his troops for Africa.

Ti-moleon, thus freed from the Carthaginians,
346. attacked, the day after their departure, the city

of Syracuse on three different fides, and with

such success, that the troops of Icetas were put to flight,
and the city was taken on the first aflault without the
loss of a single Corinthian. As soon as tranquillity was
restored in the city, Tin-oleon convinced the Syracu-
fans of the necessity of demolishing the citadel, which
he called the tyrant's nefZ. In compliance with his ad-
vice, all the fortifications, together with the palaces of
both the Dionysiuses, were in a few days levelled with
the ground.

Timoleon perceiving that Syracuse, by its intestine

commotions and its wars with the Carthaginians, was
in a great measure depopulated, ordered proclamation
to be made through all Greece, that liberty being now
reitored to Syracuse, every person who inclined to go
thither to fettle, should receive a proportion of the lands
belonging to the city equal to that of the natives of the
city of the fame rank. In consequence of this procla-
mation, a new colony of Greeks, amounting to 60,ooo
fouls, quickly arrived at Syracuse. The behaviour of
Timoleon on this occasion is truly admirable; for he
preferred the honour of being the restorer of Syracuse
to that of being its king. After distributing the lands,
he fold by auction all the flatues that had belonged to
the tyrants.

But desirous of totally rooting tyranny out of Sicily,

he led his troops against Icetas; obliged him to re-
nounce his alliance with the Carthaginians, and to de-

Il molifli

molifh all the catles and forts in his poffeflion. Having
thus reduced him to the Rfation of a private man, he
sent him to Corinth. He used Leptinus tyrant of A-
pollonia in the fame manner.-Having successfully ac-
compli{hed these undertakings, he returned to Syracuse,
and applied himself to establish good laws, and to en-
force the observance of them.

But more laurels were still reserved for him in the

fields of Mars. The Carthaginians again invaded Sicily
with a fleet of 200 ships and 70,000 men, under the
command of Hamilcar and Hasdrubal, and landed near
the promontory of Lilybeum. Timoleon immediately
marched against them with an army of no more, as is re-
ported, than 6000 men; and surprising them at the de-
file of Crimefus, attacked them in flank, while a dread-
ful storm of lightening and rain suddenly arising, com-
pleted their disorder. Timoleon taking advantage of
their consternation, penetrated their ranks with great
slaughter, put them to flight, and took 15,ooo prison-
ers, with an immense booty. The number of killed
on the fide of the Carthaginians is said to have been
13,000

Timoleon, on returning to Syracuse, put the finishing

hand to his laws and regulations. But he was soon as-
ter obliged once more to take the field against the Car-
thaginians ; who had invaded the island anew at the in-
fligation of the tyrants of Catana and Meflina, per-
fuaded to that measure by Icetas. But the event of this
expedition was even more unfortunate for the Carthagi-
nians than that of the former: Timoleon, to cut off
the evil at its source, went in pursuit of Icetas ; and ha-
ving taken him, caused his head to be struck off. Thus
was avenged the murder of Dion's wife and fitter, put
to death, as we have mentioned above, by this seditious
man Icetas. This train of fuccels gave the Carthagi-
nians so high an opinion of Timoleon, that they sued to
him for peace.

T'imoleon,

Timoleon, after extinguiflhing tyranny in every city

of Sicily, and completing the great work of reformation
in the government of Syracuse, resigned all authority,
and reduced hinfelf to the rank of a private citizen.
Removing oIon after to the country with his wife and
children, he p.issed the remaining part of his life in re-
tirement, enjoying the secret fatisfacion of having re-
flored liberty and quiet to all the cities of Sicily.

Some years before his death he became blind. The

Syracufans, full of affection and. refpea for their deli-
verer, uled, by way of consolation for that misfortune,
to pay him frequent visits, and to carry him in a chair
to the theatre, where his presence excited universal ac-
clamations from the fpeEators. His funeral was ce-
lebrated at the public expence; and the Syracufans
established annual rejoicings in honour of his memory.
Of all the great men of Greece Timoleon is perhaps the
only one who, satisfied with his success, pursued the
proper course for avoiding the ingratitude of his fellow-
citizens, and ended his days in tranquillity and peace.

Timoleon poifeffed all the qualifications of a great ge.

neral, and a disinterested attachment to the public wel-
fare. Cornelius Nepos mentions a circumfiance that
refleEts additional lustre on all his other great qualities.
'When any person happened in his presence to expatiate
in encomiums on his wisdom, his bravery, and the glo-
ry he had acquired in having humbled so many tyrants,
Timoleon uscd to answer, that he most sincerely thanked
bte gods for choofiig him preferably to any other general,
as the initrument of their great goodness, in restoring
3-berty and quiet to Sicily; being firmly persuaded, adds
the fame historian, that no human event is brought a.
bout but by the immediate interposition of the gods
A sentiment worthy of the most enlightened Chriflian.

The liberty reflored by Timoleon to Syracuse
31 9. was but of thort duration. Agathocles possessed

bhimfelf of the fopreme power in that city; and

behaved

behaved with the molt shocking cruelty, never hefita-
ting at the greatest crimes. This Agathocles undertook
the molt daring enterprise recorded in history. Being
unable to make head againrf the Carthaginians, who
were carrying every thing before themn in Sicily, and
were warmly besieging Syracuse itself, he boldly left his
own country, carried the war into the dominions of
Carthage in Africa, reduced the firongeft towns, and
laid waste the country. After a great variety of events,
in the course of which Agathocles had left Africa, and
had given the command there to another person, he
again returned thither himself; but finding all his con-
quests loft, he was obliged to fly to Syracuse. There,
too, his ill fortune attended him; for the Syracufans
had taken the advantage of his absence to revolt. All
his projeEts being thus ruined, he ended his days in a
manner worthy of his crimes.

The Syracufans after this enjoyed for some time the

sweets of liberty; but were much harafed by the Car-
thaginians, who persecuted them with continual wars,
and obliged them to call to their aliftance Pyrrhus king
of Epire. That prince was very successful against their
enemies; but other affairs soon carried him from their
country.

Upon the departure of Pyrrhus, the Syracufans crea.

ted Hiero chief magistrate, and afterwards be-
stowed on him both the title and the power of 26S.
king. Hiero was successful against the Cartha-
ginians, and enjoyed a very long and peaceable reign:

Hieronymus succeeded Hiero, but reigned only a

year. On his death nothing but confusion prevailed in
Syracuse. Andranadorus the fon-in-law of Hiero seized
on the island and citadel. The senate sent, deputies to
treat with him; and he agreed to submit. But at the
instigation of his wife, a woman of a most ambitious
spirit, he entered into a conspiracy with Themiftes for
raising himself to the throne. The conspiracy having

P p 3 been

been discovered, the conipirators were put to death by
order of -he magistrates. The people hearing of their
design, were in(tantly seized with the molt ungovern-
able fury. crying out, that the race of tyrants ought to
be totally extirpated. A fceue of horror ensued; from
which we may conceive of what exccffis an enraged
multitude is capable. They firt mrurdered Demarata
the daughter of ch.ir lree king, an, wife of Andrano-
do'us, together wic H.irnlomila the wife of Theliftes&.
then they ran to the house of feraclea wife of Zoipus;
and, deaf to the tears and supplications of that lady,
wno intreated them to spare her two daughters, whose
age was sufficient to move compaifon in more feeling
bosoms, they firlt murdercd her, and then her daugh-
ters all covered with their mother's blood.

After thus satiating their cruelty, they elected Epicy-

des and Hippocrates principal magifirates; who being
both devoted to the interest of the Carthaginians, la-
boured to inspire their countrymen with an aversion to
the Roman power.-The Rornans, informed of the si-
tuation of things in Sicily, and dcfirous of m;king them-
feives maiters of so pleasant and fruitful a country, dilf
patched thither the consul Marcellus, who had becomne
famous by his success against Hannibal, to endeavour to
reduce it. Marcellus, on his niarch towards Syracuse,
sent messengers to acquaint the Syracufans that he was
advancing with an intention of refIoring them to liberty,
not to oppress them with war. Epicydes, however, and
his colleague Hippocrates, refused to admit him into
the city; and told him with great prefuimption, that
they would make him finfible of the difference betwix:
Syracuse and Leontium, a city lately taken by the P1o-
man consul.

Marcellus, provoked at this insulting nnfwer, ordered

Appius to attack Syracuse on the land fide, at the quar-
ter cdlled Huexapds s, while he himself with sixty galleys
blocked it up by fca on the .Acradina quarter. ' he Sy-

rac ulan s

:racufans .were now in the utmost consternation, think-
ing it impossible for them to hold out for any confider-
able time againit the Roman power. But one single
man, who happened at this time to be fliut up in Syra-
cufe, was destined to defeat all the efforts of this formi-
dable enemy for the space of eight months.

Archimedes, one of the greatest mathematicians of

antiquity, was the man of whom we speak. IRefolved
to attempt every thing for the defence of his country,
he put in practice all the resources of his wonderful ge-
nius in machinery; and rendered this siege one of the
longest and most bloody that ever the Romans under-
took. The particulars recorded of the many engines
invented by him for frustrating the attacks of the befie-
gers, and for annoying them in their turn, are so extra-
ordinary and wonderful, as to exceed all credibility,
were they not recounted by the graveci and mos credi-
ble historians. Some of those engines difclarged against
the Roman infantry stones of an enormous bulk, which
cruflhed in pieces whatever came in their way; and by
the havoc they produced, refembledi in some degree
thole terrible fire-arms since invented by mankind ior
their mutual defiruaion. Others let fall such ponderous
weights on the Roman galleys, as intautly funk them.
Another engine more extraordinary iill, was so contri-
ved, as with an iron arm of amazing lrcingth to leize a
vessel by the prow, to lift her up to a considerable
height, and then to let her fall with her vwhole weight,
so as to fink or break her to pieces. Others dafiedl in
pieces the strongest machines of the besiegers.

In this manner did Archimedes baffle for the space of

eight months all the attacks of the Romans: Of fucli
great use, on some occasions, is a single man of genius
and science. Marcellus, wearied out with so long a re-
fiftance, turned the siege into a blockade; and leaving
Appius before Syracuse with two.thirds of the army,

P p I4 marched

marched himself into other parts of the island, to reduce
some cities to the obedience of the Romans,

The consul employed part of the second year of the

siege in various expeditions through the island. But in the
mean time, a Carthaginian fleet having found means to
convey a supply of provisions into Syracuse, Marcellus,
on his return to that city about the beginning of the
third campaign, found things in such a situation, that he
began to despair of taking the place. In these circum-
ltances, a Roman soldier having discovered a part of the
wal! near the gate of Trogilus considerably lower than
the reft, and capable of being scaled by ordinary lad-
ders, communicated the discovery to Marcellus; who im-
mediately ordered ladders to be gotten ready, and taking
advantage of a feast celebrated by the Syracufans in ho-
nour of Diana, commanded a detachment of his bravest
.soldiers to advance to the place in the dead of night.
These quickly scaled the wall, broke open the gate, and
took poffcffion of the quarter of the town called Epipolis.
The Syracufans, awakened by the noiei, began to put
themselves in a posture of defence. /But Marcellus or-
dering all the trumpets of the Roman army to found at
once, created such an alarm, that the inhabitants were
thrown into the utmost confiernation, believing the city
to be wholly in the hands of the enemy. But the quar-
ter of Acradina was not taken. Epicydes, assem-
bling tome troops, resolved to attack Marcellus; but
finding his forces too weak, he was forced to retire to
Acradina.

It is said that Marcellus, on contemplating from the

top of a tower the largeness and beauty of this city, Ihed
tears at the thoughts of the miserable fate it was about
to undergo. From the fame motive, before proceed-
ing to the attack of Acradina, he sent several officers to
exhort the besieged to propose a capitulation, and to
prevent the ruin of their city. Hisremonfirances, how-
Lver, proving ineffetual, he made the proper dispositions

for

for the siege of Acradina. But a plague breaking out
about this time in the city and in the Roman camp,
protracted a little longer the fate of Syracuse.

The Carthaginian fleet having in the mean time re-

turned to Sicily, Epicydes endeavoured to persuade
Bomilcar who commanded it, to venture a fea-fight,
and to attack Marcellus. The Roman, though inferior
in naval strength, resolved not to decline the engage-
ment, and to be by that means blocked up in the har-
bour of Syracuse. He therefore advanced with his
fleet in good order. The Carthaginian general, inlimri-
dated by their determined appearance, was afraid to
venture a battle, and therefore retired. Epicydes, who
had tone out to join the Carthaginian fleet, was seized
with despair; and not daring to return to Syracule, fail-
ed away for Agrigentum.

The inhabitants, confounded at being deserted both

by the Carthaginians and by Epicydes, sent ambassadors
to Marcellus to treat about capitulating, and to try to
prevail with him not to defiroy their city entirely. But
the Roman deserters, fearing to be delivered up, took
arms together with the foreign soldiers, murdered the
new magiltrates, and resolved to defend the place to the
la. In the mean time, one of the chief commanders
being gained over by Marcellus, admitted the Romans
at night by one of the gates of Acradina. The Syra-
cufans next day threw open all the other gates to Mar-
cellus; and sent ambassadors to beg that he would grant
them their lives, which they obtained. But Marcellus,
provoked at their perfidy and obstinate refiflance, gave
up the city to be plundered. The riches found in it
by the Romans exceeded their nolt sanguine
expecations, being greater than even those of 2Iz.
Carthage. Thus was Syracuse reduced after a
siege of three years.

Marcellus was much delighted with the hopes of
finding in this city the man whoc wonderful genius

had

had so long baffled the bravest efforts of the Roman
arms; and therefore ordered diligent search to be every
where made for Archimedes. A private soldier finding
him at last, deeply intent on the solution of some geo.
metrical problem, commanded him to go along with
him to Marcellus. Archimedes very quietly begged of
the soldier to wait a few moments till he should finish his
problem. But the soldier, mistaking his request for an
absolute refusal to obey him, flabbed him with his sword
on the spot.

Marcellus was extremely grieved for the death of

Archimedes; and by the honours paid to his memory,
plainly evinced the high opinion he entertained of his
merit. He gave his body a very pompous funeral, and
caused a sumptuous monument to be ereaed to his me-
mory. He even extended his favour to the relations of
Archimedes, on whom he bestowed distinguishing and
advantageous privileges. Cicero tells us, that more
than 140 years after this event, when the memory of
Archimedes was almost loft among his own country-
men, he himself had the curiosity to make inquiry a-
bout his tomb, which after a painful search he had the
pleasure at last to find; discovering it by a pillar, where-
on was delineated the figure of a sphere and cylinder,
with an inscription on the foot of it, pointing out the
proportion that a sphere bears to a cylinder of the
fame base and altitude, which is as that of 2 to 3: a
proporition that was discovered and demonitrated by
Archimedes.

The tranfacions at Syracuse, after its reduclion by

the Romans, are not very intereling ; and, as well as
the affairs of Greater Greece, fall more properly under
the Roman hifory than that of Greece. The whole
illand of Sicily, after Syracuse was taken, became a Ro-
mnan province; but continued nevertheless to be go-
verned by its own proper usageS and constitutions, in
She imine manner as before itss ubjecion.

Confiderab/

Considerable places in Greater Greece.

IN Greater Greece, history takes notice of three fa-
mous cities in the neighbourhood of Tarentum, viz.

i. Crotona, a Greek colony founded by Mifcellus

chief of the Achcans. ' his was the birth-plce of
Milo the celebrated wrestler, thence called The Croto-
nan.

2. Sybaris, an Achean colony likewise, and in the

fame province with Crotona. This city, in process of
timne, became very powerful and rich ; but its excef-
five wealth occaiioned the moit fhanmeful corruption of
manners among its inhabitants, who pafled their whole
time in public diversions, feasts, and debauchery. 'I heir
effeminacy and feniuallity were ib great, as to render
them a proverb among the ancients. They would not
even permit to reside in their city such tradefmnen as
made a noise in working. At last fa&ion broke out a-
mong themn; and the richer fort having been expelled,
implored succour of the Crotonians. The Sybarites
took the field, and engaged the Crotonians, command-
ed by Milo; but were totally defeated. Thenceforward
Sybaris was quite deserted.

3. Thur:umn, founded in the neighbourhood of the

ancient Sybaris by an Athenian colony. Here the fa-
mous Herodotus fixed his residence. The inhabitants
were composed partly of Syb:irites, and partly of Athe-
nian soldiers sent to their aflitalnce againit the Cro-
tonians.

Etminent Writers, Phi/lfophers, AIrt~s, &c.

Pythagoras, the celebrated philosopher, was the

founder of the Italic, school, which received that ap-
pellation from his having fettled in that part of I;a!y
called Greater Greece. he was a native of Samos, and

1i;hcit

spent the more early part of his life in travelling through
many countries in pursuit of instruCtion. With this
view, he visited Egypt, Chaldea, and the island of
Crete. Finding, on his return from his travels, his na-
tive country oppressed by the tyrant Polycrates, he did
not choose to fettle there; but removed to Crotona, and
opened a school which soon grew very famous, the
number of his scholars having in a short time increased
to 500. This school was in its most flourishing state a-
bout the time of Tarquin the last king of the Romans,
and the year before Christ 530. For the two first years
of their attendance, the scholars of Pythagoras were en-
joined a profound silence; but afterwards they had per-
miion to propose their difficulties. Never was a ma-
iler so highly refpeded by his scholars; a proof of the
great esteem they entertained of his genius. His opi-
nions with them had the authority of so many oracles;
and all further doubt was laid aside on these words
being pronounced, ulof i : C" The maier himself hath
" said so."

Pythagoras thought it an undertaking worthy his wis-

dom and philosophy, to reclaim the inhabitants of Cro-
tona to sentiments of virtue; and the effeEts of his ex-
hortations were, by the account of Juflin, truly extraor-
dinary, producing a wonderful reformation among the
inhabitants of that city, who were before plunged in the
utmost excess of luxury and debauchery; so lively
were his representations of the baseness of vice and in-
temperance on the one hand, and of the beauty and
excellency of virtue on the other. To the fair he re-
commended modefly, and the other qualities becoming
the sex; and to the youth, refped for their parents. So-
iriety he extolled as the mother of virtue ; and intreat-
cd the youth of both sexes to lay aside the splendid an-
unnecessary ornaments of dress, as being the principal
i.fitruments of corruption. He inspired rulers and ma-
-rates with principles of honour, with integrity, and

g~~~~~~~? ~with

with a zealous attachment to the public welfare. In a
word, he in a manner made new men of the inhabitants
of Crotona. Nor were his virtuous labours confined to
that city alone. He visited all the neighbouring towns
with the fame laudable intentions. It was a maxim of
Pythagoras, that the whole aim of philosophy ought to
be, to render men more acceptable in the fight of the
Deity, by inducing them to pratife all the virtues of
humanity.

Pythagoras introduced into the western world a doc-

trine which he had imbibed somewhere in the east,
where, by all accounts, it has prevailed from the molt
early ages, namely, that of the MetempfychofJi, or Tranf-
migration of Souls; which taught, that on the deaths of
men, their fouls passed into and animated other bodies.
If, for example, a man was vicious and wicked, his foul
animated the body of some unclean animal, and passed
through a progress of misery proportioned to his crimes
in this life. Hence Pythagoras and his followers religi-
oufly abstained from eating fiefh, left, perhaps, they
flould devour that of some of their former friends and
acquaintance. In all probability, the accounts of this
philosophy transmitted to us are very imperfect; and in
nothing, perhaps, more so than its real scope and mean-
ing. Let us therefore, on this point, as on every
other of the fame kind, be extremely cautious in con-
demning.

Antiquity has handed down a thousand impertinent

fables with refpea .to this great philosopher, which it
were more impertinent tfill to mention here. Accord-
ing to Juflin, Pythagorus died at Metapontum in a very
advanced age. The reputation of his school was very
great, and produced many philosophers of distinguished
reputation, who divided themselves into a variety of dif-
rent feEs.

Cbaronlas, a scholar of Pythagoras, delivered to the

inhabitants

inhabitants of Thurium a fyflem of excellent laws, of
which tire following were some of the most remarkable.
Whoever entered into a second marriage, after having
childern of a former, was deprived of his priviledge of
becoming a senator: Those convicted of calumny, were
ignominiously dragged through the city: Public ma-
ilers were to be appointed for the instruction of the
youth, without fee or reward; for he thought ignorance
the source of all vice: The education of orphans was
to be intrufed to their relations on the mother's fide;
and the care of their fortunes to those on the father's
fide: Deserters in war were condemned to appear pub-
licly in the city for the space of three days in woman's
dreis.

Zaileucus, another scholar of Pythagoras, was the le-

giflator of the Locrians. The preamble to his laws is
much celebrated. He desires the citizens to keep in
mind, that gods do exist ; and assures them, that the
chief of the gods is the original fountain of all laws.
Then he sets down regulations for the preservation of
unanimity and peace in social intercourse. He exhorts
judges, by all means, to diveRt themfclves of prejudices,
whether arising from friendship or from animosity. He
prohibits women from wearing magnificent apparel; or
from using such superfluous and luxurious ornaments,
as jewels and bracelets, which were allowed to profti-
tutes alone and he delivers nearly the fame prohibition
with refpedt to the men.

INDEX.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.

A Pag.

Abdolonymus made king of Sidon 415
Abifares puts himself under Alexander's protection 448
Abydos, dreadful catastrophe of 526
Achaia, mountains, rivers, towns, subdivisions, &c. of ib

Achaean republic 505o
Achaans assist Philip against- the JEtolians 5 6

attack Nabis - 53
attack the Spartans 536
1 ooo of their chiefs seized and sent to Rome 538
ravage Laconia 5 39
recommence hoflilities against the Romans - ib
defeated by Metellus 540

and by Mummius ib

Acheron, river- -ib
Acroceraunian mountains - ib
Actium, town of - ib
IEgina, island - 30
.iEgos Potamos, decisive engagement at 233
fEfchines pleads against Demoithenes about the crown 38s
Agamemnon 45

chosen general of the Greeks against Troy 5z
assassinated 5 S

Aganippe, fountain 23
Agathocles tyrant of Syracuse -596
Agefilaus promoted to the throne of Sparta 29c

outlines of his charater -ib
lets out for Asia 290
exploits there - - 291, &c.
recalled from Asia 306
joyfully received at Sparta - 308
besieges Corinth 309
repulses the Thebans from Sparta - 326
appeases commotions in Sparta . 328
conduts an expedition into Egypt 348
his operations there - 349
raises Neftenabus to the throne of Egypt ib
death and characer ib
Ages of Ancient Greece 3S

AK.

Pag.
Age first, of Greece, general characer of 55

second, general characer of - 3
third, general charater of 259
fourth. chara&er of - .
Agis III. King of Sparta, slain in a battle with Antipater 434

IV. King of Sparta, attempts to reform the government 508

perishes in the attempt 509

Agrigentum city -562
Alceus the poet 84
Alcibiades - - 210

takes a lead in the Athenian government - 2
outlines of his charadter - ib.
political conduc of - ib.
engages the Athenians in the Sicilian expedition 215
arraigned of impiety 2 16
avoids the trial by flight - ib.
conduEt at Sparta - - 217
flies from Sparta to Sardis 230
advice to Tiffaphernes about Greek affairs ib.
his support solicited by his countrymen 23£

arillocracy eftabliflied at Athens by his advice ib
supports his countrymen - 232

beats the Spat tan fleet at Abydos - 233
successful operations of - - 233, &c.
returns to Athens 235
falls again into disgrace - 238
aflaffinated, and his charaser 263

Alcmxondes, fation at Athens 77
Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, born - 362

succeeds his father Philip - 395
outlines of his character 396, 97
defeats the Triballi - - 398
defeats the Thebans, and deltroys their city ib.
eleted commander in chief of the Greeks ib.
consults the oracle at Delphos about his expedition against

Persia - - 400

sets out for Persia - 401
celebrates games in honour of Achilles - ib.
defeats the Persians at the Grannicus - 402
conspiracy againt - - - 403
cuts in pieces the gordian knot - ib.
bathes in the Cydnus, and falls dangerously ill 404
magnanimous behaviour, on that occasion with refpeft

to his physician Philip ib.

defeats the P-rfians at Issus 410
visits Darius's wife and mother - 411
besfeges Tyre 415

Alexander

Pag7
Alexander takes Tyre - 41

goes to Jerusalem - -4
reduces' ;aza - 41
subdues Egypt, and visits the temple of Jupiter Ammon 42
passes the Tygris - -423
defeates Darius at Arbela -26
enters Babylon - 427
enters Susa - 428
takes poffeflion of the pass of Susa 429
enters Persepolis - ib.
burns the magnificent palace there - 430
arrives at Ecbatana - - 431
corrupted by profparity - -436
gets Beffus in his power 419
cruelty to the Branchida: ib.
receives an embassy from the Scythians 440
defeats the Scythians at the Jaxartes ib.
reduces the fortress of Petra Oxiana - 442
kills a lion - 443
murders Clytus - -44
marries Roxana - 444
acknowledged by his officers to be a God ib.
enters India - 44
successes in India 448
passes the river Hydafpes ib.
defeats Porus - -449
his soldiers refuse to pass the HyphaCus 45'z
marches towards the ocean -454
desperate adventure at the capital of the Oxydracae ib.
embarks his army on the Indus, and fails to the ocean 456
arrives at the ocean - -ib.
sets out on his return from the Indies -ib.
Bacchanalian procefiion through Carmania 457
puts Orfinus unjutfly to death 459
marries Statira, Darius's daughter 4.o
fals along the Persian gulph 46z
enters Babylon in great pomp, and solemnizes Ephe-

stion's funeral - 463

death and ch-ara&er 466

Alexander's empire, division of - 4 3
Alexander, tyrant of Pliera, seizes Pleopidas - 3'5

is assassinated by his wife and her brothers 3,8

Alexandria in Egypt founded by Alexander the Great 420
Aliacmon, river - - 19
Allies, war of - 351
Ambracia town - -2
Amphy&ions, council of, initituted 58

QOq Amphipolis.

Pag.
Amrphipolis, town 21

reduced by Philip 360

Alphabet, Phenician, introduced into Greece - 45
Alpheus, river 27
Anacreon, the Lyric poet 248
Anaxagoras prosecuted at Athens 193

account of - -47

Anaximander the pi;:!ofcpher 88
Andranodorus attempts to assume the tyranny at Syracuse 597
Andros, island - 31
Antalcides's negociations in Persia 30

peace negociated by - 3 I
Antiochus invades Greece - 534

is defeated by the Romans 534
Antipater appointed governor of Macedonia by Alexander the

Great -- 4co

defeats the Lacedemonians ' 434
defeated by the Athenians 484
besiegcd in Lamia by the Athenians - 485
defeated agian by the Athenians - ib.
defeats the Athenians, and di&ates severe terms of

peace to them - - ib.

Apag?, machine of torture used by Nabis - 425
Apelles, tht painter . 479
Apellcs Philip's tutor and favourite, villanous political in-

trigues of - - 51 7

.A.pollo's temple at Delphos - 27,124
Apsis rivte - - 19
Aratus restores Sicyon to iiberty -505

seizes the ci:' del of Corinth - 506
engages A.!tigonus in affe:rs of the Peloponnesians 5I
otLer exploits of - 5i5, 6, 17
puifoned ix the procurement of Philip - 519

Arbela, battle at where Darius was defeated - 423
Arc' di' - - - 2
Ar helaus ' :l hiidatcs'; general; tyrant of Athens - 542
A;z-hidanm's dcfcjats '.li Arcadianls and Argives - 334

'. .

i;a: c "-uindut i:: d.fi.ncc of Sparta - 339

Ar-chi:: cls thll pr- - - - 4
Archiiiedes, the fa, Jus matht;natician 598
Archons set up at Athens - - 70

thirty for thirty tyrants) government of Athens com-

ritted to - - 245

tyrannical proceedings of - 260
civil wzr occasioned by - 267
Arcepagus, court of - - 58

encroached on by Pericles - 82

Arginufe,

Pag.

Arginufe, fea-fight at - 240
Argis, Argia, or Argolis, diftriE of " 29
Argonauts 43
Argos, city - - 29
Argos, principality, kings of - 40
Ariftagoras persuades the (onians to revolt from the Persian

governm ent - - 13

- negociates with the flates of Greece - ib.
Aristides, outlines of his character - - 43

banifled- - 1 45
recalled - r5
commiflioned by the Athenians to hear and judge of

a private scheme of Themistocles. of .hich he ad-
mits the expediency, but condemns the injultice 166

political operations of - - 197
contempt of - 172
general charader of - 173

Arittion tyrant of Athens - 542
Ariftodemus, King of the Meffenians, sacrifices his daughter to

render fate propitious to his countrymen -68

Ariflogiton and Harmodius - 76
Ariftomes the Meffenian general - - 70
Aristophanes the comic poet - 25 £
Aristotle the philolopher - -ib
Armies of the Greeks - -120
Artabanus dissuades Xerxes from invading Greece 146
Artaxcrxes Mnemon mounts the throne of Persia - 26
Artaxerxes foments disturbances in Greece -304

his unfuccefsfil war againit Egypt - 321

Artemifa Quen, heroic behaviour of - - s5
Artemifa, widow of Maufolus - 364
Afcra, town - - 23
Asbestos, stone so called - -29
Afopus, river - -23
Aspasia the celebrated courtezan - - 19
Aehenians conspire aganitn Hipparchus and Hippias 76

expel Hippias. and assert their liberty - 77
chastises the iflands-that had joined Darius I44
desert their city, and go aboard their fleet 156
sent their old men, women, and children, to Trezene ib;
abandon their city a second time - 6 t
reject Mardonius's propofuls . - ib.
rebuild and fortify their city - - 16
undertake an expedition into Egypt - 184
undertake the Sicilian exepedition .214
Athenian from of government, and public institutions 97

some of their private laws - 1

.
Athenian generals, fix put to death 44 24Z

Q: a z Athen$

Pag,
Athens . a

kings of - .
polity established there by Theseus 60
citadel of taken by storm by the Persians 157
plague breaks out there -2c
barbarous procedings of the ariflocracy 230
decemvi ate established at - - 266
reduced by the general of Mithridates 542
besieged and taken by Sylla 543
continues to be the feat of learning .4S

Athletae - l
Athos, Mount - - -9
Attica - -2
Augury - - 130
Aulis, town - - -26
Axius, river - -19

B

Babylon entered by Alexander the Great -4'7
Baccidc - - 48
Bacchus comes into Greece - 58
]Bceotia - - - 25
Battle at Marathon - - 142

at Platea - - 63
at Mycale - - - 64
at Tanagra - - 183
at Cunaxa - 270
at Lycion - -306
at Cheronea, between the Spartans and Thebans 308
at Tegyra - - 3 20
at Leutra - -323
at Mantinea - 341
at Cheronea, between the Macedonians and Thebans 386
at the Granicus -401
at Ifrus - - 409
at Arbela - 424
at Selafia - 428

Bellerophon -48
Beffus murders Darius - 432

put to death by Alexander's orders . 44

Betis governor of Gaza ungenerously put to death by Alexander 420
Boxing, combat of - - 12
Brachmans - - 451
Branchidte crueley destroyed by Alexander -439
Brafidas the Spartan general, exploits of -20
Bucephalus, Alexander's horse 396
Buthrotum, town - 2

Cadmus

C Pag.

Cadmus - - - 45
Calanus the brachman burns himself - 460
Callicratidas the Spartan commander, characer of 239

defeated and slain near the islands Arginufae 240

Callidromus, mountain - 23
Califthenes the philosopher put to death by Alexander 446
Calippus gets Dion aflffinated, and usurps the tyranny at

Syracuse - - 589

Caphia, Achleans defeated at 51S
Carydemus put to death by order of Darius - 407
Carthaginians, operations of in Sicily 562, 63, 64, 6oi
Catheans subdued by Alexander - 451
Cecrops king of Athens, institutions of - 57
Celidnus, river - - 21
Cephalenia, island - - 3
Cephiffus, river - -23
Chabrias the Athenian commander 311

opposes Epaminondas successfully 3;,3
death of - 35

Chabius, river - - 19
Chercnea, town - -26

battles at - 308, 3 6

Chalcis town - - 29
Chariot-races - 10
Chares, the Athenian commander -5 i, &c.
Charondas the philosopher -o05
Chilo tyrant of Sparta - - -57
Chios island - - 30
Charonicus, mountain - -27
Cimon the Athenian distinguishes himself in the fea-fight at

Salamis - - 160

outlines of his charadcr - 169
successful exploits against the Persians -ib.
his gcnerofity - 77
banifled - - 182
recalled - 1S4
death and charaAer - -85

Cineas the friend of Pyrrhus . 499
Citheron, mountain - 23
Clazomenae, town . -33
Clearchus the Spartan co-operates with the younger Cyrus 268
Cleombrotus, king of Sparta, killed at Leuatra - 324
Cleomcnes, king of Sparta - 510

attempts to reform the government there 5 1
his gallant exploits 512
defeated at Selafia by Antigonus 5 3
takes refuge in Egypt, and dies there 1 4

Cleon

Pag.

Cleon the Athenian demagogue - -205
Clisthenes's operations at Athen - 78
Clitus saves ilexander's life - -401

murdered by Alexander - 443

Cnidus, town - -35
Cocytus, river - - Z2
Colophon, town - - 34
Combats and games - - 107
Comedy, comic poets - 115
Conon, the Athenian commander - - 292, 30o

defeats the Lacedemonians -308
rebuilds the walls of Athens and Pyreus 3c9
seized by the Persians - - 310

Constantinople taken by Mahomet IT. - - 546
Corcyra, Island - 31

dissension and horrible massacre there 202
Corinth, city - 27

kings of - 47
besieged by the Lacedemonians -309
Corinth. massacre there - 315

taken and demolished by the Roman - 541

Corinthians, violent proceedings againit the Romans 539
Cos. island - - 31
Crete, ifand - - 32
Crotona, city - - o03
Ctefias the physician and hiflorian 34
Cuma, town - 33
Cunaxa, battle at, between Artaxerxes and his brother the

younger Cyrus - 270

Cupid, famous statue of 6z, 477
Cyclades, islands 3 1
Cyllene, town - -28
Cyllon's infurreaion at Athens 70
Cyrus the younger, cruel action of - 24

revolts againfi Artaxerxes his brother -6z
expedition of to attack his biother - 28
is slain in the battle of Cunaxa 271

D

P.amocles, his feast, cxprellive ofa tyrant's life 576
Danaides, Danae - 41
Dancing, itudied by the Greeks lo6
JDarius, foi of Hiyftafpes made king of Perlsa - 133

meditates an invasion of Greece 134.
fends an aimy against Greece -137
his firll expedition relinquished ib.
death of ': x46

Darius

Pag.

Dorius Nothus succeeds to the crown of Persia 203
Darius Codomannus, defeated by Alexander at lffus 408

behaviour on hearing :f his wife's death,

and of Alexander's behaviour to her 422

defeated at Arbela - 424
assassinated by Beffus - 432

Datames the Carian - 295
Delos, ifand - 31
Delphi, town; Apollo's temple there -24
Demaratus, the exiled king of Sparta, speaks his mind freely

to Xerxes - 151
Demetrius Phalereus, made governor of Athens 490

retires from Athens - 494
charaaer as an orator r 548

Demetrius of Pharos - - 16
Demetrius Poliorcetes -492, 94, 95
Democritus the laughing philosopher -86
Demotthenes the Athenian general arrives at Syracuse to affi[t

Nicias - - 224

defeated by the Syracufans 225
surrenders, and is put to death 228
Demosthenes the orator begins to appear 358

outlines of his characer, - 359
harangues against Philip 369
harangues in favour of the Olynthians 370
defends Diopithus against the accusations of the

creatures of Philip - 375
perflades the Athenians to support the Lacede-

monians against Philip 37

pronounces his Philippics 379
persuades the -hebans to join with the Athenians

against Philip - 384

pleads againt Efchines on the'fubjea of the crown 388
banished on a suspicion of being bribed 461
recalled - 484
swallows poison, and dies 486

Dercillidas the Sparta commander - 297
Deucetius the Sicilian chief, his history - 560
Dialeas of the Greek language, - 56
Diodorus Siculus ihe historian - 55
Diogenes's interview with Alexander -400

charact:r asa philosopher -475
Dion, the Syracufan - 567 77, 85

banished by Dionysius the younger 580
lives some time at A thens * 581
conducs an expedition against Dionysius the younger 583
ungratefully treated by the Syracufans 585

Q q 4 returns

Pag.

returns again to their relief, and lays siege to the citadel 587
restores liberty to Syracuse - 588
consents to the affallnation of Heraclides ib.
is himself assassinated by Calippus - 589
his character - - ib.

Dionysia. leftival of - - 126
Dionysius the Haliicarnaffian, the critic -55
Dionyfiils the elder, his intrigues fur attaining the tyranny of

3yracufe - - 560, 6i

becomes tyrant of Syracuse 5 63
his fubfequcnt condu - 565
attacks the Carthaginians - 57
beficges and ruins lkhegium 571
his passion for poetry 572
death and charactcr 574
Dionysius the younger succeeds his father in the tyranny of

Syracuse - - - 576

his condut - 776, 77, &c.
capitulates with Timoleon, and is sent to Corinth 592

Discus, combat of - - c8
Dodona, town, temple and oracle of Jupiter at - 22
DToris, diftrit of - -24
Doris in fia Minor, towns in 33
Draco the Atheniam legislator -70
Dyrrachium, or Epidamus, town of 19

E
Earthquake in Laconia - 179

at Rhodes - - 51

Education of children at Sparta - 93, 94
Egeltians beg affiitauce of the Athenians - 214
Eolia, town - 33
Eleusis, to;.n, in Attica - - 24
Eleutinian mysteries - - - 16
Elis, diftrici of - -27
Eolia, diliri&, cities, mountains, and rivers, in -33
Epaminondas the I heban commander 316

concurs with Pelopidas in asserting the liberty

of 'hebes - - 3

contradicts Agefilaus 322
defeates the Spartans at Leu&ra - 323
invades the Peloponnese -327
advances to the gates of Sparta -ib
is repulsed, and retires - 328
ungratefully treated by his countrymen - 9
bLIi-es the tyrant of Phera to release Pelopidas 336

Epa-

Fag.
Epaminondas again invades the Peloponncfe, and attempts to

rci:uce .-parta 339

but is again obliged to retire 340
miscarries in an attempt on Mantinea ib
defeats the Sp'rtans at Mantinea 341
deattl and character 346

Ephori at Sparta - -67
Epicictas the philosopher - 547
Epic urus the philolopher -47
Ephesus. city - 33
EpheIlion, Alexandet's friend, dies -463

Jais magnificent funeral 464

Epidamnus or Dyrrachium, town - 0
Epiris, mountains, rivers, towns, in -2
Epidaurus, town 30
Equinoxes, procession of, observation about 252
Erigon river - 19
Efchincs pleads against Demosthenes about the crown 388

is worited and banifihed . 389

Efchylus the tragic poet - -249
Etolia 23
.dtolians invade the Peloponnese -5 15

defeat the Acheans ut Caphia ib
attacked by F ilip 11. of Macedon -16
make peace with him -519
resume hoililities '

- -5o

ijnflgate Antiochus to invade Greece c35
their capital Heraclea taken by the lomans 536
make peace with the Romans ib
Eubmea, island - 29

taken from the Athenians by the Laccdemnonians ;-. z

Euclid the philosopher, anecdote of -:4
Eumenes 'l-'3, 49 L
Euribades the Spartan, chief commander of the Greek forcet

during the second Perilan invaliun -152

Euripides the tragic poet - 20
Eurotas, a river in l.aconia -
Evagoras, Iing of Salamnis - 292

his war with the Persians - 293

Eleans oppressed by the Lacedernonians - 300
Empedocles the Pythagorean philosopher -48

F
Fabricius the Roman his generous condu(c with refpedl to

King Pyrrhus - -500

Fcltivals, Greek - - 25
Flaminus, Quintiuns defeats King Philip near Cynocephaat 528

proclaims liberty to Greece - 29

Fla-

Pag.
Flaminius attacks Nabis -

besieges Sparta - - 532
makes peace with Nabis -ib

Forces, Greek - - r

Games and combats - o8
Gauls, famous eruption of - _- o0
Gaza taken by Alexander 419
Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse - 557
Granicus, battle at - 401
Greece, Ancient, geographical description ot - 7

earliest traditional hiffory of -4
ages of 35
division of the history of ib
general chalraer of the first age of 36
general character of the second age of 132
general charaEter of the third age of 259
general charater of the fourth age of - 481
general observation about the history of the more early

times of -

Greek language, dialeas of 5S
Greeks, 10,ooo, famous retreat of - 272, &c.
Gylippus, the Spartan general, arrives to the relief of the Sy-

racufans - - 221
steals part of treasure sent by Lysander under

his charge to Sparta, and flies - 246

Gymnastic combats and exercises - - I
Gytheum, town - 2g

H

Halicarnassus, city of Doris - - 3
Harmodius and Ariitogiton conspire against the Pififtratida 76
Harpalus governor of Babylon flies to Athens 461
Helicon, mount - - 23
Helen runs away with Paris - - 50
Helots, origin of - -

revolt -i8
barbarous massacre of by the Spartans - 206

Heraclea, capital ofthe Etolians, taken by the Romans 522
Heraclida - 4

regain the Peloponnese -

H-ercules 4-- 4

H-eraclytus the crying philosopher - 86
Hlerodotus the hi ftorian . - 25 !

reads his history at the Olympic games 1 3

Hcfiod the poet - 83
-I:.fione carried cff by Hercules -50

Hier.

Pag.

Hiero tyrant of Syracuse - 559
Hipparchus and' iippias tyrants of Athens -5
Hipparchus affaflinated - 76
Hippias expelled from Athens 77

retires to Artiphernes governor of Sardis 79

Hippocrates the physician 197
Homer - -
Hymettus, mountain 23
Hypocrene, fountain - ib

Jason - -43
Javelin throwing, game of 1 1
Icetas tyrant of Leontium 589

unites with the Carthaginians 591
besieges the citadel of Syracue - 593
put to death by Timoleon 9S

Inachus, river - - 27
Ionia, towns in 33
lonians revolt from the Persians - 3

are subdued - - I3

India, entered by Alexander 446
Iphicrates the Athenian commander 3- 1 12

tried by the Athenians, and his singular stratagem on

that occasion 35

chara&er of ib

Ifeus the orator - - 236
Ifinenius, river - 23
Isocrates the orator - 25

adrefles an oration to Philip 372

Issus, battle at - - 08
Isthmian games - 1 4
Jumping, game of 113

L
Lacedemonians invade Samos, but ate repulsed 76

propose to exclude from the council of the Am-

phytions the rfates that had submitted to
Xerxes - - 67
beg affitance of the Athenians againit the He-

lots - 179

Laconia, diftrit of -2
Lais, famous courtezan - 27
Lamia in Thessaly besieged by the Athenians 485
Laus, river - - 9

Leaping, exercise of l- I x

Lebedus town 33
Leonidas king of Sparta defends most heroically the pass of Ther-

mopylz againlt Xerxes i 5

Leonidas

Pag.
Leonidas makes' a desperate attack on the Persian camp, and is

killed - -54

Lemnos, island - 30
Lenea, feflival of 26
Lesbos, island -30
Letters, Phenician, brought into Greece 45
Lesbians revolt fiom the Athenians, and accede to the Pelopon-

nefian league - 199
subdued by the Athenians 200
LeuAra, town -26

battle at - 3 3

Lionna an Athenian lady, heroical behaviour of 76
Locris, diRrit of 23
Lycion, battle there - 307
Lycophron tyrant of Phere -365
Lycurgus the Spartan legislator, travels of I 64

reforms the government at Sparta - 65
political institutions at Sparta -68
death of -9
Lysander the Spartan commander 237

condua of - 238
defeats the Athenians near Ephesus ib
defeats them again decisively at lEgos Potamos 24.4
ambitious pr)jefts 267
tried at Sparta for mifdemeaours ib
his plot to become king - 302
death and charaAer of 3o0

Lysias the orator 256
Lyficles the Athenian commander put to death 389
Lysippus the statuary 579

M

Macedonia, geographical description of - 8
Mlachanidas tyrant of Sparta - - 520

defeated and slain by Philopcemen 522

Mania, the heroine widow of Zenis -297
Mantisa, town - -

battle at - 34
Marathon, town in Attica 24

battle at -141
Marccllus besieges Syracuse - 59s

reduces it 6- -1

Ma tial claraier of the ancient Greeks 119
M'ardnnins makes advantageous proposals to the Athenians

which arc rejected - 16
TCdicis, family of, the public refrorers of polite learning 545
Megara, town - 24

Megara,

Pag.

Megara, fediticn at - -20
Megaris, diftri& of ib
Memnon the Rhodian 403

advises Darius to invade Macedonia 406

Meander the comic poet
Menelaus - - 50
Messenia, diftri& of - -27
Meffenians, their first war with the Lacedemonians 67

their second war with the Lacedemonians 69

Metellus defeats the Achseans . 540
Meton the altronomer . .- 247
Milo the Crotonian, the famous wrestler 114
Miltiades commands the Athenians at Marathon, and defeats

the Petfians - 14t

imprisoned and dies 1-

- 44
Mithridates's generals reduce Athens 542

his generals defeated by Sylla 544

Mummius defeats the Acheans, and destroys Corinth 54X
Music Grecian - o6
Mycale, battle at 164
Mycenae, city 29
Mycene, kingdom of 42
Myron the Iculptor 257
Mysteries Elufinian 126

N.
Nabis tyrant of Sparta 524

gets pofieffion of Argos 525
his cruelties there 526
attacked by Flaminius 530
makes-peace with the Romans 53
joins the -Etolians againit the Romans ib
killed by the JEtolians - 534
Naupaaus, city of lEtolia 23

fea-tigh: at - 97

Naval power of the Greeks -122
Naval engagements between the Greeks and Persians 155
Nearchus conduets the Macedonian navy from the mouth of the

Idus to the Euphrates - 447

Nemsean games 1 14
Nicias the Athenian commander 204

pppofes the Sicilian expedition 214
military conduct of in Sicily 219, &c.
retreats fiom Syracuse 227
surrenders hiinfeif and his army -22S
put to tleath i1y the Syracufans 229
Nicocles king of Salamis z26t

Nli .-

Pag.

Nicopolis, town - -22
Nipfius supports Dionysius the younger 587

0

Ochus king of Persia -350, 367
Oedipus - 46
Oeta, mountain - * 22
Olympia, (or Pisa), city - 27
Olympias, mother of Alexander, her cruelties- 491
Olympiad, what o8
Olympic--games . - ib

privileges of the viAors in - I1 3

Olympus mountain . -2
Olynthians, at war with the Spartans 313
Onomarchus, general of the Phoceans -365
Oracles - -128
Orefles - 55
Orpheus's tomb - . 23
Orfinns put to death unjustly by Alexander- 459
Ofia, mountain - 21
Ostracism introduced at Athens - 78
Othrys, mountain - -23
Ozola of Locris persecuted by the Amphy&ions 38z

P

Panathencea, festival of r * X2
Panatitus the Stoic philosopher 546
Pancratium, combat of - - t
Panyafis river - 19
Paris runs away with Helen 50
Panyfus, river - 27
Parmenio assassinated by Alexander's order 438
Parnassus, mount - - 23
Paros, island - 31
Parrhafius the painter - z57
Parthenians, illegitimate Spartans - 68
Pausanias the Spartan general commands the Geecian forces. at

Platea 6- -

his intrigues with Xerxes against Greece ^ 68
put to death - -17

Pelafgi 35
Pella, town in Macedonia . 19
Peleum mountain - 21
Peneus river - 19
Pelopida 42
Peloponnesian war begins - 194

concludes - 2 446

..Be-

Pag
Pelopidas, the Theban commander - - 31

expels the Spartans from Thebes -36
defeats the Spartans at Tegyra -32
ungratefully treated by his countrymen 331
negociations in Persia - 333
decides the disputed fucceflion to the throne of Macedon 334
seized by Alexander tyrant of Phere - 335
relieved by Epaminondas - 336
is slain - - 33

Peloponnefus, geog aphy of -26
Pelops - -42
Pericles, the Athenian, begins to make a figure -180

outlines of his c'.aararer - -ib.
opposed by T'hucydides - - -6
encourages the fine arts - -ib
military exploits of - -189
pleads for Aspasia - -1
death and charater of - -198

Periander tyrant of Corinth - 48
Perseus -41
Persian empire 3 33
Persian monarchy and monarchs, general chara&cer of - 33
Persians invade Greece for the first time 141

defeated by the Athenians at Marathon -42
take the citadel of Athens by itorm - 159
their fleet beat at Salar\is - 16o
their army defeated at Platea - 63

Persepolis, fine palace there burnt by Alexander 430
Phalanx, Macedonian - 59
TPhebidas, the Spartan, seizes the citadel of Thebes 3 I
Phoenicians and Egyptians revolt from the Persians 366
Phidias the statuary imprisoned by the Athenians - 192

character as a ifttuary - 256
Philip, son of Amyntas. feat to Thebes as an hostage -334

leaves Thebe.- ai, is raised to the throne of Macedon 3(
takes Amphipolis, reduces Potidea, and gets pofltflion

of Philippi - 9

loses one of i!is eyes at the ficge of Methone - 365
marches aga nl'i Greece - 3 8

bceieges Olynthus 3-

takes a fide in the facied war -37
makes a treaty witli the Athenians 3-7
admitted into the cwuncil of the AmphyLcions 3i9
puts an end to thl- ficred war -i
besieges Perinthus and Byzantium - 38
intrigues .;,ainf the liberties of Greece - 38
seizes Eubcca - -8z

Philip

Pag
Philip fends an artful letter to the Athenians 38

rescued by his son Alexander in a battle with the rri-

balli - - 82

em loyed by the Amphydions to chastise the Ozolae 383
seizes Elatea the capital of Phocis - ib
defeats the Thebans and Athenians at Cheronaa 286
chosen commander in chief of the Greeks 390
divorces Olympias, and marries Cleopatra ib
affffinated by Pausanias -392
charafler of ib
Philip, son of Demetrius king of Macedon, attacks the IEto-

lians - - 5 6
takes Pfophis and Therma - 517
ravages Laconia, takes Thebes in Phthiotis 51
makes peace with the IEtolians -ib
fights the iEto'ians and Romans near Elis 520
ravages Attica, and defeats the Athenians 527

Philomelus general of the Phoceans 469
Philopcmmen, character of 522

defeats and kills Machanidas - 5 24
peifuades the Spartans to join the Achean league 534
is defeated by the Meffenians, and put to death 537

Philotas, son to Parmenio, put to death by Alexander 437
Philoxenuathe poet, his adventure with Dionytius the elder 573
Phoceans, war of the, or sacred war, begins -463
Phocis, diftri& of - 24
Pholce, mountain -- 29
Phocion, the Athenian, outlines of his character 176

recovers Euba - - 377
relieves the Byzantines and Perentheans, and worits
Philip - - 379

unjustly put to death by his countrymen - 488
his charastcr - - ib.

Phryne the courtezan, anecdotes of -26
Pieria, dietrit of - 19
I'indar the poet - - 249
Pindus, mount 2
Pisa (or Olympia) city 27
Pifitratus tyrant of Athcns - 73

expelied 74
reitored - ib
condut after his restoration - 5
Platca, town - 6

battle at - 163
bcfieged - 199
Taken by the Pelponncfians, and all the men found in it

murdtred in cold blood - 2c

Platea

Pag.

Platea demolished by the Thebans 321
Plague breaks out at Athens 197

breaks out again at Athens -202
Plato, the philosopher - -470

goes to the court of Dionyiius the younger 578
returns to Greece - 580
goes back again to Dionysius -58

Plutarch the biographer - 552
Polybius the historian - -548
Polycletus the statuary - 477
Polycrates tyrant of Samos - - 75
Porus defeated by Alexander 547
Potidea taken - 199
Praxitiles the statuary - - 477
Procession of the equinoxes, curious observation about 252
Priam king of Troy - -48
Protogenes the painter -477
Pylus, town -

taken by the Athenians 202

Pyrrho the philosopher -83
Pyrrhus King of Epire - - 498, & seq.
Pythagoras, the philosopher - 60
Pythian games - - . 14

R

Races, chariot - -
Religion of the ancient Greeks -23
Retreat, famous, of the io;oco Greeks 272
Rhegium in Sicily ruined by Dionysius the elder - 571
Rhodes, dissensions there - -3to

besieged by Demetrius Poliorcetes - 495
earthquake there - -54
Romans interfere in the affairs of Greece 507

persuade the -ZEtolians to make war on Philip 520
along with the IEtolians fight Philip near Elis ib
fend Valerius Levinus againit Philip 528
prescribe terms of peace to Philip 529
give liberty to Greece ib
make war on Nabis 530
defeat Antiochus - 534
take Heraclea the capital of the -Etolians' 535
grant peace to the IEtolians - ib
reduce Greece into a province . '

. -542
Roxana married to Alexander 445

fle and her son put to death by Caffander 493
Running, game of - -9

S
Sacred war, or war of the Phoceans, begins 362

R r Sa-

Pag.

Sacrifices - - 25
Sages of Greece 73
Salamis, island - 30
Sea-fight there -59
Samos - -3
Sappho tle poetess s 84
Sardis accidentally burnt 136
Sciros, island - 29
Scythian ambafIadors, their speech to Alexander 440
Scythians defeated by Alexander - 441
Selalia, battle at - 513
Sicily, description of 555
Sicyonr, town 27

principality of 40

Simonides the poet 85
Socrates makes a campaign -191

his life, trial, and death 283, et seq.
Solok the Athenian legislator 7

travels into distant countries 72
retires from Athens, and dies in Cyprus 73
some of his private laws - 1o3

Sophocles the tragic poet 249
Smyrna, city - 33
Sparta, city - 28

kings of - 50
eftablilhment of two kings there- 56
political institutions there by Lycurgus 88, et seq.
some of their customs censured 95
Spartans, 400 besieged and surrender in SphaAteria - 203

accede to the A chean league 534
attacked by the Acheans - 536

Spha&eria, ifllad - 28
Sphinx appears in the Theban territory 46
Sphodrias the Spartan, miscarries in an attempt to seize Pireus 3 ! 8
Sporades, islands 3
Stagira, town - 19
Statira married to Alexander 460

murdered by the procurement of Roxana 49

Stefichorus the poet - - 84
Strymon, river - -I
Stymphalus, mountain 27
Sybaris 603
Sylla besieges Athens 543

takes it 544
defeats the generals of Mithridates ib

Syracuse, deCcription of - 218, 558
Bvyrac;ufamus defeat the Athenians in a sea fight 224.

S.Y.

Pag.
Syracufans defeated the Athenians in a battle 225

defeated the Athenians in a second fea-fight - 226

Susa entered by Alexander - 428

Tanagra, battle at 183
Tachos King of Egypt 349
Taxilus puts himself under Alexander's protet&ion - 448
Taygetus, mountain -27
Tegyra, battle there - 320
Tempe, valley of - -19
Ten thousand Greeks, famous retreat of - 276, & feqq.
Tenedos, island . -27
Teos, town -- - 33
Thales the philosopher - 85
Theatre, Grecian, description of - 1 17
Theatrical entertainments - - 15
Thebes, city - 25

kings of - 45
first liege of - - 48
second siege of --ib.
citadel of, seized by the Spartans 313
demolished by Alexander - -399
rebuilt by Caffander - 492
Themiftoclcs, the Athenian, outlines of his chatafer - 140

his conduct in the Persian invasion 15 i, & feqq.
persuades the Greeks to fight the Persian

navy in the strait of Salamis 157

political operations of i66
fortifies Pireus ib.
banilied - -71
takes refuge in Persia 174
death and characer of - -178

Theopompus King of Sparta, eftablifles the Ephori 67
Theramenes put to death by the thirty tyrants - 26
Thermopyle, pass of - 21

heroic stand made there by Leonidas, 1 3
Theseus King of Athens - -59

his alterations in the government - 6
exploits of - -ib.
death of . 62

Thefpia, city - - 26
Thespis the tragic poet 884
Theffalonica, city - 19
Thessaly, geography of - - -2
Thrafybulus the Athenian conspires against the thirty tyrants 265

expels the thirty tyrants 260

Thra-

Pag.
Thrafybulus re-etablifhes democracy at Athens 266

his wife's conduf in procuring a general amnesty 267
death - 31

Thrafybulus, tyrant of Syracuse - 559
Thymbron the Spartan general - - 297
Thucydides opposes Pericles - - 186

banished - 187
chara&er as an historian - 253

Thurium, city - - -606
Tirnanthus the painter - - 257
Timoleon the Corinthian gets his brother assassinated 591

arrives in Sicily to assist the Syracufans against Dio-

nyfius the younger - - 592
defeats the Carthaginiani, and gets possession of A-

drana ib.

deposes Dionysius, and fends him to Corinth ib.
becomes master of Syracuse - 593
induces a new colony of Greeks to fettle there 594
subdues the other tyrants in Sicily . ib.
successful exploits against the Carthaginians 595
resigns his authority - - ib.
his death and characRer - - 556
Timotheus the Athenian - 19

character of - 35 2
fined by the Athenians -ib.
Tiffaphernes assists the Lacedemonians in the Peloponnesian

war - - - 229

aflaffinated - - 303

Tragedy-Tragic poets - 15
Treasure sent by Lysander to Sparta, deliberations about recei-

ving it there - - 247

Triballi defeated by A lexander - - 397
Troy, war again - - 49

causes of - - 5
taken - - 52
Tyrants, thirty, set up at Athens by Lysander - 247

violent proceedinga of - 260, & seq.
expelled by Thrafybulus - - 266
assassinated - - ib.
Tyre, city, besieged by Alexander - - 414

taken - - 417

Tyrtmeus the Athenian poet, general of the Lacedcmonians 19
%V'ar between the Lacedemonians and Argives 67

terminated by a combat of 3oo men on each fide ib.
between the Lacedemonians and Egincte 1 29

War

Pag.
War between the Athenians and Eginet - 138

Peloponnesian, begins - - 194
sacred, or of the Phoceans - - 6

Wife men, or fages of Greece - 73
Wrestling -
- z

X

Xenocrates the philosopher - - 473
Xcnophon, chara&er of as a writer -254

condu& in the famous retereatof the Io,ooo Greeks 277
Xerxes resolves to invade Greece - - 146

sets out, and arrives at Celene in Phrygia - 18
winters at Sardis - 149
transports his army from Asia Minor into Europe ib.
reviews his forces at Dorifca in Thrace - I o
numbers of his army and fleet - ib
opposed by Leonidas at the pass of Thermopyle 15 3
flies precipitately from Greece - 16
assassinated - - 7

Y
Youth, Grecian, education of - - 0o.

Z

Zacynthus, island 32
Zalcucus the philosopher 606
Zeno the Stoic philosopher 474
Zeuxis the painter - 2 5

FINI S.

# BOOKS lately published by WILLIAM CREECH, EDINBURGH.

( 631 )
BOOKS lately published by WILLIAM CREECH,

EDINBURGH.

. - OMAN ANTIQUITIES, or an Account of the Man.
R ners and Customs of the Romnas, refpeaing their

Government, Law, Religion, Games, Military and Na-
val Affairs, Dress, Marriages, Funerals, Coins, Weights
and Measures, Houses, Gardens, &c. &c. designed chief-
ly to illustrate the Latin Classics; by Dr Adam, Re&or
of the High School of Edinburgh, boards, price 7s 6d.
2. ELEMENTS of the PHILOSOPHY of the HUMAN

MIND, by Dugald Stewart, Professor of Moral Philo-
sophy, 4to, boards, price I1 is.
3. PRINCIPLES of MORAL and POLITICAL SCIENCE,

by Dr Adam Ferguffon, 2 vols. 4to, boards, price

l1 i6s.
4. INSTITUTES of MORAL PHILOSOPHY, by Dr Ser-

guffon, one vol. x2mo, third edition, bound, price 3s 6d.
5. HISTORY of CIVIL SOCIETY, by Dr Ferguffon, 8vo,

fifth edition, bound, price 6s.
6. ELEMENTS of MORAL SCIENCE, by Dr Beattie, Pro-

feffor of MoralPhilofophy and Logic in the Marifchal
College, Aberdeen, 2 vols. 8vo, boards, price 13s 6d.
7. Dr BLAIR's LECTURES on RHETORIC and BELLES

LETTRES, 3 vols. bound, price i8s.
3. ELEMENTS of MATHEMATICS, comprehending Geo-

metry, Conic Secions, Mensuration, Spherics, with 30
Copperplates by Mr Weft, afiftant Professor at St. An-
drews, bound, price 7s 6d.

4.

( 63
9. ELEMENTS of CONIC SECTIONS, by the late Pro-

feffor Simpson, with t4 Copperplates, 8vo, bound, price
6s.
o. OUTLINES of LEC1TURES on UNIVERSAL HISTO-

RY, Antient and Modern, with 7 Maps and a Chrono-
logical Table, by .Mr Tytler, Professor of Civil History,
bound, price 6s.
ii. POEMS, by RobertI Burns, a new edition, in 2 vols. con-

fiderably enlarged, boards, price 6s.
i. STATISTICAL ACCOUNT of SCOTLAND, by Sir

John Sinclair, Bart 1 o vols.
13. The MIRROR, a Periodical Paper, published at Edin-

burgh, 1779 .nd 1780, 3 vols. i2mo, a new edition,
bound, price 9s.
74. The LOUNGER, a Periodical Paper, published at Edin-

burgh in 1785 and '1786, 3 vols. a new edition, bound,
ios 6d.
15. INTRODUCTION to the ART of THINKING, by

the late Lord Kaimes, a new edition, bound, 3s.
x6. Dr SMITH's THEORY of MORALSENTIMENTS, a

new edition, 2 vols. Svo, bound, price 14s.
17. Dr SMITHI's NQUIRY into the WEALTH of NA-

TIONS, 3 vols. bound, price I is.
IS. Dr GREGORY's WHOLE WORKS, 4 vols. crown oc-

tavo, bound, price i6s.

k _ _ _ _ _ _
