THE
HI S T ORY

F
SCOTLAN D

DURING THE REIGNS OF
OQeen MARY and of King JAMES VLI

TILL
iis ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D,

VOLUME I.
THE SIXTH EDITION.

DUBLIN:
PRINTED FOR JAMES WILLIAMS, IN SKINNER-ROW.

MDCCLXXI.

# PREFACE.

P R E F ACE.
I Deliver this book to the world with all the dif-

fidence and anxiety natural to an A4thor on

publilhing his first performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to coceal, till it be known
whether that approbatio hall ever be etowed
upon it.

BUT, as I have departed, in many itances,

from former HIiftorians, as J have placed fals in a
different light, and have drawn chara&ers with new
colours, I ought to account for this conduct to my
readers; and to produce the evidence, on which,
at the distance of two centuries, I presume to con-
tradiet the testimony of less xemiote, or even of co-
temporary historians.

THE transactions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againit each other
with the fiercest political hatreds embittered by re-
ligious zeal. Each of these produced historians of
considerable merit, who adopted all their senti-
nents, and defended all their actions. Truth was
nor the sole obje& of these authors. Blinded by
prejudices, and heated by the part which they
themselves had ated in the scenes they describe,
they wrote an apology for a faction, rather than
the history of their country. Succeeding Historians
have followed thefe.guides almost implicitly, and
-have repeated their errors and mifrepiefentations.
But as the fame paflions which inflamed parries in
that age have descended to their posterity; as al-
most every event in Mary's reign has become the
objet of doubt or of dispute; the eager spirit of
controversy oon discovered, that without orme evi-
dence more authentic and more impartial than that
of Hiftoriars, npnsepf the poinas in quefion could

A 2 be

be decided with certainty. Records have there
fore been searched, original papers have been pro-
duced, and public archives, as well as the repofi-
tories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to collec whatever related
to that period, in which he aed so conspicuous a
part, hath provided such an immense store of ori-
ginal papers for illustrating this part of the English
and Scottish history, as are almost sufficient to satis-
fy the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the property of
the public) made great and valuable additions to
Cecil's colleetion; and from this magazire, Digges,
the compilers of the Cabala, Anderson, Keith,
Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of the papers
which they have printed. No Hift6ry of Scotland,
that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since there collections were publilhed. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
stances, to correct the inaccuracies of former His-
torians, to avoid their mistakes, and to detect their
misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the

notice of those industrious Collectors, and after all
the': have produced to light, much still remained
in darkness, unobserved or unpublished. It was
my duty to search for there, and I found this un-
pleasant task attended with considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advo-

cates at Edinburgh, contains not only a large col-
leEtion of orignal papers relating to the affairs of
Scotland, but copies of others no less curious, which
have been preserved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
extant in the public offices in England. Of all these,
the Curators of that library were pleased to allow
me the perusal.

THOUGH the British Mufleum be not yet open
to the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging difpofitiori

is

is well known, procured me access to that noble
collection, which is worthy the magnificence of a
great and polished nation.

THAT vast and curious collectioh of papers re-

lating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made
by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he published only two
volumes, having been purchased since his death,
by the Lord Viscount Royfton, his Lordship was
so good as to allow me the use of fourteen Volumes
in Quarto, containing that part of them which is
connected with my subject.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

valuable collection of original papers, in two large
Volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbiflop Spots-
wvood's hand; and it appears from several passages
in his history, that he had perused them with great
attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Cler-

gyman of the lalt century, compiled an History of
Scotland from the beginning of the Reign of James
V. to the death of James VI. in fix large Volumes
wherein he has inserted many papers of confe-
quence, which are no where elie to be found. A
copy of this history, which tfill remains in manu-
icript, in the poffefion of the Church of Scotland,
was put into my hands by my worthy friend the
Reverend Mr. George Withart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to

me the papers which he has collected relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy; but by explaining to me his
sentiments with regard to that problematical pas-
sage in the Scottish history, has enabled me to
place that transaction in a light which diipells much
of the darkness and confusion in which it has been
hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments
with regard to the condu6t and character of Queen

Mary

Mary to be extremely different from his own, com-
municated to me a Volume of manuscripts in his
possession, which contains a great number of valua-
ble papers copied from the originals in the Cottoni-
an Library and Paper Office, by the late Reverend
Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the University of Edinburgh. I likewise receiv-
ed from him the original Register of letters kept by
the Regent Lenox during his administration.

I HAVE consulted all there papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any use, towards illuftrat-
ing that period of which I write the history. With
what success I have employed them to confirm what
was already known, to ascertain what was dubious,
or to determine what was controverted, the public
must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in size
to the most bulky collection of my predecessors;
But I have satisfied myself with publishing a few
of the most curious among them, to which I found
it necessary to appeal as vouchers for my own vera-
city. None of there, as far as I can recollea, ever
appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dif-

fertation concerning the murder of King Henry, and
the genuineness of the Qtueen's letters to Bothwell.
The sacs and observations which relate to Mary's
letters, I owe to my friend Mr. John Davidlbn,
one of the Clerks to the Signet, who hath examined
this point with his usual acutenifs and industry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

OF .
S C OTLAND.

B O K I.
Ccntaining a review of the SCOTTISH Hij/ory previous

to the death of JAMES V.

H E firft.ages of the Scottish History are BOOK I.
dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as men, Teorigi
arrive at maturity by degrees, and the e- of nations
vents which happened during their infancy fabulous

or early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve and ob-
not to be remembered. The gross ignorance, which ure.
anciently covered all the North of Europe, the con-
tinual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent
and deftru&cive revolutions which there occasioned,
render it impossible to give any authentic account
of the origin of the different kingdoms now eftab-
lifhed there. Every thing beyond that short period,
to which well attested annals reach, is obscure; an
immense space is left for invention to occupy, each
nation, with a vanity inseparable from human na-
ture, hath filled that void with events calculated to
display its own antiquity, and lustre. And history
which oughttorecordtruthandto teach wisdom, of-
ten sets out with retailing fictions and absurdities.

THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as Origin of

high as any of their neighbours. Relying upon the Scots.
uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,

VOL. . B still

Boo r. frill moreuncertain, they reckon up a fenes of kings
^~^~ several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a

particular detail of the occurrences, which happen-
ed in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots,
as well as the other northern nations, we receive
the eariceft accounts on which we can depend, not
from their own, but from the Roman authors,
A. D 81. When thle Romans, under Agricola, first carried

their arms into the northern parts of Britain they
found it pofeffed by the Caledonians, a fierce and
warlike people; and having rpulfed, rather than
conquered them, they erecled a strong wall be-
tween the firrhs of Forth and Clyde, and there fix,
ed thl- bo:ndaries of their empire. Adrian, on
account of the difficulty of defending such a distant
frontier, contracted the limits of the Roman pro-
vince in Britain, by building. a second wall which
A.D.I21. ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambiti-

onof succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover
what Adrian. had abandoned; and the country be-
tween the two walls was alternately under the do-
minion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. A-
bout the beginning of the fifth century, the inroads
of the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Ro-
mans, in order to defend the centre of their em,
pire, to recall those legions, which guarded the
frontier provinces; and at that time they quitted
all their conquests in Britain,
A.D.4z2I. THEIR long residence in the island had polished,

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the
Romans, for the art of writing, and the us of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to
preserve the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left

under the dominion of the Scots and Pics. The
former, who were not mentioned by any Roman
author, before the end of the fourth century, were

proba.bi'

probably a colony of the Celtae or Gauls; their as- BOOK I.
finity to whom appears from their language, their V
manners and religious rites: circumstances more
decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than
either fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-inform-
ed, and credulous Annalists. The Scots, if we
may believe the common accounts, fettled at first
in Ireland; and extending themselves by degrees,
landed at last on the coasts opposite to that island,
and fixed their habitations there. Fierce and
bloody wars were, during several ages, carried on
between them and the Pias. At length, Kenneth
II. the sixty ninth King of the Scots (according tQ A D. 83,
their own fabulous authors) obtained a comple::e
vicory over the Pi6s, and united under one mo-
narchy, the whole country, from thewall of Adrian,
to the northern ocean. And his kingdom became
known by its present name, which it derived from
a people who at first fettled there as strangers, and
remained long obscure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period, the history of Scotland would Hiflory of
merit ome attention, were it accompanied with Scotland

peculiarly

any certainty. But as our remote antiquities are obfcurc.
involved in the fame darkness with those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown
almost an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfacions. This was occasioned by the malici-
ous policy of Edward I. of. England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch
called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that that kingdom was held as a fief of
the crown of England, and fubje&ed to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to efta-
blifh his claim, he seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poifeffion, by force or- fraud, of many historical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity or
freedom of the kingdom, he carried some of them
into England, and commanded the reft to be burn-

B z ed.

BooK I. ed.* Anuniverial oblivion ofpafttranfations might
,n"-"re have been the effe of this fatal event, but ome
fay. E5. imperfe& Chronicles had efeaped the rage of Ed-

ward; foreign writers had recorded some impor-
tant facts relating to Scotland; and the traditions
concerning recent occurrences were fresh and wor-
thy of credit. These broken fragments, John de
Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth century, col-
lected with a pious industry, and from them pick-
ed out materials, which he formed into a regular
history. His work was received by his country-
.men with applause; and as no recourse could be
had to more ancient records, it supplied the place
of the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was
copied in many monasteries, and the thread of the
narrative was continued, by different monks, thro'
the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and.Hector Boethius
published their histories of Scotland, the former a
succinct and dry writer, the latter a copious and
florid one, and both equally credulous. Not ma-
ny years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work;
and if his accuracy and impartiality had been, in
any degree, equal to the elegance of his taste, nd
to the purity and vigour of his style, his hiflory
might be placed on a level with the most admired
compositions of the ancients. But, instead of re-
jeting the improbable tales of Chronicle writers,
he was at the utmost pains to adorn them; and
hath cloathed with all the beauties and graces of
fition, those legends, which formerly had only its
wildness and extravagance.

Four re- THE history of Scotland may properly be .di-
markable vided into four periods. The first reaches from
scraosttth e origin of the monarchy, to the reign of Ken-
Lifor-. neth II. The second from Kenneth's conquest of

the Picts, to the death of.AlexanderIII. The third
extends to the death of James V. The lait, from

thence

thence to the accession of James VI. to the crown Boo I.
of England.

TFE lfirft period is the region.of pure fable and

con'ictture, and ought to be totally neglected, or
be abandoned to the indufry and credulity of an-
tiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second pe-
riod, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually in-
creaing-; and the events which then happened,
may be slightly touched, but merit no particular
or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the
history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records
preserved in England, becomes more authentic:
not only are events related, but their causes and
effects explained; the characters of the actors are
difpiayed; the manners of the age described; the
revolutions in the contitution pointed out: and
here every Scotsman should begin, not to read only,
but to fudy the history of his country. During
the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so-
mingled with those of other nations, its fituationin
the political slate of Europe was so important, its
influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was so visible, that its history becomes
an object of attention to Foreigners, and without
lone knowledge of the various and extraordinary
revolutions which happened there, they cannot
lbrm a uft notion either of the most illustrious e-
vents, or of the characters of the most diftinguifled
perionages in the sixteenth century.

THE following history is confined to the last of A review

these periods. To give a view of the political state of the
of the kingdom, during that which immediately third a:ra
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book.
The imperfect knowledge which frangers have of
the afFairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots-
men themselves have imbibed with regard to the
various revolutions in the government of their
country, render such an introduction equally ne-
ce.Tary to both.

B 3 The

BOOK t. The period from the death of Alexander III. t6

the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and an half, from the year 1286, to the
year 1542.

Rife ofthe IT opens with the famous controversy, concern-
controver- ing the independence of Scotland. Before the u-
fyconcern-
ing the inlion of the two kingdoms, this was a question of
depen- much importance. If the one crown had been
dence of confidered not as imperial and independent, but
Scotland. as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could

not have been concluded on equal terms, and every
advantage which the dependent kingdom procured,
must have been esteemed the concession of a Sove-
reign to his vaifal. Accordingly about the be-
ginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on. foot,
this controversy was agitated with all the heat,
which national animofities naturally inspire. What
was then a subject of serious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere
curiosity. But though the obje&s, which at that
time warmed and interested both nations, exist no
longer, a question which appeared so momentous
to our ancestors, cannot be altogether indifferent
or uninftruive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottish kings, who, as
far back as the feudal customs can be traced, held
these pofifeiTons of the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on that account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they heldin Eng-
land, was in no wife derogatory from their royal
cdgniy. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas,
than that the fame person should be both a Lord
;:nd a vassal, independent in one capacity, and de-
pendent in another e. The crown of England was

without

A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history.
Arpin fold the vicompt of the city Boutges to Philip I. who

did

without doubt imperial and independent, though BooK I.
the Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the ---
vassals of the Kings of France; and, in confe-
quence of their pofi-ilions in that kingdom, bound
to perform all the services, which a feudal Sove-
reign has a title to exat. The fame was the con-
dition of the Monarchs of Scotland; free and in-
dependent as Kings, but, as poltffing English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The
English Monarchs, satisfied with their legal and
uncontroverted rights, were neither capable, nor
had any thoughts of urping more. England,
when conquered by the Saxons, being divided by
them into many fmail kingdoms, was in no condi-
tion to extend its dominion over Scotland, united
at that time under one Monarch. And though
tlhele petty principalities were gradually formed
into one kingdom, the reigning Princes exposed to
continual ivafionsof the Danes, and often fubjeEt-
ed to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom
turned their arms towards Scotland, and were ut-
terly incapable of establishing new rights in tat
country. The first kings of the Norman race,
busied with introducing their own laws and man-
ners into the kingdom which they had conquered,
or with maintaining themselves onthethronewhich
some of them pofiefled by a very dubious title,
were as little solicitous to acquire new authority,

did homage to the Count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which he held of thit Nobleman, A. D. i oo. belie, e that
no example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own
fubjels, is to be met with in the hillories either of England
or Scotland. Philip le bel abolithed this practice in France,
A.D. 1302. Henaut. Abreg Chronole Somewhat similar to this,
is a charter of the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. 53, conRtitut-
ing James V. the Bailiff or Steward of that abbey, veiling
in him 311 the powers which pertained to that office, and re-
quiring him to be answerable to the Abbot for his exercise of
the fame, Arrhiv. publ. Edin.

B4 or

Boor I. or to form new pretensions in Scotland. An un-
'"-y - expeced calamity that befell one of the Scotch

Kings, first encouraged the English to think of
bringing his kingdom under dependence. William
King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Alnwick,
Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only ex-
torted from him an exorbitant ransom, and a pro-
mise to surrender the places of greatest strength in
his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
forhis whole kingdom. Richard I. a generousPrince,
solemnly renounced this claim of Homage, and
absolved William from the hard conditions which
Henry had imposed. Upon the death of Alexan-
der III. near a century after, Edward I. availing
himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland, ac-
quired an influence in that kingdom, which no
Engliih monarch before him ever possessed, and
imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather
than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the
claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Preteni- MARGARET of Norway, Grand-daughter of
ons of Alexander, and heir to his Crown, did not long
Bruce and survive him. The right of fuccefflon belonged to
a..r cjX the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third

son of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors forthe
Crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel Earl
David's econd daughter; Baliol, the grandson of
Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the
ruins of lucccmon which are now established, the
right of Balioi was preferable, and notwithftand-
ing Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of his
mother and grandmother, would be deemed incon-
teftible. But, in that age, the order of succession
was not ascertained with the fame precision. The
question appeared to be no less intricate, than it
vw.is important. And though the prejudices of the

people,

people, and perhaps the laws of the kingdom, fa- BooK I.
voured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by -
a powerful faction. Arms alone, it was feared,
must terminate a difpute-too weighty for the laws
to decide. But, in order to avoid the miseries of
a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both
parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This
had well nigh proved fatal to the independence of
Scotland; and the nation by its eagerness to guard
againit a civil war, was not only exposed to that
calamity, but almost fubjeted to a foreign yoke.
Edward was artful, brave, enterprising, and com-
manded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which pre-
vailed in Scotland, and the ambition of Compe-
titors ready to lacrifice their country in order to
obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to fubje& the kingdom. The
authority of an umpire, which had been unwarily
bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him
to execute his schemes with the greater facility.
Under pretence of examining the question with the
utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish Ba-
rons to Norham, and having gained forme, and
intimidated others, he prevealed on all who were
present, not excepting Bruce and Baliol, the com-
petitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the
English Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their
Sovereign or Liege Lord. This ftep led to another
itill more important. As it was vain to pronounce
a sentence which he had not power to execute,
Edward demanded possession of the kingdom, that
he might be able to deliver it to him whose right
ihould be found preferable. And such was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient am-
bition of the competitors, that both assented to this
strange demand, and Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl
of Angus, was the only man who refused to fur-

render

BooK . render the calfies in his custody to the enemy of
k"'V^ his country. Edward finding Baliol the most ob-

fequious and the least formidable of the two com-
petitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Baliol once more professed himself the vassal of
England, and submitted to every condition which
the Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged
was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
the nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully established.
But he began too soon to assume the master; his
new vaffais, fierce and independent, bore with
impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the
passive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Ed-
ward, who had no longer use for fiuch a pa-
geant king, forced him to resign the Crown,
and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to him-
self, by the rebellion of his vassal. At that cri-
tical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero,
to whom the fond admiration of his countrymen
hath acribed many fabulous as of prowess,
though his real valour, as well as integrity and
wisdom, is such as needs not the heightenings of
fiftion. He, almost single, ventured to take arms
in defence of the kingdom, and his boldness re-
vived the spirit of his countrymen. At lait, Ro-
bert Bruce, the grandson of him who stood in
competition with Baliol, appeared to assert his
own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his
country. The nobles, ahamed of their former
baseness, and inraged at the many indignities of-
sered to the'nation, crowded to his standard. In
order to crush him at once, the English Monarch
entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army.
Many battles were fought, and the Scots, though

often

often vanquished, were not.fubdued. The ardent BooK I.
zeal with which the nobles contended for the in- -v-r
dependence of the kingdom, the prudent valour
of Bruce, and above all a national enthusiasm,
inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated es-
forts of Edward, and counterbalanced all the ad-
vantages which he derived from the number, and
wealth of his subje&s. And though the war con-
tinued with little intermission upwards of seven-
ty years, Bruce and his posterity kept poffefionof
the throne of Scotland, and ruled with an authority
not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employ-
ed to terminate this controversy, neither Edward
nor the Scots seemed to difrruft thejuftice of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records,
and from these produced, in their own favour,
such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addressed by
each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced
as the common father, and often appealed to as
the common judge of all Christian Princes, are frill
extant. The fabulous tales oftheearly British history;
the partial testimony of ignorant Chroniclers; sup-
pofititious treaties and charters; are the proofs; on
which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty
of Scotland : and the homage done by the Scottish
Monarchs for their lands in England, is prepof-
teroufly fippofed to imply the fubje&ion of their
whole kingdom*. Ill founded, however, as their Ander-
right was, the English did not fail to revive it, in fon'sHif-
all the subsequent quarrels between the two king- Effaycon-
doms; while the Scots disclaimed it with the ut- cerning
most indignation. To this, we must impute the the Inde-
fierce and implacable hatred to each other, which pcnde" C
long inflamed both. Their national antipathies
were excited, not only by the usual circumstances
of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but

the

Book I. the English confidered the Scots as vassals who
-- '
.- had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,

regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at
enslaving their country.

1306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his
Stateof rein in Scotland, the fame form of government
do when was etablifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe.
Bruce be-And the surprising similarity, in their conititution
gan hi and laws, demonstrates that the nations which
reign. overturned the Roman empire, and ereted these

kingdoms, though divided into different tribes,
and distinguished by different names, were origi-
nally the fame people. When we take a viewof the
feudal 1yrfem of laws and policy, that itupendous
and singular fabric ereced by them; the firit ob-
jec that strikes us is the King. And when we are
told that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands
within his dominions, that all his fubjedcs derive
their poffefions from him, and in return confe-
crate their lives to his service: when we hear that
all marks of diftinaion, and titles of dignity, flow
from him as the only fountain of honour; when
we behold the most potent Peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, tivearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereig",
and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce
him a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No
conclusion, however, would be more iafh, or worse
founded. The genius of the feudal government
was purely ariftocratical. \Vith all the ensigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of deiporic
power, a feudal King was the most limited of all
Princes.

Ongin of BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations
Goverdal to conquer the world, many of the northern nati-
mcnt,rand ons seem not to have been subject to the govern-
its aifo. ment of kings * and even where monarchical
ratical government was eablifhed, the prince possessed
gc"'ib but little authority. A general rather than a king,
-i. c.; 3- his

his military command was extensive, his civil ju- BooK I.
riliti&on almost nothing*. The army which he led t--.~
was not composed of ioldiers, who could be corn- de Mor.
pelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed Germ. c.
his standard t. These conquered not for their 7. .
leader, but for themselves; and being free in t C[. ib.
their own country, renounced not their liberty
when they acquired new settlements. They did
not exterminate the ancient inhabitants of the
countries which they subdued, but seizing the
greater part of their lands, they took their persons
under protection. And the difficulty of main-
taining a new conquest, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it ne-
ceffary to be always in a posture of defence, the
form of government which they established, was
altogether military, and nearly resembled that to
which they had been accustomed in their native
country. Their general still continuing to be the
head of the colony, part of the conquered lands
were allotted to him; the remainder, under the
name of beneficia or fiefs, was divided amongst his
principal officers. As the common safety required
that these officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence,
and flould continue obedient to their general, they
bound themselves to take the field when called,
and to serve him with a number of men, in pro-
portion to the extent of their territory. These
great officers, again, parcelled out their lands
among their followers, and annexed the fame con-
dition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military subordination was
established, and the possession of land was the pay
which soldiers received for their personal er-
vice. In consequence of these notions, the pof-
lfefion of land was granted during pleasure only,
and kings were eletive. In other words, an o.i-

cer

Boor I. cer disagreeable to his general was deprived of

- ' his pay, and the person who was most capable of

conduaing an army, was chosen to command it.
Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of feu-
dal government.

BUrT long before the beginning of the four-

teenth century, the feudal system had undergone
many changes, of which the following were the
most considerable. Kings, formerly elective, were
then hereditary; and fiefs granted at first during
pleasure, descended from father to son, and were
become perpetual. These changes, not less ad-
vantageous to the nobles, than to the prince, made
no alteration in the ariftocratical spirit of the feu-

General dal constitution. The king, who, at a distance,
caofes seemed to be invested with majesty and power,
wited the appears on a nearer view, to possess none of thole
power of advantages, which bestow on monarchs their gran-
the feudal deur and authority. His revenues were canty;
monarchs. he had not a standing army; and he enjoyed no

proper jurisdiction.

Their re- ' AT a time when pomp and splendor were un-
venues known, even in the palaces of kings; when the
were mall officers of the crown received little salary besides

the fees and perquisites of their office; when em-
bassies to foreign courts were rare; when armies
were composed of soldiers who served without pay;
it was not necessary that a king hould possess a
great revenue; nor did the condition of Europe,
in those ages, allow its princess to be opulent. Com-
merce made little progres in the kingdoms,
where the feudal government was established. In-
fitutions, which had no other objec but to inspire
a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and
ro make arms the only honourable profeifion, na-
urally discouraged the commercial arts. The re-
venues, arising from the taxes imposed on the dif-
ferent branches of commerce, were by consequence
;-nconfiderable, and the prince's treasury received

little

little supply from a source, which among a trading BooK I.
people, flows with such abundance; and is almost -v
inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on
land; such a burden would have appeared intole-
rable to men who received their estates, as the re-
ward of their valour, and who confidered their
service in the field as a full retribution for what
they possessed. The king's demesnes, or the portion
of land which he still retained in his own hands
unalienated, furnished subsistence to his court, and
defrayed the ordinary expence of government e.
The only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged
vafiais to pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldest
ion was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married: and a third in order to ran-
fom him if he should happen to be taken prisoner.
Besides these, the king received the feudal casual-
ties of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals.
And, on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjets
granted him an aid, which they distinguished by
the name of a benevolence, in order to declare that he
received it not in consequence of any right,
but as a gift, flowing from their good-will t.
All these added together, produced a revenue,
scanty and precarious, which far from enabling the
king to attempt any thing that could excite the
jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continu-
al indigence, anxiety, and dependence.

NOR could the king supply the defect of his re- They had

venues; by the terror of his arms. Mercenary no sand-
troops and standing armies were unknown as long ingarmie
as the feudal government subsisted in vigour.
Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of
the king, and the fub-vaffals of the barons were
all obliged to carry arms. And while the poverty

Craig. de Feud. lib. . Dieg. 14. Du Cange Glof. voc.
Dominicunm. t Du Cange vcc. Auxilium.

of

Boo: I. of princes prevented them from fortifying their
>>'lr' frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a

few weeks, and while a fierce and impetuous
courage was impatient to bring every quarrel to
the decision of a battle, an army without pay, and
with little discipline, was sufficient for all the pur-
poses both of the security and of the glory of a
nation. Such an army, however, far from being
an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less
formidable to him than.to his enemies. The more
warlike any people were, the more independent
they became; and the fame persons being both fol-
diers and fubjecls, civil privileges and immunities
were the consequence of their vicories, and the
reward of their martial exploits. Conquerors,
whom mercenary armies, under our present forms
of government, often render the tyrants of their
own people, as well as the scourges of mankind,
were commonly, under the feudal constitution, the
most indulgent of all princes to their subjects, be-
cause they stood most in need of their assistance.
A prince, whom even war and victories did not
render the master of his own army, pofelled no
shadow of military power during times of peace.
His disbanded soldiers mingled with his other sub-
jets; not a ingle man received pay from him;
many ages elapsed even before a guard was ap-
pointed to defend his person; and, destitute of
that great instrument of dominion a standing ar-
my, the authority of the king continued always
feeble, and was often contemptible.

Theirju- NOR were these the only circumstances which
nrifieio contributed towards depressing the regal power.
was umit- By the feudal system, the king's judicial authority

was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes
seem to have been the fupremejudges of their peo-
ple, and, in person, heard and determined all con-
troverfies among them. The multiplicity of causes
soon made it necessary to appoint judges, who, in

the

the king's name, decided matters, that belonged Boor I.
to the royal juriidition. But the Barbarians, who w- '
overran Europe, having destroyed most ofthegreat
cities, and the countries which they seized being
cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in
return, they were bound to prote& from every
injury; the administration of justice was greatly
interrupted, and the execution of any legal sentence
became almost imprat&icable. Theft, rapine, mur-
der, and disorder of all kinds prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible;
and scarce compatible with the subsistence of civil
society. Every offender sheltered himself under
the protection of obme powerful chieftain, who
screened him from the pursuits of justice. To
apprehend, and to punish a criminal, often re-
quired the union and effort of half a kingdom *.

* A remarkable instance of this occurs ir the following

hiflory, so late as the year 1 56 . Mary, having appointed a
court of juflice to be helJ on the borders, the inhabitants of
no less than eleven counties were summoned to guaid the
p-rfon, who was to ad as judge, and to enable him to en-
force his decisions. The words of a proclamation, which
afford uch a convincing proof of the feebleness of the feu-
dal government, deserve our notice.-- " And because
it is neceflary for the execution of her iighnefs's comrnand-
ments, and service, that her justice be well accompanied,
and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence
of a good power of her faithful fubjets.- Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons,
Free-holders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling
within the said counties, that they, and every one of them,
with their kin, friends, servants, and houfhold-men, well
bodin in feir of wa' in the molt ubilantious manner, [i. e.
compleatly armed and provided,] and with twenty days
vituals, to meet and to pass forwa-d ith him to the bo-
rough of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the said
space of twenty days, and to receive such direction and
commands, as shall be given by him to them in our Sovereign
Lady's name, for quietness of the country : and to put the
fame in execution under the pain of losing their life, lands,
and goods." Keith's Hist. of Scotland, 198,

VOL. I. C In

BooK I. In order to remedy there evils, many persons of
i b*- diftintion were entrusted with the adminiitration

of justice within their own territories. But what
we may presume was, at first, only a temporary
grant or a personal privilege, the incroaching fpi-
rit of the nobles soon converted into a right, and
rendered hereditary. The lands of some were
ereted into Baronies, those of others into Regalities,
Thejurifdi&ion of the former was extensive, that
of the latter, as the name implies, royal and almost
unbounded. All causes, whether civil or crimi-
nal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the
regality appointed; and if the king's courts call-
ed any person within his territory before them,
the lord of regality might put a stop to their pro-
ceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, re-
move the cause to his own court, and even punish
his vassal, if he submitted to a foreign jurifdic-

Craig. tion . Thus, almost every question, in wich
lib. iii. any person, who resided on the lands of the no-
lieg 7 bles, was interested, being determined by judges

appointed by the nobles themselves, their vassals
were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, sub-
je& to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split
into many small pnncipalities, almost indepen-
dent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And
the king was not only stripped of the authority
annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but his
revenues suffered no small diminution, by the loss
of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
that age, due to the person who adminiftred jus-
tice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles rose towards independence.
Not satisfied with having obtained an hereditary
right to their fiefs, which they formerly held
during pleasure, teir ambition aimed at some-
thing bolder, and by introducing entails, endea-

voured,

voured, as far as human ingenuity and invention BooK I.
can reach that end, to render their possessions -_
unalienable and everlaftiftg. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance tranlinitted to
themn from their ancestors, but none to dimini-sh
it; tirne alone, by means of marriages, legacies,
and oilier accidents, brought continual accefforis
of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of
itscourte, and as it rolled on, new honours and
new property flowed successively into it. What-
ever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons likewise possessed in an ample man-
ner. These marks of diflincion are, in their own
nature, either official or personal, and being an-
nexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by the
admiration of mankind upon illustrious characers,
ought to be appropriated to these. But the on,
however unworthy, could not bear to be stripped
of that appellation, by which his father had been
diftinguiihed. His presumption claimed, what his
virtue did not merit; titles of honour became
hereditary, and added new lustre to nobles al-
ready in pofeffion of too much power. Something
more audacious, and more extravagant still re-
mained. The supreme direction of all affairs,
both civil and military, being committed to the
great officers of the crown, the fame and safety of
Princes, as well as of their people, depended upon
the fidelity and abilities of these officers. But such
was the preposterous ambition of the nobles, and
so successful, even their wildest attempts to a-
grandize themlelves, that in all the kingdomns
where the feudal institutions prevailed, most of
these offices were annexed to great families, and
held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A person,
wholei undutiful behaviour rendered him odious
to his Prince, or whole incapacity exposed him to
the contempt of the people, often held a place of

C 2 power

BOOK I. power and trust, of the greatest importance to
"'"' both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord Justice

General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward,
High Constable, Earl Marshal, and High Ad-
miral, were all hereditary; and in many coun.
ties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame
manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great; could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want in-
ftruments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands, which they parcelled
out among their followers, supplied them with a
numerous band of faithful and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely fplen-
dour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was
often more crowded than the court of his Sove-,
reign. The strong castles, in which they reided,
afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and
seditious. A great part of the revenue was spent
upon multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers,
And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were
accompanied, even in times of peace, with a vail
train of armed followers. The usual retinue of
William the sixth earl of Douglas consisted of
2000 horse. Those of the other nobles were mag-
nificent and formidable in proportion. Impatient
of subordination, and forgetting their proper rank,
iuch potent and haughty Barons were their rivals
rather than the fubjeas of their Prince. They
often deipiled his orders, insulted his person, -and
xrefted from him his crown. And the hiftoryof
Europe, during several ages, contains little else,
but the accounts of the wars and revolutions, oc-
cafioned by their exorbitant ambi ion.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceed-
;:d i; proper bounds in the other nations of

Europe,

Europe, we may affirm that the balance which BOOl I.
ought to be preserved between a King and his T''.f-

Their

nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scottish power
nobles enjoyed, in common with those of other greater in
nations, all the means for extending their autho- Scotland
rity, which arise from the ariftocratical genius of-an iter
the feudal government. Besides these, they kingdom.
possessed advantages peculiar to themlelves; the
accidental sources of their power were confidera- The par-
ble; and singular circumstances concurred with ticular
the spirit of the constitution to aggrandize them. caures of
To enumerate the most remarkable of these, will thll
serve both to explain the political state of the king-
dom, and to illustrate many important occur-
rences, in the period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause The na-

of the power and independence of the Scottish tureofth¢
nobility. Level and open countries are formed for cOuntr
fervit:de. The authority of the supreme ma-
giftrate reaches with ease to the most distant
corners, and when nature has erected no barrier
and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
are oon detested, and punished. Mountains, and
fens, and rivers set bounds to despotic power, and
amidst these, is the natural state of freedom and
independence. In such places, did the Scottish
nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to
his own castle, a mutinous Baron could defy the
ower of his Sovereign; it being impra&cicable to
lead an army through a barren country, to places,
almost inaccessible to a tingle man. The fame
cauies, which checked the progress of the Roman
arms, and rendered all the efforts of Edward I.
abortive, often proteEted the Scottish nobles from
the vengeance of their Prince; and they owed
their personal independence, to those very moun-
tains and marshes, which saved their country from
being conquered.

C 3 II. THE

Boos . I1. THE want of great cities in Scotland con-
Th~ail~ tributed not a little to increase the power of the
nUmberofrobility and to weaken that of the Prince. Where.
great ci- ever numbers of men aemble together, order
tieS. must be established, and a regular form of go-

vernment instituted, the authority of the magif-
trate must be recognized, and his decisions meet
with prompt and full obedience. Laws and fubor-
dination take rile in cities; and where there are
few cities as in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there
are few or no traces of any fort of police. But
under the feudal governments, commerce, the
chief means of assembling mankind, was negleEt-
ed3 the nobles, in order to trengthen their in-
fluence over their vassals, resided among them,
and seldom appeared at court, where they found
a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with
equals. In Scotland the rich counties in the
south lying open to the English, no town situated
there could rile to be great or populous amidst
continual inroads and alarms; the residence of our
monarchs was not fixed to any particular place;
many parts of the country were barren and un,
cultivated; and in confequenceof there peculiar cir-
cumftances, added to the general causes flowing
from the nature of the feudal institutions, the towns
in Scotland were extremely few, and very inconfi-
derable. The vassals of every Baron occupied a
diftinc portion of the kingdom, and formed a fe-
parate and almost independent society. Inflead of
giving aid towards reducing to obedience their fedi-
tious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his pro-
teition, they were all in arms for his defence,
and obftrucied the operations of justice to the
utmost. The prince was obliged to connive at
criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles,
conscious of this advantage, v.w-re not afraid to

o (srn l;

offend; and the difficulty of punishing almost as- BOOK I,
fured them of impunity. V-

III. THE division of the country into clans had The initi-

no small effect in rendering the nobles considerable. tution of
''he nations, which overran Europe, were origi- Clans
nally divided into many small tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had
conquered, it was natural for every chieftain to be-
stow a portion, in the first place, upon those of
his own tribe or family. These all held their lands
of him; and as the safety of each individual de-
pended on the general union, these finall societies
clung together, and were distinguished by ome
common appellation, either patronymical, or local,
long before the introduction of surnames, or en-
signs armorial. But when these became common,
the descendants and relations of every Chieftain
assumed the fame name and arms with him; other
vassals were proud to imitate their example, and.
by degrees they were communicated to all those
who held of the fame superior. Thus clanihips
were formed; and in a generation or two, that
consanguinity which was, at first in a great mea-
sure, imaginary, was believed to be real. An ar-
tificial union was converted into a natural one;
men willingly followed a leader, whom they re-
garded both as the superior of their lands, and the
chief of their blood, and served him not only with
the fidelity of vassals, but with the affe&ion of
friends. In the other feudal kingdoms, we may
observe such unions as we have described, imper-
fetly formed; but in Scotland, whether they were
the production of chance, or the effet of policy,
orintroduced by the Irih colony above-mentioned,
and strengthened by carefully preserving their ge-
nealogies both genuine and fabulous, clanfhips
were universal. Such a confederacy might be
overcome, it could not be broken; and no change
of manners, or of government, has been able, in

C 4 some

Boo I. fame parts of the kingdom, to dissolve associations
t..-^v which are founded upon prejudices so natural to

the human mind. How formidable were nobles
at the head of followers, who, counting that cause
just and honourable which their Chief approved,
were ever ready to take the field at his command,
and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person,
or of his fame? Against such men, a King con-
tended with great disadvantage, and that cold ser-
vice, which morny purchases, or authority extorts,
was not an equal match for their ardor and zeal.

The small IV THE smallness of their number may be
number of
thenobles. mentioned among the causes of the grandeur of

the Scottilh nobles. Our annals reach not back to
the first division of property in the kingdom; but
so far as we can trace the matter, the original pof-
sessions of the nobles seem to have been extenlive.
The ancient Thanes were the equals and the ri-
vals of their prince. Many of the Earls and Barons,
who succeeded them, were masters of territories no
less ample. France and England, countries wide
and fertile, afforded settlements to a numerous
and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom nei-
ther extensive nor rich, could not contain many
such overgrown proprietors. But the power of an
aristocracy always diminishes, in proportion to the
increase of its numbers; feeble if divided among a
multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly re-
femble those of the people, they are routed only
by what they feel, not by what they apprehend;
and submit to many arbitrary and opprefive as,
before they take arms againit their lovereign. A
small body, on the contrary, is more sensible, and
more impatient; quick in dicernin,, and prompt
in repelling danger; all is motions are as !iddcn,
as those of the other are flowv. lc-i,. I ptoceccicd
the extreme iealoufv, with which the Si:tn;!bh o-
bles ob-erved thei- .m'.n.a:'ch. a.c t'-: i ., !icfs

v .

with which they opposed their encroachments. BooK I.
Even the virtue' of a Prince did not render them --
less vigilant, or less eager to defend their rights;
and Robert Bruce, notwithtanding the splendor
of his victories, and the glory of his name, was
upon the point of experiencing the vigour of their
resistance, no less than his unpopular descendent
James III. Besides this, the near alliance of the
great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural consequence of their small number. And
as consanguinity was, in those ages, a powertiful
bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman in-
tcrefted themselves in his quarrel, as a common
cause, and every contest the king had, though
with a single Baron, soon drew upon him the arms
of a whole confederacy.

V. THOSE natural conneAions both with their Their

equals, and with their inferiors, the Scottifl nobles leagues
strengthened by a device, which if not peculiar to and corn
themselves, was at leat more frequent among
them, than in any other nation. Even in times
of profound peace, they formed afiociations, which
when made with their equals, were called leagues
es mutual defence; and when with their inferiors,
bnAds of manrent. By the former, the contracting
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each
other, in all causes, and against all persons. By
the latter, protection was stipulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and personal service promised
on the other *. Self-prefervation, it is probable, A. 30.
forced men at first into these confederacies, and Parl.1424.
while disorder and rapine were universal, while A 43 P.
government was unsettled, and the authority of'555
laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it necelfary to unite in this manner for their
icurity, and the weak were obliged to court the
patronage of the il;-rg. By degrees, these as-
lociations became so many alliances offensive and
defensive against the throne; and as their obliga-

tion

BOoK I. tion was held to be more sacred than any tie what-

'r^ever, they gave much umbrage to our Kings, and

contributed not a little to the power and indepen-
dence of the nobility. In the reign of James II,
William the eighth Earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the Earls of Crawford,
Rois, Murray, Ormond, the LordsHamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and ib formidable was this combination
to the King, that he had recourse to measures no
less violent than unjust in order to dissolve it.

The fre- VI. THE frequent wars between England and
quent Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the
wars with
England. power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar-

rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the
eait; on the well they are separated by an imagi-
nary line. The small revenues of our Kings pre-
vented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons
in the towns on the frontier; nor would the jea-
lousy of their fubjefs have permitted such a me-
thod of defence. The Barons, whose estates lay near
the borders, confidered themselves as bound both
in honour and in interest to repel the enemy. The
wardebips of the different marches, offices of great
trust and dignity, were always bestowed on them.
This gained them the leading of the warlike coun-
ties in the south; and their vassals, living in a
state of perpetual hostility, or enjoying at best an
insecure peace, became more inured to war than
even the reft of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their chieftain in his most hardy
and dangerous enrerprizes. It was the valour, no
less than the number of their followers, that ren-
dered the Douglases great. The nobles in the
northern and midland counties were often dutiful
and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs
always found it impraAicable to subdue the muti-
nous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all
our domestic quarrels, those, who could draw to their

fide

fide the inhabitants of the southern counties, were Boo oae
sure ofvictory; and conscious of this advantage, ----
the Lords who possessed authority there, were apt
to forget the duty which they-owed their Sovereign,
and to aspire beyond the rank of fubjets,

VII. THE calamities which befell our Kings, The fre-

contributed more than any other cause to diminish quent nii-
the royal authority. Never was any race of mo- noriies
narchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix fuccef- happened
five princes, from Robert III. to James VI. not one in Scot-
died a natural death; and the minorities, during land.
that time were longer, and more frequent, than
ever happened in any other kingdom. From Ro-
bert Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes;
and seven of there were called to the throne, while
they were minors, and almost infants. Even the
moit regular and best established governments feel
sensibly the pernicious effets of a minority, and
either become languid and inactive, or are thrown
into violent and unnatural convulsions. But, un-
der the imperfect and ill-adjufted system of go-
vernment in Scotland, these effets were still more
fatal; and the fierce and mutinous fpirit.of the no-
bles, unrestrained by the authority of a King,
scorned all subjection to the delegated jurifdition
of a regent, or to the feeble commands of a mi-
nor. The royal authority was circumscribed with-
in narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced
almot to nothing; and the aiftocratical power
gradually rose upon the ruins of the monarchical,
Left the personal power of a regent mlould enable
him to at with too much vigour ; the authority,
annexed to that office, was sometimes rendered
inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a ingle re-
gent was chosen, the greater nobles, and the heads
of the more illustrious families, were !eldom raised
to that dignity. It was often conferred upon men,
who poffeifed little influence, and excited nojea-

lousy.

BoOK I. lousy. They, conscious of their own weakness,
'-rr.-j were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and

to permit others: and, in order to fuipport their au-
thority, which was deftikute of real trength, they
endeavoured to gain the most ,owerful and arive
Barons, by granting them poilCfTions and immuni-
ties, which railed them to still greater power.
When the King himleif came to aiiinie the reins
of governmenr, he found his revenues wafted or
alienated, the crown lands seized or given away,
and the nobles o accufomed to independence, that
after the struggles of a whole reign, he was ieldom
able to reduce them to the fame fta&, in which

Reviewof they had been at the beginning of his minority, or
the events to wrest from them what they had usurped during
favoura- 1
ble to the tat time. If we take a view of what happened to
noblesdo- each of our kings, who was so unfortunate as to
ring each be placed in this situation, the truth and impor-
minorty. tance of this observation will fully appear.

1320.
David II. THE minority of David II. the son of Robert

Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Ed-
ward Baliol, who relying on the aid of England,
and on the support of some difaffeced barons among
the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success
which at first attended his arms, obliged the young
King to retire to France; and Baliol took possel-
sion of the throne. A small body of the nobles,
however, continuing faithful to their exiled Prince,
drove Baliol out of Scotland; and after an ab-
fence of nine years, David returned from France,
and took the government of th- kingdom into his
own hands. But nobles, who were thus wafting
their blood and treasure in defence of the crown,
had a right to the undisturbed possession of their
ancient privileges, and even some title to arrogate
new ones. It teems to have been a maxim, in that
age, that every leader might claim as his own,
the territory which his sword had won from the
rneny. Great acquisitions were gained by the

nobility

nobility in that way; and to thefethe gratitude and Boo I.
liberality of David added, by distributing, among ' "
ilch as adhered to him, the vast poffefions which
fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his enemies.
The family of Douglas, which began to rife above
the other nobles, in the reign of his father, aug-
mented both its power and its property, during his
minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the English during the 4o05.

continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained James I.
a prisoner almost nineteen years. During that
period, the kingdom was governed, first by his
uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Mur-
do his son. Both these noblemen aspired to the
crown, and their unnatural ambition, if we may
believe most of our historians, not only cut short
the days of Prince David the King's elder brother,
but prolonged the captivity of James. They flat-
tered themielves, that they might ftep with less
opposition into a throne, when almost vacant; and
dreading the King's return, as the extin&tion of
their authority, and the end of their hopes, they
carried on the negotiations for obtaining his liberty,
with extreme remissness. At the fame time they
negleted nothing that could either iboth or bribe
the nobles to approve their scheme. They flack-
ened the reins of government they allowed the
prerogative to be encroached upon; they suffered
the most irregular acts of power, and even wan-
ton instances ofopprelfion, to pass with impunity;
they delt out the patrimony of the crown among
those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose favour
they had gained; and reduced the royal authority,
to a state of imbecility, from which succeeding mo-
narchs laboured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the admi- 437.

nifration of affairs and the custody of the King's James II.
person was committed to Sir William Crichton,

and

Bo I. -and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and dif-
b*'-' cord were the effects of their conjunct authority,

4and each of them, in order to strengthen himself,
bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, -e-
reAed a fort of independent principality within
the kingdom; and forbidding his vassals to acknow-
ledge any authority but his own, he created
Knights, appointed a privy council, named officers
civil and military, affumedevery ensign of royalty,
but the title of King, and appeared in public with
a magnificence more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons werechofen to govern the king-
James III. dom, during theminority of James III. LordBoyd,

however, by seizing the person of the young King,
and by the ascendant which he acquired over him,
soon engrossed the whole authority. He formed
the ambitious project of railing his family to the
fame pitch of power and grandeur with those of
the prime nobility; and he effeted it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern-
ment, and the barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire
was of no long continuance, and the fall of his fa-
mily, according to the fate of favourites, was fud-
den and deftru&ive; but upon its ruins, the fa-
milv of Hamilton arose, which soon attained the
highest rank in the kingdom.
James X. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or protected either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more re-
gular factions, and disregarded more than ever
the restraints of order and authority. The French
had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their
interest, railed to be regent. This was the Duke

of

of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of Boo I.
James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the moft'v-
eminent of all the Scottiffh peers, who survived the
fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures,'
during the first years of his admini'fration; and
the intrigues of the Qeen Dowager, ifter of
Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no less
feeble. Though supported by French auxiliaries,
the nobles delpifed his authority, and regardless
either of his threats, or his intreaties, perempto-
rily refused, two several times, to enter England,
to the borders of which kingdom he had led them.
Provoked by these repeated instances of contempt,
the regent abandoned his troublesome flation, and,
retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of a
private life, to an office destitute of real authority.
Upon his retreat, Douglas Earl of Angus became
master of the King's person, and governed the
Kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made
to deprive him of his usurped authority. But the
numerous vassals and friends of his family adhered
to him, because he divided with them the power
and emoluments of his office ; the peqple reveren-
ced and loved the name of Douglas; he exercised
without the title of regent, a fuller and more abfo-
lute authority than any who had enjoyed that
dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous pre-emi-
nence of the Douglases eemed to be restored.

To there and to many other causes omitted or

unobserved by us, did the Scottish nobility owe that
exorbitant and uncommon power, of which in-
stances occur, so frequently in our history. No-
thing, however, demonitrates so fully the extent
of their power, as the length of its duration. Many
years after the declension of the feudal system in
the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the arms
or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken, or
laid it in ruins, the foundations of that ancient

fabric

Boo I. fabric remained, in a greatmeafure, firm and uni

~'~'e touched in Scotland.

The pow- THE powers, which the feudal institutions vest.
er of the ed in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
bles be- Princes of Europe, who longed to pofecfs some-
came in- thing morethan a nominal and precarious authority.
tolerable Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Hen-
toPrinces. ry III. of England, Edward II. and ome other

weak Princes, into rash and premature attempts
against the privileges of the Barons, in which they
were disappointed, or perished. Princes, of great-
er abilities, were content to mitigate evils which
they could not cure; they fought occupation for
the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent
wars; and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate
in foreign expeditions, which, if they brought no
other advantage, secured at least domestic tran-
quillity. But, time and accidents ripened the

The at- feudal governments for deftrution. Towards the
tmpbleo end of the fifteenth century, and beginning of
the nobles the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe attacked,
faccefsful as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men
in France of genius then undertook with success, what their
and in
Enland. unskilful predecessors had attempted invain. Lewis

XI. of France, the most profound and the most
adventurous genius of that age, began, and in a
single reign almost compleated the scheme of their
deftrucion. The sure but concealed policy of
Henry VII. of England produced the fame effe.
The means, indeed, employed by these monarchs
were very different. The blow which Lewis
struck was sudden and fatal. The artifices-of
Henry resembled those flow poisons, which waste
the constitution, but become not mortal till some
distant period. Nor did they produce confe-
quences less opposite. Lewis boldly added to the
crown whatever he refted from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons by encouraging
them to fell their lands, which enriched the com-
mons, and gave tcm a weight in the legislature

unknown

uinknown to theii- predeceflors. But while these BOOK I.
gre.It revolutions were carrying on in two king- , t.
Liorns, with which Scotland was intimately con- nobles
ncfted, no alterations happened there; the King continue
neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled to gather
the commons to encroach upon the aristocracy; nsrhgth
the nobles not only retained their ancient privileges land.
and pocffionsj but daily made new acquisitions.

I'HI. was not owing to the inattention of our OurKings

Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were end-avour
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the tend the
nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that royal au-
order. They did nor, however, possess means sus- thority.
ficient for accomplishing that end. The resources
of our monarchs were few, and the progress which
they made iconfiderable. But as the number of General
their followers, and the extent of their jurisdiction, means to-
were the to chief circumstances which rendered wards this
the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance d.
the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings
had recourse to the fame expedients,

i. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage5 and of Encou-

inpolilhed manners, surrounded with vassals bold rage dif-
and licentious, whom they were bound by interest cord a-
and honour to protet, the causes of discord were noblgths
many and unavoidable. And as the contending
parties could fcldom agree in acknovledging the
authority of any common superior or judge,-and
hir impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decisions ofjuftice, their quarrels were ufulally ter-
ininated by the sword. The offended Baron assem-
bled his vafrals, and wafted the lands, or Ihed the
blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury, was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly *.
Hence quarrels were rranfmitted from father to

VOL. I. D son,
' The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the

r-..'nners, but, what is more remarkable, by the lawsof those
ages. If any person thought the prosecution of an injury of-
feted to his fami!;, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the
Flique l.aw-5 cr. rtcd hqm publikly to defill from de-

manding

Boe I. son, and under the name of dead) fends, subsisted

for many generations, with unmitigated rancour.
It was the interest of the crown to foment rather
than to extingufh these quarrels, and by scatter-
ing or cherishing the feeds of discord among the
nobles, that union which would have rendered the
aristocracy invincible, and which must at once
have annihilated the prerogative, was effetually
prevented. To the fame cause, our Kings were
indebted for the success, with which they sometimes
attacked the most powerful chieftains. They em-
ployed private revenge to aid the impotence of
public laws, and arming against the person who
had incurred their displeasure, those rival families
vhich had wished his fall, they rewarded their
service, by sharing among them the spoils of the
vanquished. But this expedient, though it served
to humble individuals, did not weaken the body
of the nobility. Those, who were now the inftru.
ments of their Prince's vengeance, became, in
a hort time, the objeas of his fear. Having ac-
quired power and wealth by serving the crown,
they, in their turn, set up for independence: and
though there might be a flutuation of power, and
of property; though old families fell, and new
ones rfe upon their ruins; the rights of the arifto-
cracy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

rtar.ding vengeance but the fame laws, in order to punilh
ri cowardice, and want of affetion to his family, deprived
h m of the right of lucceflion. Henaut. Abrege Chronol. p.
: . .mong the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular institution
i ::inge;l.cd hy the amre of fcdaltium ; a voluntary
li. ciation, the ob:.et whereof was the personal fecuri-
t.' of :hnfe who joired in it, and which the teeblenefs of go-
vernmeint at that time rendered necessary. Among other re-
gi:.icr;., .hich are contained in one of those still extant,
inc fo'iz-.jrg deferyes notice. If any associate shall either eat
or drink v. h a crion ;ho has killed any member of the

.s.:::.;-, niefs i. the prelence of the King, the Bilhop, or
t.e C::n:, 2nd ur.!efs he can prove that he did not know
le per.:c, Ic: him rFa a great fine." Hick's Dissert. Epif-

-:,'-.. a-r d The'aur. I.ii.g. Septcntr. vol. i. p. 1z.

II. As

II. As the administration ofjuftice is one of the BooK I.

most powerful ties between a King and his subje&s, t-Eend
all our monarchs were at the utmost pains to cir- thejurif-
cumfcribe the jurifdition of the Barons, and to dition of
extend that of the crown. The external forms of theKing's
Ilbordination, natural to thefeudal system, favour- court.
ed this attempt. An appeal lay from the judges
and courts of the Barons to those of the King.
Tlhe right, however, of judging in thefirft instance,
btlonged tothe nobles, and they easily found means
to defeat the effec of appeals, as well as of many
other feudal regulations. The royal jurisdiction
was almnot confined within the narrow limits of the
King's demelnes, beyond which, his judges claimed
i indeed much authority, but poffcied next to none.
Our Kings were sensible of there limitations, and
bore them with impatience. But it was impolfible
to overturn in a moments what was so deeply
rooted; or to strip the nobles, at once, of privi-
leges which they had held so longs and which.wgre
wrought almost into the frame of the feudal con-
ftitution. To accomplish this, however, was an
object of uniform and anxious attention to all our
princes, James I. led the way, here, as well as
in other instances, towards a more regular and perk
feet police, He made choice, among the estates
of parliament, ofacertain numberofperions, whom
lhe diltinguifhed by the name of Lords of Sefio,
and appointed them to hold courts for determining
civil causes, three times in the year, and forty
days at a time, in whatever place hepleafedto name.
Their jurisdiction extended to all matters, which
formerly came under the cognizance of the King's
council, and being a committee of parliament,
their decisions were final. James II. obtained a
law, annexing all regalities, which should be
forfeited to the crown, and declaring the right of
jurifdiEtion to be unalienable for the future. J ames
III. imposed evere penalties upon those judges ap-

D 2 pointed

BooK I. pointed by the Barons, whose decisions should be
-"»- found on a review to be unjust; and by many other

regulations,endeavoured to extend the authority of

* A. 2. hisowncourt*. James IV.on pretenceofremedying
P. I469. the inconveniencies arising from the short terms
Ad-. 94 of the court of Sefion, appointed other judges
P. -

493.

Act. 99. called Lords of daily council. The Session was an
P. 'J47· ambulatory court, and met seldom: the Daily

Council, was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh;
and though not composed of members ofparliament,
the fame powers, which the Lords of Seflion enjoy-
ed, were vested in it. At last, James V. erected
a new court, that still subsists, and which he named
the College of '7irice, the judges or Senators of which
were called Lords of Council and Se/ion. This court
not only exercised the fame jurifdi&ion which for-
merly belonged to the Session and Daily Council,
but new rights were added: Privileges of great
importance were granted to its members, its forms
were prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
power and splendor conferred upon it. The per-
ions constituted judges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpeacs, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions
more consistent. Suchjudicatories became the ob-
jet of confidence, and of veneration; Men wil-
lingly submitted their property to their derermina-
tion, and their incroachments on the jurisdictions of
the nobles were popular, and for that reason fuc-
ccfsful. By devices of a imilar nature, the jurif-
dicion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrain-
cd, and the authority of the court of Justiciary ex-
rended. The crown, in this particular, gaining
infciinibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample
authority ; and the King, whose jurifdition once
re-fenblel that of a Bron, rather than that of

a Sove-

a Sovereign*, came more and more to be confide- BooK I.
red as the head of the corhmunity, and the ftu- -
pceme dispenser of justice to his people. These
acquisitions of our Kings, however, though com-
paratively great, were in reality inconsiderable;
and notwithstanding all their efforts, many of the
eparate jurifditions pofeffed by the nobles re-,
mained in great vigour; and their final abolition
was reserved to a distant and more happy period.

BUT betides there methods of defending their Each of
prerogative, and humbling the aristocracy which our Kings

pursued

maybe confidered as common to all our Princes, we some plan
lhall find, by taking a review of their reigns, that of hum-
alnoft every one of our kings, fiom Robert Bruce bling the
to James V. had formed some particular system nobles.
for depressing the authority of the nobles, which

D 3 was

* The molf perfect idea of the feudal system of government

may be attained by attending to the state of Germany, and to
the hillory of France. In the former, the feudal institutions
fill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether abolish-
ed in the latter, the public records have been so carefully
p:eferved. that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been
enabled, with more certainty and precision, than those of any
othercountry in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and
revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be confider-
ed as a fief, and all its great Princes as vaflals, holding of the
Emperor. They posess all the feudal privileges their fiefs are
perpetual; their jurifditions within their own territories, e-
parate and extensive; and the great offices of the empire are
all hereditary, and annexed to particular families. At the
fame time, the Emperor retains many of the prerogatives of
the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretenioni
are innumerable, and his power frnall ; his jurisdiction with-
in hi, own demesnes, or hereditary countries, is compleat;
beyond the bounds of there it is almost nothing.And so perma-
nent are feudal principles, that although the feudal system be
overturned in almof every particular Rate in Germany, and
although its Princes have all become absolute, the original
feudal conltitution of the empire fill remains; and ideas pc-
culi:lr to that form of government, direac all its operations,
and determine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations
with regard to the limited jurifdiaion of Kings under the
fudal governments, are greatly illustrated by what happen-

ed

BooK . was the object both of their jealousy and terror.
'--^~ This conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied

with the accounts of their historians, must be ccp.-
fidered as flowing entirely from their resentment
against particular noblemen; and all their attempts
to humble them, must be viewed as the allies of
private pafLion, not as the consequences of any ge-
neral plan of policy. But, though ome of their
actions may be imputed to those passions, though
the different genius of the men, the temper of the
times, and the frate of the nation necefiarily occa-
sioned great variety in their schemes, yet, without
being chargeable with excefive refinement, we may

This proed by affirm that their end was uniformly the fame. And
a review the project of reducing the power of the ariftocra-
of thee- cy, ometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour;
verts in sometimes concealed, or seemingly suspended; was
their
r ens never altogether abandoned.
Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles
Bruce. than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the

kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gra-
titude and generosity bestowed on them the lands
of the vanquifshed. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to
which it was subjet, at that time, in Scotland.
Edward I. havingforfeited theeftates of most of the

ed in France. The feebleness and dotage of the defcen-
dants of Charlemagne encouraged the Peers to usurp an in-
dependent jurifdi&ion. Nothing remained in the hands of
the crown ; all was seized by them. When Hugh Capet as-
cended the throne, A. D. 987. he kept possession of his pri-
vate patrimony the Compte of Paris, and all the jurifdition,
which the Kings his successors exercised for some time, was
within its territories. There were only four towns in France,
where he could eftablilh Grands Bail'is, or royal judges; all
the other lands, towns, and baillages belonged to the nobles.
The methods to which the French monarchs had recourse
for extending their jurifdiaion were exafly similar to those
employed by our Princes. Henaut's Abrege, p. 617, &c.
De L'Efprit des Loix, Liv 30. ch. zo, &c.

anti' !.

ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to his Eng- BooK I.
!iih fubjets. These were expelled by the Scots, -
and their lands seized by new masters. Amidst
filch rapid changes, confusion was unavoidable;
and many pofi'efd their lands by titles extremely
defective. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their being wea-
ry of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed
a scheme for checking the growing power and
wealth of the nobles. He summoned them to ap-
pear, and to shew bv what rights they held their
lands. They assembled accordingly, and the quef-
tion being put, they started up, at once, and drew
their swords, " By these, said they, we acquired our
lands, and with these we will defend them." The
King, intimidated by their boldness, prudently
dropt the project. But so deeply did they resent
this attack upon their order, that notwithstanding
Robert's popular and splendid virtues, it occasion-
ed a dangerous conspiracy against his life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, after- David 1I.

wards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
tend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OUR historians have been more careful to relate Robert II.

the military, than the civil tranfacions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmishes and inroads of little con-
sequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years
of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble adminiitration of Robert III. must RohertIII.

likewise be passed over fiightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly confsitution,
was no fit person to enter the lifts with ative and
martial barons, or to attempt wresting from them
any of their rights.

D 4 THE

Boos . THE civil transactions in Scotland are better
L-- ' known since the beginning of the reign of James I
Jam5e*. and a compleat series of or laws supplies the de-

sects of our historians. The English made ome
amends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a
prisoner, by their generous care of his education.
During his long residence in England, he had an
opportunityof observing the feudal lften in a more
advanced fiate, and refined from many of the im-
perfeceions which still adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there, nobles great,'but not in-
dependent ; a King powerful,'though far from ab-
solute; he saw a regular administration of govern.
ment; wife laws enacted; and a nation flourishing
and happy, because all ranks of men were accuf-
tomed to obey them. ' Full of these ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to
him a very different scene. The roya! authority,
never great, was now contemptible, by having
been so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony and revenues of the crown, were almost
totally alienated, During his long absence, the
name of a king was little known, and less regard-
ed. The lifence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed.
The weak were exposed to the rapine and oppref-
lion of the strong. In every corner ome barbarous
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the
King, nor pitied the people *.

' A cotenporary Monkish writer describes there calami-

ties very feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis, non
era; lex in Scotia, fed quilibet poten:ioru.n juniorem np-
'refit; et totum regnum suit unum larrocii'rtm ; hromici-
dia, depr-dationes, incendia, et ctera maieficia remanfr-
runt ipunita ; et juftita relegata extra erm;inos regni ex-
,:l:'it. Clartu!ar. Mora;. spud 'r.nez L.'.-:; ol. i. p. z7I .

.,-,

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open BooK I.

force to correct such inveterate evils. Neither '-''
the men, nor the times would have borne it. He
applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of
laws and statutes. In a parliament held imme-
diately after his return, he gained the confidence
of his people, by many wife laws, tending visibly
to re-eltablilh order, tranquillity, and justice in
the kingdom. But, at the fame time, that he
endeavoured to secure these blessings to his sub-
jecs, he discovercd his intention to recover those
possessions of which the crown had been unjustly
bereaved; and for that purpose obtained an at
by which he was impowered to summon those,
who had obtained crown lands during the three
last reigns, to produce the rights by which they
held them . As this statute threatened the pro- A&. 9.
perty of the nobles, another which passed in a sub- P. 1424.
sequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their
power. By it, the leagues and combinations, which
we have already described, and which rendered the
nobles so formidable to the crown, were declar-
ed unlawfult. Encouraged by this success in the t As. o0.
beginning of his enterprize, James's next ftep was P. 1424.
still bolder and more decisive. During the fitting
of parliament, he seized at once, his cousin Mur-
do duke of Albany, and his Tons; the Earls of
Douglas, Lenox, Angus, March, and above twen-
tv other Peers and Barons of prime rank. To all
or them, however, he was immediately reconciled,
erclpt to Albany, and his sons, and Lenox.
I'hhe were tried by their Peers, and condemned;
tor what crime is now unknown. Their execu-
tion ltruck the whole order with terror, and their
Torfeiture added vas poffefions to the crown. He
ICized, likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and Stra-
:bern, upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell
to hin by inheritance. The patience and inativity

ot

Boor I. of the nobles, while the king was proceeding so

rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown, are amaz-
ing. The only obitruction he met with was from
a flight infurretion headed by the Duke of Alba-
ny's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The splendor and presence of a King, to which
the great men had been long unaccustomed, in-
ipired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and conducted his operations with much
prudence. He was in friendship with England,
and closely allied with the French King : He was
adored by the people, who enjoyed unutual security
and happiness under his administration: And all
his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individu-
als; were obtained by decisions of law; and being
founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons
who suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehen-
sions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge-
neral rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body of
the nobility, and which the event shews either to
have been entered into with too much precipitan-
cy, or to have been carried on with too much vio-
lence. The fatherof George DunbarEarl of March
had taken arms against Robert III. the King's fa-
ther; but that crime had been pardoned, and his
lands restored by RobertDuke of Albany. James,
on pretext that the regent had exceeded his power,
and that it was the prerogative of the King alone
to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the par-
don to be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earl-
dom. Many of the great men held lands by no
other right than what they derived from grants of
the two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, tho'

they

they had reason to expec it in consequence of the BOOK I.
itatute which the King had obtained, occasioned weu
a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at present,
the only sufferer, the precedent might be extend-
ed, and their titles to possessions, which they con-
fidered as the rewards of their valour, might be
fubjeted to the review of courts of law, whose
forms of proceeding, and jurifdiion, were in a
martial age little known, and extremely odious.
Terror and discontent spread fast upon this disco-
very of the King's intentions; the common dan-
ger called on the whole order to unite, and to
make one bold stand, before they were stripped
successively of their cquifitions, and reduced to a
state of poverty and insignificance. The preva-
lence of these sentiments among the nobles encou-
raged a few desperate men, the friends or follow-
ers of those who had been the chief sufferers under
the King's administration, to form a conspiracy
against his life. The first uncertain intelligence of
this was brought him, while he lay in his camp
before Roxburgh castle. He durif not confide in
nobles, to whom he had given so many causes of
disgust, but instantly difniffed them-and their vas-
fals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
soon after murdered there, in the most cruel man-
ner. All our historians mention, with astonish-
ment, this circumstance of the King's disbanding
his army, at a time, when it wis so necessary for
his preservation. A King, fay they, surrounded
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barons
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it
is evident, from this review of his administration,
that he had greaterreafon to apprehend danger, than
to expeEt defence, fiom their hands. It was the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived.
Happy ! had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-

lized;

BooK I. lized; his love of peace, of juice, and of ele-
--*---- gance, would have rendered his chemes fuccefl-

ful; and instead of perishing because he had at-
tempted too much, a grateful people would have
applauded and seconded his efforts to reform and
to improve them.
James II. CRICHTON- the most able man of those, who

h.:d the direction of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been t;he minitler of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquish the design, and
he endeavoured to inlpire his pupil with the fame
sentiments. But what James had attempted to es-
sect slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crich-
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scots-
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to that age.
William the sixth earl of Douglas was the first
victim to their barbarous policy. That young no-
bleman 'as we have already observed) contemning
the authority of an infant Prince, almost openly re-
nounced his allegiance, and aspired to indepen-
dence. Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such
an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring tojuftice
so powerful an offender, decoyed him by many
prcmifes to an interview in the cattle of Edin-
burgh, and, notwithstanding these, murdered both
him and his brother. Crichton, however, gained
little by this act of treachery, which rendered him
universally odious. William the eighth Earl of
Dcuglas was no less powerful, and no less formi-
dable to the crown. By foiming the league which
we already mentioned with the Earl of Crawfurd
and other Barons, he had united against his Sove-
recin almost one half of his kingdom. But his
creduiitv led him into the fame snare, which had
been fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the
King's promises, who had now attained to the
years of manhood, and having obtained a safe con-
dauc under the great eal, he ventured to meet

him

him in Sterling castle. James urged him to dif- BOOK .
solve thatdangerous confederacy into which he had '- '
entered, the Earl obstinately refused; " If you

wvill not," said the enraged monarch, drawing
his dagger, " this shall " and stabbed him to the
heart. An aion so unworthy of a king filled the
nation with astonishment, and with horror. The
Earl's vassals ran to arms with the utmost fury,
and dragging the safe conduct, which the king had
granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they march-
ed towards Sterling, burnt the town, and threat-
ened to besiege the castle. An accommodation
ensued, on what terms is not known. But the
King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power and re-
fcntment, prevented it from being of long conti-
nuance. Both took the field, at the head of their
armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe-
rior to the King's both in number; and in valour;
and a ingle battle must, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Doug-
las was henceforth to possess the throne of Scot-
land. But, while his troops impatiently expeted
the ignal to engage, the Earl ordered them to
retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of
C'andow, the person in whom he placed the great-
eft confidence, convinced of his want of genius to
improve an opportunity, or of his want of courage
to leize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many; and the
Earl, cdepilcd, or forsaken by all, was oon driven
out of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for
his subsistence, on the friendship of the King, of
F.ngland. The ruin of this great family, which had
lo long rivalled and overawed the crown, and the
terror with which such an example of unsuccessful
ambition filled the nobles, secured the King for
some time, from opposition and the royal autho-
rity remained uncontrouled and almost absolute.

James

BOOK I. James did not uffer this favourable interval to

pass unimproved; he procured the consent of par-
liament to laws more advantageous to the prero-
gative, and more subversive of the privileges of
the aristocracy, than were ever obtained by any
former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

By one of there, not only all the vast possessions

of the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown,
but all prior and future alienations of crown lands
were declared to be void, and the king was im-
powered to seize them at pleasure, without any
process or form of law, and obliged thepoffeffors to

A&. 41. refund whatever they had received from them *.
P.- 455- A dreadful instrument of oppression in the hands

of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenfnip of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in
several instances, the jurifdicion of that office ; and

t bid. extended the authority of the King's courts t.
Ae. 42. BY a third, it was enacted, that'no Regality, or

exclusive right of administering justice within a
man's own lands, should be granted in time to

t Ibid. come, without the content of parliament $, a con-
Aa. 43. dition, which implied almost an express prohibi-

tion. Those nobles who already poiffffed that
great privilege, would naturally be solicitous to
prevent it from becoming common, by being be-
flowed on many. Those, who had not themselves
attained it, would envy others the acquisition of
such a flattering diflintion; and both would con-
cur in rejecting the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth at, all new grants of hereditary

offices were prohibited, and those obtained since
. A6. 44. the death of the last King were revoked §.

EACH of these statutes undermined some of the

great pillars, on which the power of the aristocracy
refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
Prince pursued the plan which he had begun, with
the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death,

occasioned

occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burf BooK I.
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his -
progress, he wanted neither genius nor courage to
perfec' it and Scotland might, in all probabi-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, which
would have seen the subversion of the feudal sys-
tem.

JAMES III. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
farinferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and pofeffed of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were,
likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif-
tance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
affection upon a few mean persons, of professions
so dishonourable, as ought to have rendered them
unworthy of his presence. Shut up with there, in
his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public,
and amused hinfelf with architecture, music, and
other arts, which were then little esteemed. The
nobles beheld the power and favour of theie minis-
ters, with indignation. Even the sanguinary mea-
fures of his father provoked them less than his
neglet. Individuals alone suffered by the former;
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their difcontentwas
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights
to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
every other concefllon, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the ulual

preparatives

BooK I. preparatives for civil war, were the effects of their
.-.V resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John

Earl of Mar, the King's Brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame
coldness, as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into all their cabals. The King detected
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The Earl of Mar
having remonftratedwith too much boldness against
the King's conduct, was murdered, if we may be.
lieve our historians, by his command, Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his ecape out
of the cattle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which first induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the profpet of the advantages which
might be derived from their general dilaffection,
added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, oon
inspired Albany with more ambitious and criminal
thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.
of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
aflilfance which was promised him towards dethron-
ing his brother, he bound himself, so oon as he
was put in poffefion of the Kingdom, to swear
fealty and to do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contract a new one with England, and to surrender
some of the strongest castles, and most valuable

Ab-rcr. counties in Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke
Mart. so basely purchased at the price of his own honour,
A.rch. and the independence of his country, was puntu-

ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with
a powerful arm conducted him towards Scotland.

The

The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to BooK I.
implore the affiltance of those nobles whom he had -- -
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in clolf confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event, which would restore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
field, however, at the head of a powerful army of
their followers, but with a stronger disposition to
rcdrcfi their own grievances, than to annoy the ene-
my; and with a fixed resolution of punithing those
mi~nions, whose insolence they could no longer to-
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
ear Lawder, with a military dispatch and rigour.
laving previously concerted their plan, the Earls
f Angus, Huntly, Lenoxj followed by almost all
e Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
red the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all
s favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they
uld not tear from the King, in whose arms he
ook shelter, and without anyform of trial, hanged
hem instantly over a bridge. Among the most
einarkable of those who had engrossed the King's
ffiction, were Cochran, a mason, Hommilataylor,
eonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan
fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
e capriciousness of James's character, and ac-
ounts for the indignation of the nobles, when they
eheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such
nworthy objedcs,
JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so
ttle under his command, and dismissing it, fnut
imfelf up in the catle of Edinburgh. After va-
ous intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
length restored to him and he seemed even to
ave regained his brother's favour, by some impor-
ant services. But their friendship was not of long
uration. James abandoned himself, once more,
VOL. I, E to

BooK I. to the guidance of favourites; and the fate-of thole
l- '- who had suffered at Lawder, did not deter others

from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Al-
bany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and
retiring to his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the
King himself. At the fame time he renewed his
former confederacy with Edward; the Earl of An-
gus openly negotiated that infamous treaty other
Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba-
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety, and flying
first to England, and then to France, he seems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Ministers multiplied the insults which
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs thenlived amidst theirnobles,
was railed for the King's defence, and the com-
mand of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of
Bothwell, the fame person who had so narrowly es-
caped when his companions were put to death at
Lawder. And, as if this precaution had not been
sufficient, a proclamation was issued forbidding any
perion to appear in arms within the precin&s of

Feric-i- the court * which, at a time, when no man of
s ;9gS. rank left his own houle without a numerous reti

nue of armed followers, was, in effect, debarring
the nobles from all access to the King. James, at
the fame time, beame fonder of retirement than

ever;

ever; and funk in indolence, or superstition, or BooK i.
attentive only to amuiiments, devolved his whole 'T~
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries
provoked the most considerable nobles to take arms,
and having persuaded orobliged the DukeofRoth-

hy, the King's eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set

himself at their head, they openly declared their
ntention of depriving James of a crown, of which
ie had discovered himself to be so unworthy.
Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his re-
irement, took the field, and encountered them
ear Bannockburn; but the valour of the Border-
ers, of whom the army of the malecontents was
hiefly composed, soon put his troops to flight, and
e himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, in-
olence, immoderate attachment to favourites, and
1 the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his
vhole condu&c but the character of a cruel and
nrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to
im by our historians. His neglect.of the nobles
rritated, but did not weaken them; and their dif-
ontent, the immoderate ambition of his two bro-
hers, and their unnatural confederacies withEng-
and, were Iufficient to have disturbed a more vi-
orous administration, and to have rendered a
rince of luperior talents unhappy.
THE indignation, which many persons of rank
xpreffcd against the condut of the conspirators,
together with the terror of the sentence of excom-
nunication which the Pope pronounced against
hem, obliged them to u their victory with great
oderation and humanity. And being conscious
how detefable the crime of imbruing their hands
n the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they en-
eavoured to regain the good opinion of their
ountrymen, and to atone for their treatment of
:he father, by their loyalty and duty towards the
on, they placed him instantly on the throne,

E 2 and

BooK I. and the whole kingdom oon united in acknow
a--e--m' ledging his authority.

laes. JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave

he felt, in an high degree, all the passions whicl
animate a young and noble mind. He loved mag
nificence, he delighted in war, and was eager t
obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient ant
hereditary enmity between the King and noble
seems almost intirely to have ceased. He envie
not their splendor, because it contributed to th
ornamentof his court; nordid he dread their power
which he confidered as the security of his king
dom, not as an object of terror to himself. Thi
confidence, on his part, met with the proper re
turn of duty and affection, on theirs; and, in hi
war with England, he experienced how much:
'King, beloved by his nobles, is able to perform
Though the ardour of his courage, and the fpii
of chivalry, rather than the profpe& of any natio
nal advantage, were the motives of that expedid
on; such was the zeal of his fubjets for the King'!
glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army
as ever any of his ancestors had led upon Englift
ground. But tho' James himself formed no fchemi
dangerous or detrimental to the aristocracy, hi
reign was distinguished by an event, extremely fa
tal to it; and one accidental blow humbled it mon
than all the premeditated attacks of precedin[
Kings. In the rash and unfortunate battle of Flow
den, a brave nobility chore rather to die, than te
desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteer
Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an in

-r. i-. credible number of barons, fell with the King}
w4 - The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibl!y

felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had
then ascended the throne, their consternation and
teeblei els would have afforded him advantages,
which no former monarch ever possessed.

Bun

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an BooK'I.

infant of a year old; and though the office of re-
gent was conferred on the Duke of Albany, a man James V.
of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power. of
the King was already great; though he made ma-
ny bold attempts to extend the royal authority;
though he put to death Lord Home, and banished
the Earl of' Angus, the two noblemen of greatest
nfluence in the kingdom, the aristocracy loft no
ground under his administration. A stranger to
the manners, the laws, and the language of the
eople whom he was called to rule, he aed, on
omne occasions, rather like a viceroy of the French
ing, than the governor of Scotland; but the no-
les afierted their own privileges, and contended
or the interest of their country, with a boldness,
hich convinced him of their independence, and
of the impotence of his own authority. After fe-
veral unsuccessful struggles, he voluntarily retired
o France, and the King, being then in his thir-
eenth year, the nobles agreed that he should as-
lime the government, and that eight persons should
e appointed to attend him by turns, and to ad-
ife and alift him in the administration of public
affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of that
number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained ome of his colleagues,
removed others, and intimidated the reft. When
the term of his attendance expired, he still retain-
ed authority, to which all were obliged to submit,
because none of them was in a condition to dispute
it. The affection of the young King was the only
thing wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power.
But an active and high-fpirited Prince submitted,
with great impatience, to the restraint, in which
he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition,
to be confined as a prisoner, within his own pa-
lace; to be treated with no respect; and to be

E 3 deprived

BOOK I. deprived of all power. He could not, on some oc-
.
'- -- cafions, conceal his indignation and resentment.

Angus foresaw that he had much to dread from
these, and as he could not gain the King's heart,
he resolved to make sure of his person. James was
continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and con-
fidants; many eyes watched all his motions, and
observed every ftep he took. But the King's ea.
gernefs to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance.
He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the castle
of Stirling, the residence of the Queen his mother,
and the only place of trength in the kingdom
which was not in the hands of the Douglases. The
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their
hatred to Angus, and others by the refpea for
the King, crowded to Stirling, and his court was
soon filled with persons of the greatest distinction
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpected
revolution, resolved, at first, to make one bold
push for recovering his authority, by marching to
Sterling at the head of his followers; but he want-
ed either courage, or strength, to execute this re-
solution. In a parliament held soon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after escaping
from many dangers, and enduring much misery,
he was at length obliged to fly into England, for
refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefulness
of person, orin rvigour of mind. His understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm; the former
capable of great improvement, and the latter sus-
ceptible of the best impressions. But according to
the usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been negleed.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to instruct him. It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from

knowing

-knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in BooK I.
order to divert him from business, gave him an ear- '
r taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied
nd engrossed him more than became a King. Ac-
ordingly, we difover in James all the features of
great, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
iolent passions, implacable resentment, an immo-
erate desire of power, and the utmost rage at dif-
ppointment. On the other, love to his people,
eal for the punishment of private oppressors, con-
dence in his favourites, and the most engaging
pennefs and affability of behaviour.
WHAT he himself had suffered from the exor-
bitant power of the nobles led him early to imitate
is predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.
'he plan he formed for that purpose was more
Profound, more systematic, and purfuedwith great-
r constancy and steadiness, than that of any of
is ancestors. And the influence of the events
n his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
ender it neceffaryto explain his conduct, at greater
ength, and to enter into a more minute detail of
is ations. He had penetration enough to dilco-
er those defects in the schemes, adopted by former
ings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
xample of James I. had taught him, that wife laws

perate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce

pirit of the feudal nobles was not to be fubduedby
hefe alone. The effects of the violent measures of
ames II. convinced him, that the oppression of one
reat family is apt either to excite the suspicion and
efentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its
poils iome new family, which would oon adopt
hefame sentiments, andbecome equallyformidable
o the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
lames III. that neglet was still moreintolerable to
he nobles than oppression, and that the ministry of
ew men and favourites was both dishonourable,

E 4 and

BooK I. and dangerous to a prince. At the fame time, he
Va'V felt that the authority of the crown was not fuffi.

cient to counterbalance the power of the ariftocra.
cy, and that without some new accession of strength,
be could expect no better success in the ftruggie
than his ancestors. In this extremity, he applied
himself to the clergy, hoping that [hey would both
relish his plan, and concur, with all their influence,
in enabling him to put it in execution. Under the
feudal government, the church being reckoned a
third estate, had its representatives in parliament;
the number of there was considerable, and thev
possessed great influence in that assembly. The
superstition of former kings, and the zeal of an
ignorant age, had bestowed, upon ecclefiafticks,
a great proportion of the national wealth, and the
authority which they acquired by the reverence o0
the people, was superior even to that which they
derived from their riches. This powerful body,
however, depended entirely on the crown. The
Popes, nozwithftanding their attention to extend
their usurpations, had neglected Scotland as a dif-
tant and poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to
exercise powers, which they disputed with mor
considerable princes. The Scottish monarchs had
the sole right of nomination to vacant bishopric.s

v Epift. and abbeys ; and James naturally concluded,
Reg.scot. that men who expected preferment from his fa
,. 197. vour, would be willing to merit it, by promoting
2 p. his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had no
15,0. yet recovered the blow which fell on their order at

Flowden, and if we may judge either from their
conduct, or from the character given of them by
Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience ii
business, and incapable of acting either with una
nimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on
the other hand, were distinguished by their grea

abilities

abilities, and no less by their ambition, Various BooK I.
cauies of disgust had arisen between them and the ""
nobles who dcfpifed their character, and envied
their power, or their wealth.- By ating in concert
with the king, they not only gratified him, but
avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandize their
own order, by depressing thole, who were their ote
rivals. Secure of To powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
firit heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of thekingdom; andfenfiblethat a per-
son so far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard,
or render ineffectual all his schemes, he folemnlv
ifvore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland, and, notwithstanding the repeated
solicitations of the king of England, he adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obiinacy. He then pro-
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh,
Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken there
precautions by way of defence, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve.
rhofe offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
iefflon, to confider as appropriated to their order,
were now bestowed on ecclefialtics, who alone pol-
lefied the King's ear, and together with a few gen-
tlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had commu-
nicated his schemes, were entrusted with the ma-
nagement of all public affairs. These minifterswere
cholen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who
soon became the most eminent among them, was a
man of superior genius. They served the King with
fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour,
with reputation, and success. James no longercon-
cealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no
opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight
offences were an!:iv-xe' , into real crimes, and

punishid

BooK I. punished with severity. Every accusation againit
'"N'_ persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every ap-

pearance of guilt was examined with rigour, and
every trial proved fatal to those who were accused:
the banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for rea-
sons extremely frivolous, the beheading the Mater
ot Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt,
and the condemning lady Glamis, a fiter of the
Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch-
craft, of which even that credulous age believed her
innocent, are monuments bothof the King's hatred
of the nobility, of the severity of his government,
and of the fitretches he made towards ablolute
power. By these acts of authority, he tried the ipirit
of the nobles, and how much they were willing to
bear. Their patience increased his contempt for
them, and added to the ardour and boldness with
which he pursued his plan. Mean while they ob-
served the tendency of his schemes with concern,
and with resentment: but the King's sagacity, the
vigilance of his ministers, and the want of a proper
leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures
for their defence, and impossible to act with becom-
ing vigour. James and his counsellors, by a
false ftep which they took, presented to them, at
length, an advantage which they did not fail to
Improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompt-

ed Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority,
and to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
fyfteem of reformation satisfied none of his subjects.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so
far, others murmured because he proceeded no
farther; and by his imperious temper, and alter-
nate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, andthe
converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equal-
ly formidable to both. Henry was afraid that this
general dissatisfaction of his people might encou-

rage

rage his enemies on the continent to invade his king- BOOK L
dom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor '---'
courted the friendship of the King of Scots, and en-
deavoured to engage him in an alliance against
England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint
the effects of their negociations, by entering into
a closer unionwith his nephew, and for that purpose
sent ambassadors into Scotland, to propose a perfo-
nal interview with him at York. It was plainly
James's interest to accept of this invitation; the as-
fiftance of fopowerful an ally,the high honours which
were promised him, and the liberal subsidies he
might have obtained, would have added no little
dignity to his domestic government, and muff
have greatly facilitated the execution of his favou-
rite plan. On the other hand, a war with England,
which he had reason to apprehend, if he rejeted
Henry's offers to friendhip, was inconsistent with
all his views. This would bring him to depend on
his barons; an army could not be raised without
their assistance: to call nobles incensed against
their prince into the field, was to unite his enemies,
to make them sensible of their own strength, and
to afford them an opportunity of revenging their
wrongs. James, who was not ignorant that all
thefeconfequences might follow a breach with Eng-
land, listened at first to Henry's proposal, and
contented to the interview at York. But the cler-
gy dreaded an union, which must have been efta-
blifhed on the ruins of the church. Henry had ta-
ken great pains to infuse into his nephew his own
sentiments concerning religion, and had frequently
solicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the u-
firped dominion of the Pope, which was no lets
dishonourable to princes, than grievous to their
ilbjecs. The clergy had hitherto, with great ad-
dress, diverted the King from regarding there so-
licitations. But, in an amicable conference, Henry

expected,

BooK T. expected, and they feared that James would yield

to his intreaties, or be convinced by his arguments,
They knew that the revenues of the church were
an alluring object to a Prince, who wanted money,
and w.ho loved it; that the pride and ambition of
ecclcfiaftics railed the indignation of the nobles;
that their indecent lives gave offence to the people;
that the proreteant opinions were preading fast
throughout the nation; and that an univerlal de.
section from the eftablified church, would be the
conkcquence of giving the smallest degree of en-
couragement to thefi principles. For these reasons,
they employed all their credit with the King, and
had recourir to every artifice and insinuation, in
order to divert him from a journey, which must
have been lo fatal to their interest. They endea-
voured to inspire him with fear, by magnifyingthe
danger to which he would expose his perlbn, by
venturing so far into England, without any security
but the word of a Prince, who having violated
every thing venerable and sacred in religion, was
no longer to be trusted; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the fums which he might have received
from Henry, they offered an annual donation of
50,000 crowns; they promised to contribute libe-
rally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flattered him with the prospect of immense riches,
arifmg from the forfeiture of persons, who were to
be tried and condemned as hereticks. Influenced
by these considerations, James broke his agreement
with Henry, who, in expecation of meeting him,
had already come to York ; and that haughty and
impatient Monarch relented the affront, by declar-
ing war against Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged
to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence of
his dominions. At his command, they assembled
their followers ; but with the fame difpofiions,
which .had animated their ancestors in the reign of

J ames

James III. and with a full resolution of imitating BOOk I.
their example, by punishing those to. whom they r
imputed the grievances, of which they had rea-
Ibn to complain; and if the King's Ministers had
not been men of abilities, superior to those of James
III. and of considerable interest even with their ene-
mies, who could not agree among themselves what
vicims to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have
been as remarkable as that of Lawder, for the da-
ring encroachments of the nobility on the preroga-
tive of the Prince. But though his ministers were
saved by this accident, the nobles had soon another
opportunity, of discovering to the King, their dif-
satisfaction with his government, and their con-
tempt of his authority. Scarcity of provisions, and
the rigour of the season having obliged theEnglifh
army which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James
imagined that he could attack them, with great
advantage, in their retreat; but the principal ba-
rons, with an obstinacy and disdain, which greatly
aggravated their disobedience, refused to advance
a ftep beyond the limits of their own country. Pro-
voked by this insult to himself, and suspicious of
a new conipiracy against his ministers, the King
instantly disbanded an army, which paid so little
regard to his orders, and returned abruptly into
the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not

brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes of iuc-
cess had been rash, and his despair upon a dilap-
pointment was excessive. He felt himself engaged
in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead
of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he
expeted, had begun with such circumfiances, as
encouraged the iniblence of his subjects, and ex-
posed him to the scorn of his enemies. He fawhow
vain and ineffectual all his projets to humble the
nobles had been, and that, though in times of

peace,

Boor L peace, a prince may endeavour to depress them,

> they will rife, during war, to their former impor-
tance and dignity. Impatience, resentment, in-
dignation filled his bosom by turns. The violence
of there passions altered his temper, and, perhaps,
impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen,
and retired. He seemed, through the day, to be
swallowed up in profound meditation, and through
the night, he was diftuibed with those visionary
terrors, which make impression upon a weak un-
derftanding only, or a disordered fancy. In order
to revive the King's spirits, an inroad on the weft.
ern borders was concerted by his ministers, who
prevailed upon the Barons in the neighbouring pro-
vinces, to raise as many troops as were thought ne-
ceffary, and to enter the enemy's country. But
nothing could remove the King's aversion to his
nobility, or diminish his jealousy of their power.
Hewould not even entrust them with the command
of the forces which they had assembled; that was
reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no
sooner appeared to take possession of the dignity
conferred upon him, than rage and indignation
occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five
hundred English, who happened to be drawn up
in fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Ha-
tred to the King, and contempt of their general,
produced an effect, to which there is no parallel
in history. They overcame the fear of death, and
the love of liberty; and ten thousand men furren-
dered to a number so far inferior, without striking
a single blow. No man was desirous of a victory,
which would have been acceptable to the King,
and to his favourite; a few endeavoured to save
themselves by flight; the Englifl had the choice
of what prisoners they pleated to take; and almost
every person of diftinEtion, who was engaged in
the expedition, remained, in their hands. This
astonishing event was a new proof to the King

of

of the general diaffection of the nobility, and a BOOK .
new discovery of his own weakness, and want of 'v'
authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated
intillts, he found himself unable to revenge them.
The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the first ac-
count of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
violent palfions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a
youthful and vigorous constitution, Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison;
but the diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; and the known effiets of
disappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, sufficiently account
for his unhappy fate. " His death (faysDrummond)
proved his mind to have been raiied to an high
strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but
could not digest a disaster." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things must have hap-
pened: either the violence of his temper would
have engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protector, and have derived the fame assistance
from him, which the male contents, in the succeed-
ing reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in
that cale, a dangerous civil war would have been
the certain conlequence. Or, perhaps, necessity
mighthaveobliged him to accept of Henry's offers,
and be reconciled to his nobility. In that event
1the church would have fallen a sacrifice to their
union, a Reformation upon Henry's plan, would
have been eftablifled by law, a great part of the
temporalities of the church would have been seized,
and the friendship of the King and Barons would
have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SuCHe

BooK I. SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re.
' -.. ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they

were not attended with success, we mull not, for
that reason, conclude that they were not conduted
with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have
combined against the Crown. Accidental events
concurred with political causes, in rendering the
best concerted measures abortive. The aaflination
of one King, the sudden death of another, and the
fatal despair of a third, contributed no less than its
own natural strength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AMIDST there struggles, the influence which our

Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circum-
fiance seemingly inexplicable, and which merits
particular attention. As these aflemblies were com-
posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to ima-
gine, must have di&ated all their decisions; but
instead of this, every King found them obsequious

The extra to his will, and obtained such laws, as he eteem-
ordinary ed necessary for extending his authority. All things
influence were conduited therewith dispatch and unanimity;
of the
Scottish and, in none of our historians, do we find an in-
Kings in stance of any opposition formed againit the court
Parlia- in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in car-
ment. rying through the measures which were agreeable

to the King. In order to account for this lingular
fact, it is necessary to enquire into the origin and
confitution of Parliament.
The rfa- THE genius of the feudal government, uniform

in all its operations, produced the fame effects in
small, as in great Societies; and the territory of a
Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom,
He possesed the right of jurifdicion, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
assist both m -passing and executing his sentences.

When

-Wlnl a;Tembled, on these occasions, they eftablilh- BooK I.
cd, by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended ' .
to the welfare cf their fnall society ; and often
granted voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior,
as his necessities required. Change now a single
name: in place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its first rudiments, and ob-
icrve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now possess as Judges, as Legislators,
and as dilpenfers of the public revenues. Suita-
ble to this ideas are the appellations of the Kitg's

Wr.:rt*, and of the Kiig's Great Coucil, by which, Da
Parliaments were anciently diftincuiflled; and Cange,
iktable to this, likvewie, were the constituent mem- Voc.
hers of which it was coinpofed. In all the feudal
ilgdoms, those who held of the King, in chief were
ound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
nd to airft in his courts. Nor was this esteemed
privilege, but a service. It was exacted likewise
f Bishops, Abbots, arid the greater ecclesiastics,
Iho holding vast pofieffons of the Crown, were
deemed subjet to the lame burden. Parliaments
lid not continue long in this state. Cities gradually
cquired wealth, a considerable share of the pub-
ic taxes was levied on them, the inhabitants grew
nto cfflination, and being enfianchifed by the Sove-
eign, a place in Parliament was the consequence
f their liberty, and of their importance. But as
c would have been absurd to conferfuch aprivilege,
r to impose such a burden on a whole community,
very burrough was permitted to choose one or two
o its citizens to appear in the name of the corpo-
ation; and the idea of repreentation was first in-
troduced in this manner. An innovation, still
more important, naturally followed. The vafials
of the Crown were originally few in number, and
extremely powerful ; but as it is impossible to ren-
ti.r property fixed and permanent, many of their
pofl:fions camle, gradually, and by various methods

VOL. I. F of

BooK . of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into dif-
'3 '' ferent hands. Hence arose the dilinaion between

the Greater and the Lesser Barons. The former
were thofti who retained their original fiefs undivi-
ded, the latter were the new and less potent vassals
of the crown. Both were bound, ho-,ever, to
perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in parliament. To the lesser
Barons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this
was an intolerable grievance. Barons ometimes
denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their
right of electing, charters were obtained, contain-
ing an exemption from attendance; and the anxie-
ty, with which our ancefors endeavoured to get
free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament, is
surpassed by that only, with which their posterity
solicit to be admitted there. In order to accommo-
date both parties, and, at once, to secure to the
King a sufficient number of members in his great
council, and to save his vassals from an unnecessary
burden, an easy expedient was found out. The
obligation to personal attendance was continued
upon the Greater Barons, from which the Lefier
Barons were exempted, on condition of their elet-
ing, in each county, a certain number of Repre-
fentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a parlia-
ment became compleat in all its members, and was
composed of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
Knights of the shires, and of Burgesses. As many
causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfe&tion in England, than in Scotland; as the
rigour of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and
its defects were supplied with greater facility in
the one kingdom, than in the other; England led
the way in all these changes, and Burgesses, and
Knights of the shire appeared in the Parliaments ot

A. D. that nation, before they were heard of in ours.
,326. Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottish Par-
.Aber- crombv, liaments by Robert Bruce *; and in the preamble to

~I,.·~~~~ r_':~; i~.'~ ·the

the laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the BOOK I.
constituent members of that assembly. The Lefler - -'
Barons were indebted to James I. for a statute ex- 4Z7
emptingthem from personal attendance,andpermit.
ting them to eledt representatives; the exemption
was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was so
little valued, that, except one or two inftanres, it
lay neglected during 60 years; and James VI. first
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to
Parliament '. EfIayson

A SCOTTISH Parliament then, consisted anci- Brit An-

ently of Great Barons, of Ecclefiafcs, and a few Darymp.
representatives of burroughs. Nor were these di- Hist. of
vided as in England, into two houses, but composed Feud.
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor pre- Prop.ch.
fidedt. And, in rude ages, when the science of
government as extremely imperfect, among a
martial people, unacquainted with the arts of
peace, strangers to the talents which makea figure
in debate, and despising them, Parliaments were
not held in the fame estimation as at present; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared with such evident marks of inferi-
ority. Parliaments were often hastily assembled,
and it was, probably, in the King's power, by the

tin England the Peers and commons seem early to have
met in separate houses; and James I. who was fond of imi-
tating the Englih in all their cuftoms,had probably an inten-
tion of introducing some considerable diftintion between the
Greater and Lesser Barons in Scotland; at least he determin-
ed that their consultations should not be carried on under the
direfion of the fame President ; for by his law, A. D. 1327.
it is provided, "that out of the Commissioners of all the
Ihires (hall bechofen a wife and expert man, called the Com-
mon Speaker of the Parliament, who Ihall propose all and
sundry needs and causes, pertaining to the Commons in the
Parliament or general council." No such >peaker, it would
seem, was ever chosen; and by a subsequent law the Chan-
celor was declared perpetual President of Parliament.

F 2 manner

I:-o K [. manner in whichhe issued his writs for that purpose,

to exclude hose who were averse from his meaiures.
At a time when .deeds of violence were common,
and the restraints of law and decency were little
regarded, no man could venture with afety to op-
pose the King in his own court. The great Barons,
or Loids of Parliament, were extremely few; even

And. so late as the beginning of the reign of James VI.A
Co, Vi. they amounted only to fifty three. The ecclesias-

tics equalled them in number, and being devoted
implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have
been already explained, rendered all hopes of vic-
tory in any struggle desperate. Nor were the no-
bles themlelves lo anxious, as might be imagined,
to prevent acts of Parliament favourable to the roy-
al Prerogative conscious of their own strength,
and of the King's inability to carry these acs into
execution wvithout their concurrence, they trusted
either to elude, or to contemn them; and the fta-
tute revoking the King's property, and annexing
alienated jurisdictions to the Crown, repeated in
every reign, and violated and dcfpifed as often, is
a standing proof of the impotence of laws, when
opposed to powver. So many concurring causes are
iiificient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant,
wh ich our Kings acquired in Parliament. But
without having rec.ure to any of thefr, a single
-ircumftance, pculiar to the constitution of the
scotifh Parliament, the mentioning of which we
have hitherto avoided, will abundantly explain
thi, fact, leseingly o repugnant to all our reason-
in-; concerning the weakneis of the King, and the
povwer or the nobies.

As far back, a, our records enable us to trace

thn constitution of our Parliaments, we find a com-
rnittec, dilninguithed b;- the name of Lords of Ar-
.;...!. I: wa.s tlici boufies to prepare, and to di-
,:eft all mattere ,hi.; h vwere to b laid before the

Parliament;

Parliament; every motion for a new law was first BooK I.
made there, and approved or rejeted by them --'
at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they re-
jeted could not be introduced into the house.
IThis committee owed the extraordinary powers
vested in it, to the military genius of the ancient
nobles; too impatient to submit to the drudgery
of civil business, too impetuous to observe the
forms, or to enter into the details necessary in con-
ducting it, they were glad to leave that burden upon
a fiall number, while they themselves had no
other labour than imply to give, or to rfufe their
lancion to the bills, which were presented to them.
The Lords of Articles, then, not only direted the
whole proceedings of parliament, but possessed a ne-
gative before debate. 'That committee was chosen
and conffituted in such a manner, as put this va-
luable privilege entirely in the King's hands. It is
extremely probable, that the King once had the
sole right of nominating the Lords of Articles *.
They came afterwards to be eleted by the Parlia-
menr, and consisted of an equal numberout of each
estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and

F 3 eight

i It appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was
appointed to be held March i z, i 66, and that the Lords of
Articlcs were chosen and met on the th, five days before the
assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly ele&ed h
long beture the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to con-
clude, that the Prince alone pofelfied the right of eletcing
them. There are two different accounts of the manner f
their le}ion at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to
t.e Archbilhop ofGlafgow. " We, accompanied with our
"nobility for the time, pass to the Talbuith of Edinburgh,
"for iblding of our Parliament on the 7th day of this inflant,

and leieted the Lords Articulars." If we explain these

uords, according to fri&c Grammar, we must conclude that
tte Quetn herfelfcleCded them. It is, however, more probable
;tht Mar) meant to fay, that the nobles then prelint with
.itr, viz. her privy counlellors and others, clcccd t!.e Lords of

Articicr.

Boo I. eightSpiritual Lords,of eight representatives ofbur
t'{ -' roughs, and of the eight great officers of the Crown.

Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics, together with
the officers of the crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce possible that the choice
could fall on such temporal Lords and Burgesses as
would unite in opposition to his measures. Capa-
ble either of influencing their election, or of gain,
ing them when ele&ed, the King commonly found
the Lords of Articles no less obsequious to his will,
than his own privy council, and by means of his
authority with them, he could put a negative
upon his Parliament before debate, as well as after
it; and what may seem altogether incredible, the
most limited Prince in Europe actually pofeffed,
in one instance, a prerogative which the most abo.
lute could never attain*.

To

Articles. Keith's Hi'. of Scotland, p. 331. The other ac.
count is Lord Ruthven's, who exprefly affirms that the Queen
herfelfelected them. Keith's Append. 126. Whether we em-
brace the one or the other of these opinions, is of no confe-
quence If the privy coon fellors and nobles attending the
court had a right to ele& the Lords of Articles, it was equal,
ly advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had had the
fcle nomination of them.

* HAVING deduced the history of the committee of Lords

of Articles, as low as the subjea of this preliminary book re-
quired, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some of m) readers,
to know the subsequent variations in this singular initituti-
orr, and the political use which our Kings made ot there.
When Parliaments became more numerous, and more con.
fiderable by the admiflion of the representatives of the Lesser
Barons, the preserving their influence over the Lords of Ar-
ticles became, likewise, an objie of greater importance to
our Kings. James VI. on pretence that the Lords of Arti-
cles could not find leisure to confider the great multitudeof
affairs laid betore them, obtained an a, appointing four
persons to be named out of each eftale, who should meet

A.. 22. twtnty days before the commencement of Parliament -, to
P. 1 S94 receive all fuppiications, &c. and rejecting what they

thought frivolous, hou!d engross in a book what they
thought worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No
prcvifion is made in the at for the choice of this select bo-

dy,

To this account of the internal constitution of BOOK I.

Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of --"
the political state of Europe at that period, where Euope at
the following hiflory commences. A thorough the begin-
knowledge of that general system, of which every ning of
kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less requi- the '6th
site towards understanding the history of a nation, century.
than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to com-
prehend domestic occurrences and revolutions, but
without the former, foreign tranfations must be
altogether mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of

dy, and the King would, of course, have claimed that priv;-
lege. In 633, when Charles I. was beginning to introduce
there innovations which gave so much offence to the nation,
he dreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to
prevent that, an artifice was made use of to secure the Lords
of Articles for the Crown. The Temporal Peers were ap-
pointed to choose eight Bifhops,and the Bilhops eight Peers;
there sixteen met together, and ele&ed eight Knights of the
hire, and eight Burgesses, and to there the crown officers
were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight persons
of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were be-
come, by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obvi-
ous, would be the men whom the Bilhops would choose, and
of consequence, the whole Lords of Articles were the tools
and creatures of the King. This practice, so inconsistent with
liberty, was abolilhed during the civil war; and the statute
of James VI. was repealed. After the restoration, Pailia-
ments became more servile than ever. What was only a
temporary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, con-
verted into standing law. (' For my part, fays the author

from whom I have borrowed many of there particulars, I
should have thought it less criminal in our restoration Par-
"liament, to have openly bellowed upon the King a nega-

tive before debate, than, in such an underhand artificial
manner, to betray their constituents, and the nation " El-
fays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a
letter of Randolph's to Cecil, o, Aug. s560, printed in the
Appendix, that this parliament had rome appearance of an-
cient precedent to juilify their unworthy conduct.

F 4 historians

Bi3o I. historians have seen only the effect, we may be

' able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
doms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
litical state of Europe. Kingdoms, which were in-
considerable when broken, and parcelled out among
nobles, acquired firmness and strength, by being
un i:d into a regular monarchy. Kings becanme
conscious of their own power and importance.
They meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged
in wars at a distance. Numerous armies were
railed, and great taxes impoled for their fubfif-
tance. Considerable bodies of infantry were kept
in cornfant pay; th2t ferrice grew to be honoura-
bl and cavalry, in which the fftrength of Euro-
pean armies had hitherto consisted, though proper
enough for the short and voluntary excursions of
Barons who served at their own expence, were
found to be unfit either for making, or defending
any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany iirit appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into so many small states, the lux-
ury of the people, and thcir effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom-
ed to mrock battles only, and to decide their quar-
rels by innocent and bloodless victories, were afto-
nihed at the fight of real war; and as they could
not refirf the torrent, they suffered it to take its
courle, and to pend its rage. Intrigue and policy
fuppiedi the want of strength; and necelf;c and
felf-prefcrvation led that ingenious people to the
great ccret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the power of one prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the lib'ery or Italy was long preferv-

ed.

eji. The scales were poised by very skilful hands; BooK r
the finalleft variations were attended to, and no '-- -
Prince was allowed to retain any uperiority, that
could be dangerous.

A SYS rTE of conduft, pursued with so much-

ilucceis in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
I'rving a balance of power is founded so much
tupon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu-
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon became a
niatter of chief attention to all wife politicians..
,I'vrv flep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable
Ipies, authorised by the mutual jealousy of Kingr,
resided alnoft constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge towatch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
vented with more ease. Confederacies were fornnei
to humble any power which rose above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or self defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; nd war, both in its com-
mencement, and 'in its operations, was more an
xercife of the judgment, than of the passions of
men. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
..:, and the most inconsiderable states acquired im-
orcance, because they could add weight to either
cale.

FRANCIS .I. who mounted the throne of France
n the year 515, and Charles V, who obtained the
nperial crown in the year 519, divided between
hem the strength and affections of all Europe.
'heir perpetual enmitywas not owing either to per-
'nal jealoufv, or to the caprice of private palion,
butas founded so much in nature and true policy,
that it subsisted between their posterity for everal
aces; and, notwithfianding their prelent acciden-
al and unnatural unien. n-uf- again revive. Char;-s

I ~il i.1 .'J. t,.

BOOE I. succeeded to all the dominions of the house of Au.

stria. No family had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a short time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Arch-
dukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were
in possession of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-
reditary right. Betides these territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all
the dominions which belonged to the house of Bur-
gundy. The Burgundian provinces engrofled, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew from them, on many occa-
sions, those immense fums, which no people with-
out trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furniihed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his conquests.
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust
These advantages rendered Charles the first Prince
in Europe; but he wiihed to be more, and openly
aspired to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an
unexpected height and vigour. He possessed, in
an eminent degree, the characteristic virtues of all
the different races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand
father; he pursued them with that obstinate and in-
flexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood; and in executing them, he
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his
Burgundian Ancestors. His abilities were equal
to his power, and neither of them would have been
inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity
to mankind, and in order to preserve them fromn

the

the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised EBOO T,
up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His '-"V
dominions were less extensive, but more united
than the Emperor's. His fubjeEts were numerous,
aótive, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of
their King. To Charles power was the only object
of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure
and elegance with his ambition, and though he
negleted some advantages, which a more phleg-
matic or more frugal Prince would have improv-
ed, an aive and intrepid courage supplied all his
defects, and checked or defeated many of the Em-
peror's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
had recourse to the expedient, which they had of-
ten employed with success. They endeavoured to
divide the power of the two contending Monarchs
into equal scales, and by the union of several small
states, to counterpoise him, whose power became
too great. But, what they concerted with much
wisdom, they were able to execute with little vi-
gour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held

the balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in power; and the advantageous situation
of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his
immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered
him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.
Each of the rivals courted himwith emulation; he
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely with
either of them. But he was seldom able to reduce
his ideas to practice; he was governed by caprice

more

/onx 1. more than by principle; and the passions of the

man were an overmatch for the maxims of the
;Kin. WVanin- and relentment were the great fpiungs
cf ali his undertakings, and his neighbours easily
found the was, by touching there, to force him
upon many rainl and inconfittent enterprises. His
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politics,
and while he eteemed himself the vwifeft Prince in
Europe, he was aconifant dupe tothofe, whofound
it necessary, and could ubmit to flatter him.

IN this firuation of Europe, Scotland, which had

hitherto wa:ted her itrength in the quarrels between
France and England. emerged from her obfcuritv,
took her fation in the i-ftem, and began to have
some influence upon the fate of distant nations.
Her aiftance was, frequently, of consequence to
the contending parties, and the balance was often
so nicely adjuited, that it was in her power tomake
it lean to either fide. The part assigned her, at
this juncture, was to divert Henry from carrying
his arms into the continent. That Prince, having
routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Te-
roucnne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition
which ended with his life. For the fame reason,
F-rancis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Al-
banv, to ruin the farilies of Angus and Home,
which were in the interest of England, and would
willingly have periladed the Scots to revenge the
death of their ing, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was
the intercft of both Kings, that the Scots should
continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
eft-ct of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
this, and to embarrals Henr- by another inroad of
the Scots. For this end, he made great advances
t Jam.c- V. ratterirg the vanity of the young
Monarrhii. Vi;- f.ecir.:!- him a Knight of the Golden

Fleece,

I:lkece, and by offering him a match in the impe- BOOK 1.
rial family; while, in return for these empty ho- --
nou's, lie demanded of him to renounce his alli-
ance with France, and to declare war against Eng-
land. But James, who had much to lose, and
who could gain little by embracing the Emperor's
proposals, rejected them with decency, and keep-
ing firm to his ancient allies, left H-enry at full
liberty to at upon the continent with his whole
strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his anceltors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
that he was at no pains to gain his fi-iendfhip; but
on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
reviving the antiquated prctenfions of the crown of
England to the Sovereignty over Scotland. But his
own experience, and the example of his enemies,
gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was
impofiible to defend an open andextenfive frontier,
against the incursions of an aive and martial peo-
ple. During any war on the continent this obliged
him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necefiary to maintain a kind of army of obfer-
vation in the North of England; and after all pre-
cautions, the Scottish borderers, who were ifperior
to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and
d(lolation over many counties. He fell, at last,
utpon the true secret of policy, with respect to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little penetra-
tion to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The fituatien of the country, and the bravery of
the people made the conquelt of Scotland impoffi-
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence of
faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to
govern it. Hie abandoned, therefore, the former
cfign, an.' relblvcd to empioy the utmost address
1. executing te lstt:r. It ih.d not yet become ho-

nourable

Boos I. nourable for one Prince to receive pay from ano.
~'-~' ther, under the more decent name of a subsidy.

But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been
good in courts, and of weight with ministers, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the argu.
ments, by which Henry brought over so many to
his interest during the minority of James V, we

v Born. know by the original warrants still extant*, for re.
Hifl Ref. mitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a
v. i. p7. proper distribution of there, many persons of note

were gained to his party, and a faction which held
secret correspondence with England, and received
all its direEtions from thence, appears henceforward
in our domestic contests. In the sequel of the his-
tory, we shall find Henry labouring to extend his
influence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
fame plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of
the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almost equally between them, and the
authority, which he inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which he acquired in the other.

THE

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY'

OF
S CO T LA N D.

B OO K IL

| A fA RY Queen of Scots was born a few days ooK 11.
MVI before the death of her father James V. l>rv
The situation in which he left the kingdom alarm- Dec. 4,
ed all ranks of men, with the profpe& of a turbu- Birth of
lent and disastrous reign. A war against England Mary.and
had been undertaken without necessity, and car- ftateofthe
ried on without success. Many persons of the first kingdom.
rank had fallen into the hands of the Engliih, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and
were still prisoners at London. Among the reft of
the nobles there was little union, either in their
views, or in their affection; and the religious dif-
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers,
g'gowing every day more violent, added to the rage
of those factions which are natural to a form of go-
vernment nearly ariftocratical.

THE government of a Queen was unknown in
Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
the minds of a martial people. The government
of an infant Queen was still more destitute of real
authority; and the profpeEt of a long and feeble
minority invited to fation by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
aainft the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's educa-

tion,

BooK 1I. tion, and the administration of affairs in her name.
--- Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold

that they would quickly burst into aftorm, he was
so little able to disperse them, orto defendhis daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities,
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre-
tender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own satisfaction.

Pretcnsi- CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
onsofCar- been confidered as prime minister, was the firftwho
dinal Bea- claimed that high dignity; and in support of his
tun to he
regency. pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he
* adler'. himself had forged in the name of the late King;
Le:t. 161. and without any other right, infantly assumed the

title of Regent. He hoped, by the assistance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the
whole Popish faction, to hold by force, what he
hid fcized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Thole among the nobles who wised for a Refor-
mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the
highelt office in the kingdom as a depression of
themselves. At their instigation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed
himself from his inactivity, and was prevailed on
to alpire to that station, to which proximity of

EarlofAr- blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who
ran chosen were ambled for that purpose, unanimously con-
Regent. ferred on him the office of regent; and the pub-

lic voice applauded their choice.

Charaafr No two men ever differed more widely in difpo-
ot Bea- fition and character, than the Earl of Arran and
toua. Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of

·immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinemcen:; and insolence
grew upon him from continua! ! cclf. Ili high

ftatior

farion in the church placed him in the way of BOOK Ir.
great employments; his abilities were equal to the ~
greatft of these ; nor did he reckon any of them
to be above his merit. As his own eminence was
founded upon the power of the church of Rome,
he was a zealous defender of that superstition, and
for the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine
of the Reformers. Political motives alone deter-
ni ncd him to upport the one, or to oppose the
other. His early application to public business
:kept him unacquainted with the learning and con-
troverfies of the age; he gave judgment, however,
upon all points, in dispute, with a precipitancy,
violence, and rigour, which cotemporary historians
mention with indignation.

THE character of the Earl of Arran, was, in al- Of Arran

most every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He
wvas neither infected with ambition, nor inclined
|to cruelty: the love of ease extinguished the for-

t .er, the softness of his temper preserved him from
the latter. Timidity and irresolution were hispre-
dominant failings, the one occasioned by his natu-
ral constitution, and the other arising from a con-
fcioufnefs that his abilities were not equal to his fta-
tion. With there dispositions helnight haveenjoyed
and adorned private life; but his public conduc'
was without courage, or dignity, or confilfence.
The perpetual lave of his own fears, and, by con-
sequence, the perpetual tool of those, who found
their advantage in praaifing upon hem. But as
no other person could be set in opposition to the
Cardinal, with any probability of success, the na-
tion declared in his favour with lb general a consent,
that the artifices of his rival could not withstand
its united strength. Schemes

HE Earl of Arran had scarc.e taken polffeifon of Henry

of his new dignity, when a negotiation was opened v'i [ with
VOL. I G ,i regar to

Sotland.

BooK If. with England, which gave birth to events of the
t-- most fatal consequence to himself, and to the king.

dom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. wa
no longer afraid of any interruption from Scotland
to his designs againit France; and immediately
conceived hopes of rendering this security perpetual.
by the marriage of Edward his only son with the
vourng Queen of Scots. He communicated his in.
tention to the prisoners taken at Solway, and pre-
vailed on them to favour it, by the promise of li.
berry, as the reward of their success. In the mean
time, he permitied them to return into Scotland,
that, by their pretence in the parliament which the
Regent had called, they might be the better able
to persuade their countrymen to fall in with his
proposals. A cause, entrusted to such able and
zealous advocates, could not well miss of coming
to an happy issue. All those who feared the Car.
dinal, or who desired a change in religion, were
fond of an alliance, which afforded protection to
the doctrine which they had embraced, as well as
to their own persons, against the rage of that power-
ful and haoghty Prelate.

1:' con- BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was
d by

c n

r1

b t11
h'meim incapable ofimprovingthisfavourableconjunure.

Address and delicacy in managing the fears, and
follies, and interests of men, were arts with which
he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
formed upon Scotland,were obvious from the mar.
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise, or to conceal them. In-
stead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would soon have enabled
him to recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated
the whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
person should be immediately committed to his cu-
tody, and that the government of the kingdom
hould be put in his hands during her minority.

HENRY

HENR could not have prescribed more ignomi- BOOK I.
nious conditions to a conquered people, and it is no ,I -

Odious to

wonder they were rejeted, with indignation, by the Scots,
men who scorned to purchase an alliancewithEng- though in
land, at the price of their own liberty. The par- part ac-
liament of Scotland, however, influenced by the cepted by
nobles who returned from England; desirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the March,2,
Regent's confining theCardinal as a prisoner, from 1543-
any opposition to which he might have given rife;
consented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but
upon somewhat a more equal footing. And after
I fom dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young
Queen and cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and to
I accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that

the Queen hould continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any share in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand,
the Scots agreed to fend their sovereign into Eng-
land as soon as fie attained the sullage often years,
and instantly to deliver fixperfons, of the firftrank,
to be kept as hostages by Henry till the Queen's
arrival at his court.

THE treaty was still so manifestly of advantage Favoured

to England, that the Regent loft much of the pub- b> the Re-
lic confidence by contenting to it. The Cardinal, gent.
who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not
fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmost.
He complained loudly, that the Regent had be- Opposed
trayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies, by the
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He Cardinal.
foretold the excinction of true catholic religion,
under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic
but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient king-
dom contenting to its own slavery, descending into
':h ignominious fiation of a dependent province

G 2 and,

B.oO II. and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of' a
'"'"' ingle man surrendering every thing for which the

Scottish nation had ifruggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal
were not without effect. They were addressed to
prejudices and paflions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jealousy of na-
tional honour and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the prelent century, went near
to prevent the Scots from conienting to an union
wi;h England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
againtf the alliance which had been concluded. In
the one period, an hundred and fifty ye-rs of peace
between the two nations, the habit of being sub-
jieted to the fame King, and governed by the fame
maxims, had considerably abated old animofities,
and prepared both people for incorporating. In
the other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on
both fides were open, and, in the warmth of resent-
ment, it was natural to seek revenge, and to be a-
xerfe from reconcilement. At the union in 1707,
rihe wildom of parliament depiled the groundleis
murmurs occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but
in 1543, the complaints of the nation were better
iounded, and urged with a zeal and unanimity,
which it is neither just, nor afe to disregard. The
rage of the people rose to such an height, that the
English ambassador could hardly be protected from
their inuilts. The clergy contributed a great um
towards preserving the church from the dominion
f a Prince, whole yiftem of Reformation was o
Tatal to their power. The nobles, after having
mortificd the Cardinal, it lately, in such a cruel
manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to e-
cond him, as the defender o'f ith honour and liber-
ty of his ijuntrv.

ARGYLI,,

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power- BooK If.

ful Barons declared openly against the alliance with '-
England. By their assistance, the Cardinal seized ahnoll the
on the persons of the young Queen andher mother, whole na-
and added to his party the splendor and authority tion

again}

the

of the royal name *. He received, at the fame agil^liec
time, a more real accession to his ftrcngth, by the Kleith's
i arrival of Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox, whose Hisi. of

return from France he had earnestly solicitcd. This Sott. 3c
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to de-
* prive him of the possession of his private fortune.

. he Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the prolpect
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and affeEted to
treat him with so much respect, that the Regent
2 became jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by te

1 Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some
tir,e before the Earl of Lenox, and acted in con-
cert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother
of the Regent, with whom he had great credit a
warm partizan of France, and a zealous defender
of the established religion. He took hold of the
Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working
upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
diliffection of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lenox, were all
represented with aggravation, and with their mofe
threatning aspec:.

ME AN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-
.ion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
tf the hostages approached, and the Regent was
1ill1 undetermined in his own mind. He acted to

G 3 the

Boo. :I. the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
',-V.' which is peculiar to' weak men, when they are so

unfortunate as to have the chief part in the condut
of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene-

CbT;ge; rmy to his country. On the third of September, he
het te- fecrerlv withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
ng ou.c Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of
the friend- England, and declared for the interests of France*.
s.ip with HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not
En andr spared the most magnificent promises. He had of-
;9, 3 6. sered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to

his eldest son, and to constitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.
But upon finding his intereit in the kingdom to be
iefs considerable than he had imagined, the English
monarch began to treat him with little refpe&.
The young Queen was now in the custody of his
enimies, who grew every day more numerous and
more popular. They formed a separate court at
Stirling, and threatened to elect another Regent.
The French King was ready to afford them his
protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the
English, would have united in their defence. In
this situation, the Regent could not retain his au-
thority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the trea-
ty, to preserve the appearances of good faith with
England, he was obliged to throw himself into the
arms of the party, which adhered to France.

And to SOON after this sudden revolution in his political
persecute principles, the Regent changed his sentiments con-
the Re-
forme. cerning religion. The spirit of controversy was

then new and warm; books of that kind were ea.
gerly read by men of every rank; the love of no-
velty, or the conviction of truth, had led the Re-

gent

gent to express great esteem for the writings of the BooK II.
Reformers; and having been powerfully supported '--
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fa-
mily, two of the most noted Preachers of the Protef-
tant doEtrine, and, in his first Parliament, consent-
ed to an at, by which the laity were permitted to
I read the scriptures in a language which they under

stood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long
imposed on the ignorance and credulity of man-
kind, were detested and exposed to public ridicule;
and under the countenance of the Regent, the Re-
formation made great advances. The Cardinal
observed its progress with concern, and was at the
utnoft pains to obftrut it. He represented to the
I Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-

ment to opinions, so favourable to Lenox's preten-
sions; that his own legitimacy depended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the
Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be
called in question, he weakened his own title to the
succession, and furnished his rival with the only ar-
gument, by which it could berendered doubtful *
These insinuations made a deep impression on the
Regent's timorous spirit, ho, at the profpea of
such imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
the Cardinal could have wished; and his zeal for
the Protestant religion was not long proof against

T E pretensions of the Earl of Lenox to the fucceflion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was mar-
ried to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth, a daughter of that
marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lenox, and the
present Earl was hergrandfon. The Regent was likewise the
grandson of the Princess Mary. But his father having marri-
ed Janet Beatoun the Regent's mother, after he had obtained
a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lenox pre-
tended that the sentence of divorce was unjust, and that the
Regent, being born while Elizabeth Home was Rill alive,
'ugh. to be confidcred as illegitimate. Claws. Peer. 192.

G 4 Ihis

Book II. his fear. He publickly abjured the doctrine of the

~-rj Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and

declared not only for the political, but the religious
opinions of his new confidants.

THE Protestant doftrine did not susser much by

his apoitacy. It had already taken so deep root in
the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity
could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the established
religion. The reformers were persecuted with all
the crueltv, which superstition inspires into a bar-
barous people. Many were condemned to that
dreadful death, which the church has appointed
for the punifhmcnt of its enemies; but they susser-
ed with a pirit so nearly resembling the patience
and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more
were converted, than terrified by such fpeaacles.

Beatoun THE Cardinal, however, was now in possession
engroiTes of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
the chief ercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the
of affairs. envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from

the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trusted by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lenox were the on-
ly thing which remained to embarrass him. He
had very successfully made use of that nobleman to
work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but as
he no longer stood in need of such an instrument,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Le-
nox soon began to fufpe& his intention; promises,
flattery, and relpect were the only returns he had
hitherto received for substantial services; but at
last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be con-
cealed, and Lenox, instead of attaining power and
iignivt himself, saw that he had been employed

only

only to procure these for another. Resentment and BooK II.
disappointed ambition pufied him on to seek re-
venge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing
his interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl
of Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that rea-
jon, from court, and declared for the party at en-
imity with the Cardinal, which, with open arms,
received a convert, who added so much lustre to
their cause.

T
1 HE two factions which divided the kingdoms
ere 1ill the fame, without any alteration in their
views or principles; but, by one of those strange

:revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they

!had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head.of the par-
tizans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
I enox in the fame station with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in reli.ion.

he one laboured to pull down his own -\ork,
which the other upheld with the fame hand, that
Blad hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENOX'S impatience for revenge got the start

of the Cardinal's activity. He furprized both him,
And the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh,
with a numerous army; and might easily have
Irushed them, before they could prepare for their
fence. But he was weak enough to liften to pro-
oails for an accommodation; and the Cardinal
amuled him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to
Such a length, that the greater part of the Earl's
roops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal
nftitttions prevail, at their own expence, deserted
aim; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving
Ihe law, he was obliged to receive it. A iecond
attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfor-
junately. One body of his troops was cut topieces,
and the reft dispersed; and with the poor renmins
1r a ruined party, he mufft either have submittcd

to

Boor II. to the conqueror, or have fed out of the kingdom,

-- if the approach of an English army had not brought

him a short relief.

Henry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
vades indignity, with which he had been treated, both

otland. by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who,

at the time when they renounced their alliancewith
him, had entered into a new and ftriter confede-
racy with France. The rigor of the season retard.
ed, for some time, the execution of his vengeance.
But in the spring, a considerable body of infantry
which was defined for France, received orders to
fail for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry
was appointed to join it by land. The Regent
and Cardinal little expected such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable
security, were wholly unprovided for the defence
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hartford, a leader
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this ar-
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles

May 3, above Leith. He was quickly master of that place;
1544- and marching direcly to Edinburgh, entered it

with the fame cafe. After plundering the adjacent
country, thericheft, and most open in Scotland, he
set on fire both these towns; and upon the approach
of ome troops gathered together by the Regent.
put his booty on board the fleet, and with his land
forces retired safely to the English borders, deliver
ing the kingdom in a few days, from the terror o!
an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was still in his view, he loft
great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl oi
Huntly humorously called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into ab-

horrence;

lorrence; and exasperated by so many indignities, BooK IT.
the Scots were never, at any period, more attached s-
to France, or more alienated from England.

' HE Earl of Lenox alone, in spite to the Re-

rent and French King, continued a correspondence
Witlh England, which ruined his own interest, with-
out promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
prefering their duty to their country before their
rafetion to him, refused to concur in any design to
;avour the public enemy. And after a few feeble
and unsuccessful attempts to disturb the Regent's
|administration, he was obliged to fly for safety to
lthe court of England, where Henry rewarded ser-
vices which he had the inclination, but not the
power to perform, by giving him in marriage his
|niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
{exile, however, was destined to be the father of a
race of Kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-
clufion of that rival who now triumphed in his
ruin. And from that time, his posterity have held
the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which he
Iwas cast out as a criminal, and by the other re-
ceivcd as a fugitive.

MEAN while hostilities were continued by both A peace

nations, but with little vigour on either fide. The concludcl
historians of that age relate minutely the circum-
Ptances of several kirmiflies and inroads, which as
they did not produce any considerable effet, at this
distance of time, deserve no remembrance*. At

last

Though this war was diflinguiilled by no important or

decisive aion, it was, however, extremely ruinous to indi-
viduals. There still remain two original papers, which give
us tome idea of the mifcries, to which the most fertile coun-
ties in the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and de-
firutive incurlions of the borderers. The firR seems to be
the report made to Henry by the Engifh wardens of the
mnarches, for the ear 1544, and contains their exploits from

the

BooK I. last an end was put tothis languid and inativewar,

ó'- by a peace, in which England, France, and Scot.
June i546 land were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex.

elude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at.
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was
of the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em-
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, who had
served him with fidelity, and he chose rather topur-
chafe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to him-

the 2d of July, to the r7th of November. The account it
gives of the different inroads, orforrays, as they are called,
is very minute ; and, in conclusion, the fum total of mil
chief they did is thus computed:
Towns, towers, ftedes, barnekyns, paryfhe-

churches, baftel-houfes cast down or burnt 192

Scots slain - - -3
Prisoners taken - - - 16
Noit, i. e. horned cattle, take - - o,3S6
Sheep - - 2,49
Nags and geldings - - ,z96
Goats - - - 2
Bo'ls of corn - - - 80
Infight gear, i. e. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes state papers, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl

of Hartford, between the 8th and z3d of September, 1545;
the narrative is more general, but it appears that he had
burnt, razed, and destroyed in the counties of Berwick and
Roxburgh ot!y,

Monafleries and Friar-houfes -
Cafles, tovers, and piles - 6
Market towns - -
X illages 43
lilns - -
Hospitals - - - 3

All there iiere car down or burnt. Haynes 52. As the Scots

ere no lcfs skilful in the pratice of irregular war, we may

conclude that the damage which they didin England was not
incor.fiderab!e; ad that their raids were no less wasteful,
than thefc- -a of the Eglifh.

clf,

ifelf, than to leave them exposed to danger. By BOOK II.
yielding some things to the interest, and more to -
the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission,
flattery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
l ave the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before

thle conclusion of this peace, rendered it more ac-
ceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun
haid not used his power with moderation, equal to
the prudence by which he attained it. Notwith-
standing his great abilities, he had too many of the
passions and prejudices of an angry leader of a sac-
tion, to govern a divided people with temper. His
rif:ntment against one party of the nobility, his
inlolence towards the ret, his severity to the Re-
formers, and, above all, the barbarous and illegal
exccution of the famous George Wifhart, a man
of honourable birth, and of primitive anetity, wore
out the patience of a fierce age, and nothing but
a bold hand was wanting to gratify the public wish
by his dcftrution. Private revenge, inflamed and
Janaified by a fall zeal for religion, quickly sup-
lied this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of
the Earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Car-
dinal with injustice and contempt. It was not the
emper of the man, or the spirit of the times, qui-
tlv to digest an affront. And as the profellionof
his adversary creened him from the efiets of what
is called an honourable refentrent, he resolved to
take that fatisfation, which he could not demand.
Th'lis refoltion deserves as much ccniure, as the
singular courage and conduct with which he put
it in execution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at
that time, resided in the castle of Saint Andrew's,
v.hiil he had fortified at great expence, and in the
opinion of the age had rendered it impregnable.
iis retinue was numerous, the town at his devo-
i/n, and the neighbouring country full of his

dependent·.,

BooK II. dependents. In this situation, sixteen persons un.
->r- | dertook to surprise his castle, and to assassinate him-

self; and their success was equal to the boldnel
of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized
on the gate of the caffle, which was set open to
the workmen who were employed in finishing the
fortifications; and having placed sentries at the
door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened
his numerous domestics one by one, and turnin!

May 79, them out of the castle, they without noise, or tu
1546. mult, or violence of any other person, deliver

their country, though by a most unjustifiable ac
tion, from an ambitious man, whose pride was in.
supportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and cut.
ning were the great checks to the Reformation.

The Re- HIS death was fatal to the Catholic religion,anl

tempts in to the French intereftin Scotland. The fame ze
vain to for both continued among a great party in the na.
seize the tion, but when deprived of the genius and autho
murde. ritv of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence
rers.

Nothing can equal the consternation which a blow
so unexpected occasioned among his adherents;
while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only
eclipsed his greatness, but almost extinguished hi
power. Decency, however, the honour of the
church, the importunity of the Queen Dowagerand
her faction, his engagements with France, and
above all these, the desire of recovering his eldel
son, whom theCardinal had detained for some time
at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with the castle, had fallen into the hand;
of the conspirators, induced him to take arms
order to revenge the death of a man he hated.

HE threatned vengeance, but was unable to exe

cute Ji. One part of military science, the art of at
tacking fortified places, was then unknown in Scot
land. The weapons, the discipline, and impetuofi'

cr.'

of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for Booi Ir.
fiegres, as they were active in the field. An hun- 'x-'"
dred and fifty men, which was the greatest number
the conspirators ever assembled, resifted all the es-
forts of the Regent for five months *, in a place, EpilL-
which a single battalion, with a few battering can- Rcg.Sot.
non, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedi- 2'
| our siege was concluded by a truce. The Regent

undertook to procure for the conspirators an abfo-
lution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament;
and upon obtaining these, they engaged to furren-
der the castle, and to set his son at liberty.

I is probable, that neither of themwere sincere
| in this treaty. On both fides, they fought only to

amuse, and to gain time. The Regent had applied
to France for assistance, and expected oon to have
the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand if
Lefly and his afrociates were not at first incited by
Henry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in the
sequel, powerfully supported by him. Notwith-
standing the silence of cotemporary historians, there
are violent presumptions of the former; of the lat-
ter there is undoubted certainty t. During the t Keith.
f iege, the conspirators had received from England 60o
gupplies both of money and provisions; and as
Henry was preparing to renew his proposals con-
cerning themarriage and the union he had project-
ed, and to second his negotiations with a numerous
army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be
in a ituation, in which they would no longer need
a pardon, but might claim a reward.

THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It January

happened in the beginning of next year, after a 28' 1547
reign of greater flcndor than true glory; bufftling,
though not ative; oppressive in domestic govern-
ment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more beneficial to
mankind, than the virtues of others. His rapaci-

oufnefs,
I

BoUK Ii. oufnefs, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by
'--w-' dzpreffing the ancient nobility, and by adding new

property and powerto the Commons, laid the foun-
dations of the British liberty. His other palfions
contributed no less towards the downfall of Popery,
and the eablifhment of religious freedom in the
nation. His resentment led him to abolish the
power, and his covetousness to seize the wealthof
the church; and by withdrawing these supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn
the whole fabric of superstition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who

had been alternately his rival and his friend; but
his successor Henry II. was not negletful of the

Troops French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider-
arrive able body of men, under the command of Leon
from France. Strozzi, to the Regent's assistance. By their long

experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dextrous in the condu of
sieges, as the Scots were ignorant and as the bold-
neis and despair of the conspirators could not de.
fend them againit their superior art, they, after a

Force the short resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who en-
caste of

l gaged, in the name of the King his mafcer, for the

drew's to security of their lives; and, as his prisoners, tranf-
surrender. ported them into France. The castle itself, the

monument of Beatoun's power and vanity, was de-
moiifhed, in obedience to the canon law, which,
with admirable policy, denounces its anathemas
even against the houses in which the sacred blood
of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them

Burn. to be laid in ruins *.
Hist. Ref. TH archbifhoprickof St.Andrew's was bestow-
'338 ed by the Regent upon his natural brother John

Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

N'ew THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the
br^ ah conspirators. Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who.
irh ELg-

. had the chief direcion of affairs during the mino-

rity

;iit of his son Edward VI. conducted themselves, BOOK II.
\. iil regard to Scoiland, by the 'maxims of their -'
i.lc maiter, and resolved to frighten the Scots into
| l-raty, which they had not abilities or address to

birg about by any other method.

b

B or betore we proceed to relate the events 'hich

trhcir invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall stop
io t ke notice of a circumstance unobserved by co-
,tci:porary historians, but extremely remarkable for
th (cificovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
I\\ ih then prevailed among the Scots. The con-
Ii!iators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re-
icn's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's ; and
Es tlic needed the protection of the English, it was

.; be ecared that they might endeavour to purchase
, by delivering to them this important prize. The
r-iui:ptive heir to the Crown, in the hands of the
;'o,'d enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
rofpect. And in order to avoid it, the arlia-
cnt fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
n act made of purpose, they excluded " the re-
gent's eldest bon from all right of fucceffon,
public or private, so long as he ihould be detain-
cd a prisoner, and fubflituted in his place, his
,.:.',(lr brothers, according to their seniority, and
in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
thl Regent'*.' Succession by hereditary right * p *n.
.; iJea ob obvious and so popular, that a nation Reg. Scot;
i:.o:n ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes . 359.
c':rene neceflity. Such a necessity did the Par-
;.:!int diifcover in the present situation. Hatred
I '.nland, founded on the memory of past hofti-
1i, and heightened by the smart of recent inju-
ts, as the national paflion. This di&ated that
nco::!,lon statute, by which the order of lineal
ccfcon was so remarkably broken. The modern
iories, which represent this right as divine and
?alienable, and that ought not to be violated upon
VOL. I. H any

Boor . any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been
'-'-- J then altogether unknown.
Scotland IN the begining ,, September, the Earl of Hat.
invaded ford, now Duke of Somerlet, and protector of En.
by he land, entered Scotland at the head of 18,ooo nmen
Ergl!-".. and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships appear

on the coast, to second his land forces. The Scor
had for some time observed the storm gatherin
and were prepared for it. Their army was alm
double to that of the enemy, andpofted to the grea
eft advantage on a rising ground, above Muff
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Efk;
Both these circumstances alarmed the Duke
Somerset, who saw his danger, and would willing
ly have extricated himself out of it, by a new ove
ture of peace on conditions extremely reafonabk
But this moderation being imputed to fear, his pro
pofals were rejected with that scorn, which
confidence of success inspires; and, if the condu
of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish armn
had been in any degree equal to his confidence,
deftrucion of the English must have been inevit
ble: They were in a situation, precisely similar
that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwe
in the following century. The Scots had choe
their ground so well, that it was impossible to fore
them to give battle; a few days hadexhauftedd
forrage and provision of a narrow country; the l
could only furnilh a scanty and precarious subfd
ence; a retreat therefore was necessary; but
grace; and perhaps ruin, were the confequen
of retreating.

ON both there occasions, the national heat ai

impetuosity of the Scots saved the Englilh, and pit
cipitated their own country into the utmost dang
The undisciplined courage of the private men i
came impatient at the fight of an enemy. Ti
General was afraid of nothing, but that the Engl
would escape from him by flight; and leaving k

ftro:

rtong; camp, he attacked the Duke of Somerset BooK II.
;:I.!r- i'inkey, with no better success than his rafi- '- ?
I,i(i declrvcdd. The Protecor had drawn up his Baitleof
rroops on a gentle eminence, and had now the ad- Scptern-
vantag of ground on his fide. The Scottish army ber 1io
confilted aimoft intirely of infantry, whose chief 547.
wcapo)n was long spear, and for that reason their
files were very deep, and their ranks close. They
advanced towards the enemy in three great bodies,
and as they passed the river, were considerably ex-
poIcd to the fire of the English fleet, which lay ii
the! bay of Muflelbutrch, and had drawn near the

ore. The Englifil cavalry, fiufled with an ad-
vantage which they had gained in a flirmiih some
tlavs before, began the attack with more impetu-
oi[', than good conduct. A body io firm and
'onipa1'L as the Scots, easily relifted the impression
of cavalry, broke themn, and drove them off the
S;ic!. The English infantry, however advanced,
and the Scots were at once exposed to a flight of
arrows, to a fire in flank from 400 foreign Fusileers
who fcrved the enemy, and to their cannon which
wcr:e planted behind the infantry, on the highest
i:': .of the cminence. The depth and closeness of
t;'.ir order making it impossible for the Scots to
IA·d long in this situation; the Earl of Angus,
'v:o commanded the vanguard, endeavoured to
change his ground, and to retire towards the main
body. But his friends unhappily mistook this mo-
ion for a flight, and fell into confusion. A. that
very initant, the broken cavalry having rallied, re-
turned to the charge; the foot pursued the adva*-
tagc they had gained, the prospect of victory re-
doubled the ardour of both: and, in a moment,
the rout of the Scottish army became universal,
ani irretrievable. The encounter in the field was
not long, nor bloody: but in the pursuit, the Eng-
lifh diicovered all the rage and fierceness, which
national antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and

H 2 istfamed

Boor II. inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire.
'--~ The pursuit was continued for five hours, and to a

great distance. All the three roads, by which the
Scots fled, were strewed with spears and swords,
and targets, and covered with the bodies of the
(lain. Above o,ooo men fell on this day, one of
the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were
taken prisoners, and among these some persons of
diftinciton. And the protector had it now in his
power to become master of a kingdom, out of
which, not many hours before, he was almost ob-
liged to retire with infamy *.

BuT

* The following passage in a curious and rare journal of the

Protector's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who
was joined in commnillion with Cecil, as judge Marshal of the
army, and printed in 1548, deserves our notice; as it givesa
jut idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time,
' But what after I learned, specially touching their order, their
armour, and their manner as well of going to offend, as of
tanding to defend, I have thought necessary here to utter.
Hack-butters have they few or none, and appoint their fight
most commonly always a-foot. They come to the field well
furnilhed all with jack and skull, dagger and buckler, and
swords all broad and thin, of exceeding good temper, and uni.
verfally so made to lice, that as I never saw none so good, so
think I it hard to devise the better. Hereto every man his pike,
and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice about his neck,
not for cold, but for cutting. In their array towards joining

ith the enemy, they cling and thruf so near in the fore rank,

fhoulJer and houlder together, with their pikes in both their
hands ltraight afore them, and their followers in that order so
hard at their backs, laying their pikes over their foregoer
ihoulders, that, if they do assail undiscovered, no force can wel
withtland them. Standing at defence they thrust houlders like-
wife so nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling,
Dfop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with
both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one
erd of the pike againt their right foot, and the other again!t
the enemy brealt-high; their followers crofing their pike pointi
with them forward; and thus each with other so nigh as spate
and place will susser, through the whole ward, so thick, thati
easily 11all a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry
;edge hog, as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other
curious particulars are found in this journal, from which ir
Tohn Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition,
..ife of Edward VI. 279, &c. Th

BUT this victory, however great, was of no-real BooK I.
utility, for want of skill, or of leisure, to improve hei

"-'-heir vic-

it Every new injury rendered the Scots morea- orv of l-
verse from an union with England; and the Pro- tie benefit
tec6or neglected the only measure, which would to tlEng-
have made it necessary for them to have given lih-
their content to it. He amused himself in wafting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty castles; whereas by fortifying a few places
which were accessible by ea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a short
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his
terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an
improvement of it, his viEtory at Dunbar gave
Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other effect but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
situation of the English court mav, indeed, beplead-
ed in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's conduct.
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned his
tragical end, was already formed ; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his
power and credit at home. Self-prefervation, there-
tore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of
his victory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet
ripe for execution ; and his pretence suspended its
effect for some time. The supreme power fill re-
maining in his hands, he employed it to recover the
opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops,
b Ihis command, seized and fortified Haddingtoun, April,
a place, which, on account of its distance from the 548.
lea, and from any English garrison, could not be
defended without great expence and danger.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by a&
44i P. 147 i, to be fix ells; i. e. eighteen feet fix inches.

H 3 MEAN

Bcon I. MEAX while the French gained more by the
' T--' defeat of their allies, than the English did by thei
Sco i:o vicor-. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,
c!cicr u- Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
n:on with fiderable share in the direction of affairs. She was
Frrce. -warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to

the French interest; and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were
broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of noble
which met at Stirling to consult upon the fituatior
of the kingdom, all eyes were turned toward
France, no profpet of safety appearing but in affif
tance from thince. But Henry I. being then :
peace with England, the Queen reprelented th:
they could not expect him to take part in ther
quarrel, but upon views of personal advantage; anr
that without extraordinary concessions in his favour
no aliftance in proportion to their present exiger
cies could be obtained. The prejudices of the natio
powerfully fconded there representations of th
Queen. What often happens to individuals tooi
place among the nobles in this convention; the
were swayed entirely by their paflions, and in ordI
to gratify themn, they deterted their former prirn
ciples, and diii-egarded their true interest. In th
violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal so
the independence of Scotland, which had prompte

--:.;^ c- them to reject the proposals of Henry VIII. and b
: t- .t;r offering, voluntarily, their young Queen in mar
Q e-;, in -i t

to the Dauphin, eldest son of Henry II. an;

:t'rhes vrlich was irill more, by proposing to fend her it
D;up.. mediately into France to be educated a his cour

t-.ey ranted, from a thirst of vengeance, wllat c
mcr: thev would not yield upon any conidcrato
of ir.ejr o.-n faietv. 1'o gain at once luch a kingidc.:

. ......., .-.,as a mnatter of no finall conkicqucn

to France. Henry, without hesitation, accepted the BOOK .
offers of the Scottish ambassadors, and prepared -
for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition. Six
thoulamnd veteran soldiers, under the command of
Monsieur Deff, aflifted by some of the best officers,
who were formed in the long wars of Francis I. ar-
rived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scot-
I.ndl, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But
their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
blon became jealous of their designs, and neglc&tcd
to lupport them with proper vigour; and the cau-
t:.n of the Englifi, in acting w holly upon the de-
n five, prevented them from attempting any enter-
.ize of conlequcnce, and obliged them to exhaufl
heir f'rength in tedious sieges, undertaken under
|any diiadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
Iot without ome benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ing the Engliih to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to
irtrendcr several small forts, ihich they poffefted
n different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of these operations of his
oops were tillof greater importance to the French
ing. The diversion which they occasioned en-
tbled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
he Engliffh; and the influence of his army in Scot-
and obtained the concurrence of parliament with
he overtures made to him, by the assembly of no-
les at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
ith the Dauphin, and her education at the court
France. In vain did a few patriots remonifrate
ogainft fluchextravagantconceflions,bywhich Scot-
iand was reduced to be a province of France; and The treaty
lenry, fi-om an ally, raised to be master of thefor that
:ingdom; by which, the friendship of France be- purpole
tame more fatal than the enmity of England; and c de.
tvery thing was fondly given up to the one, that
iad been bravely defended against the other. A
poinr of lo much consequence was hastily decided,

H 4 in

Boos I. in a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Had-
'--,-_ dingtoun: the intrigues of the Queen Dowager,
Jne s' the zeal of the clergy, and resentment against Eng.

land, had prepared a great party in the nation for
such a ftep; the French General and Ambassador,
by their liberality and promises, gained over many
more. The Regent himself was weak enough to
stoop to the offer of a pension from France, toge-
ther with the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that
kingdom. A considerable majority declared for
the treaty, and the interest of a faction was pre.
ferred before the honour of the nation.

',.7 sent H AVING hurried the Scots into this rash and fa
tu be - tal resolution, the source of many calamities tc
France. themselves and to their sovereign, the French al.

lowed them no time for reflection or repentance.
The fleet which had brought over their forces,
was frill in Scotland, and, without delay, convoy-
ed the Queen into France. Mary was then fu
years old, and by her education in that court, one
of the politest, but most corrupted in Europe, she
acquired every accomplishment that could add to
her charms as a woman, and contra&ed many of
those prejudices, which occasioned her misfortunes
as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to susser
the war in Scotland to languish. The recovering
of the Boulonnois was the objec Henry had most
at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sus-
ficient to divide the attention and strength of the
English, whose domestic factions deprived both
their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour.
The government of England had undergone a great
revolution. The Duke of Somerset's power had been
acq ired with too much violence, and was exer-
cifed with too little moderation, to be of long conti-
nuance. Many good qualities, added to great love
of his country, could not atone for his ambition

in'

in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Many of BOOK II.
the most eminent courtiers combined againit him; '--
and the earl of Warwick their leader, no lss am-
bitious, but more artful than Somerset, conducted
his measures with so much dexterity, as to raise
himself upon the ruins of his rival. Without the
invidious name of protector, he succeeded to all
the power and influence, of which Somerlet was de-
prived, and he quickly found peace to be neccfary
for the eftabliflment of his new authority, and the
execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

HENRY was no stranger to Warwick's situation, eacecon-
and improved his knowledge of it to good purpose, cluded.
in conducting the negotiations for a general peace.
He prescribed what terms he pleated to the English
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advan-
tageous to that monarch and his allies. England March z4.
contented to restore Boulogne and its dependencies '550
to France, and gave up all pretensions to a treaty
of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quefl of her country. A few small forts, of which
theEnglifh troops hadhithertokept poffeffion,were
razed; and peace between the two kingdoms was
established on its ancient foundation.

BOTH the Britiffi nations loft power, as well as

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on
both fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
tl.er than of interest; and was carried on, under the
in'uence of national animofities, which were blind
to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater coolness, conducted it with more
IlSill; and by dextroufly availing themselves of
cvery circumstance which occurred, recovered pof.
icllion of an important territorvwhich they had loft,
:nd added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
ambition of the English Minister betrayed to them
dte former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots a-
gainlt their ancient enemies bestowed on them the
tatter; their own address and good policy merited
ri'oth IMM E-

Boo HI. IMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace

'^- ' the French forces left Scotland, as much to thei

The Scots
become own fatisfation, as to that of the nation. Th
jena!os f Scots oon found, that the calling to their afiftanc
the a people more powerful than themselves, was,
Frenc!. dangerous expedient. They beheld, with the ut.

rrmot impatience, those who had come over to pro.
tact the kingdom, taking upon them to command
in it, and on many occasions they repented the
r.fi invitation they had given. The peculiar ge-
nius of the French nation heightened this disgust,
and prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke, be.
fore they had well begun to feel it. 'The French
were, in that ae, what they are in the prelent, one
or the most poiifhed nations in Europe. But it
to be observcd, in all their expeditions into foreign
countries, whether towards the south or north, that
their manners have been remarkably incompatible
with the manners of every other people. Barba.
rians are tenacious of their own customs, because
they want knowledge and taste to dilcover the rea.
fonablcnefs and propriety of customs which diffe
from them. Nations, which hold the firit rank in
politerels, are frequently no leIs tenacious out or
pride. The Greeks were io in the ancient world;
and the French are the fame in the modern. Full
of themselves; attered by the imitation of their
neighbours; and accustomed to confider their own
modes as the standards of elegance, they scorn to
diguife, or to lay aside the diftinguilning manners
cf their own nation, or to make any allowance for
what may differ from them among othtrs. For
this reaion, the behaviour of their armies has, on
every occasion, been insupportable to lirangers,
and has aiv-ays exposed them to hatred, and often
to dellruction. In that age they over-ran Italy
lour several times, by their valour, and loft it, as
often, by their infoience. The Scots, naturally an
irafcib!e and high-lpirizcd people, and who, of all

nations,

nations, can least bear the mos distant insinuation BOOK II.
oi contempt, were not of a temper to admit all V '
the pretensions of such assuming guests. The
,lyiptoms of alienation were soon visible; they e-
conded the military operations of the French troops
,vith the utmost coldness, and their iiiguft grew In-
sensibly to adegrec of indignation that cou hardly
be restrained; and on occasion of a vry flight
accident, broke out with fatal violince. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgl, both nations cook
arms, with equal rage, in defence of their country-
inen. The Provoit of Edinburgh, his tn, and fe-
veral citizens of diftin&ion, were killed in the fray;
and the French were obligcd to avoid the fury of
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
withfanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercotirfe of good oftices
bcetween the two nations, an aversion for the French
took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the es-
tsets whereof were deeply felt, and operated
powerfully through the ubfcquent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing Progrefsof

has been said of the itate of religion. While the the .Rcfor-
war with England continued, the clergy had no lei-at
sure to moleit the Protestants; and they were not
vet considerable enough to expect any thing more
than connivance and impunity. The new doEtrines
were still in their infancy; but during this flort in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired strength, and
advanced, by large and firm t-eps, towards a full
rflablillhment in the kingdom. The first preachers
aainit popery in Scotland, of whom several had
::ppared during the reign of James V. were more
tnlincnt for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
cquaintance with the principles of the Reformation
;'us partil, and at second hand; ome of them had
:un educated in LEnrland; ;al of them had borrow-

ed

BooK l. ed their notions from the books published there;
~'^ d ' and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did not

venture far before their leaders. But, in a hor
time, the doctrines and writings of the foreign Re.
formers became generally known; the inquifitivt
genius of the age pressed forward in quest of truth;
the discovery of one error opened the way to others;
the downfall of one imposture drew many after it:
the whole fabric, which ignorance and superstition
had erected in times of darkness, began to totter;
and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but;
daring and active leader to direct the attack. Such
was the famous John Knox, who, with better qua.
lifications of learning, and more extensive view
than any of his predecessors in Scotland, possessed
a natural intrepidity of mind, which set him abovr
fear. He began his public ministry at St. Andrew'
in the year I547, with that success, which alway
accompanies a bold and popular eloquence. In
ltead of amusing himfelfwith lopping the branches
he itruck direcily at the root of popery, and at
tacked both the doctrine and discipline of the efta
blifhed church, with a vehemence peculiar to him.
self, but admirably suitable to thetemper andwihl
of the age.

AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not

have easily escaped the rage of the clergy,who ob.
served the tendency and progress of his opinions,
with the utmost concern. But, at first, he retired
for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while
the conspirators kept possession of it, preached pub
lickly under their protection. The great revolution
in England, which followed upon the death o
Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal oi
Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in
Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. The miniftersofhis
ion Edward VI. cast them off altogether, and efta.

blifhed

lifhed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame BOOK II.
oting, whereon it now stands in that kingdom. -V
heinfluenceof this example reached Scotland, and
hc happy effets of ecclesiastical liberty, in the one
ation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
overing it. The reformers had, hitherto, been
obliged to condufc themselves with the utmost cau-
:in, and seldom ventured to preach, butin private

ioufes, and at a distance from court , they gained
redit, as happens on the first publication of every
ew religion, chiefly among persons in the lower
nd middle rank of life. But several noblemen of
he greatest diftintion, having, about this time,
penly espoused their principles, they were nolon-
er under the necessity of ating with the fame re-
erve; and with more security and encouragement,
Bhev had likewise greater success. The means of
cquiring and spreading knowledge became more
ommon, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to
hat period, grew every day bolder and more uni-
'erfal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was
till under some restraint. It had not yet attained
irmnefs and vigour, sufficient to overturn a system,
ounded on the deepest policy, and supported by
he most formidable power. Under the prelent cir-
umnftances, any attempt towards action must have
)een fatal to the Protestant doctrines; and it is no
nmall proof of the authority, as well as penetration
Of the heads of the party, that they were able to
eftrain thezeal of afiery and impetuous people, till
|hat critical and mature juncture, when every
kp they took was decisive and successful.
| MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement,
irom two different quarters, whence they never
ould have expected it. The ambition of the
IoulC of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-

land.

Boor I. land, hastened the subversion of the Papal throne
',' in Scotland; and by a singular dilpofition of Pro-

vidence, the persons who opposed the Reformarior
in every other part of Europe with the fiercest zeal,
were made instruments for advancing it in that
kingdom.

The MARY of Guise possessed the fame bold and al:
Queen piring spirit, which distinguished her family. But
Dowager P'rsamly.'Do
afDire to in her it was softened by the female character, and
the office accompanied with greater temperand addreis. Hr
of Regent. brothers, in order to attain the high objects at which

they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures
as fuired their great courage. Her designs upon the
supreme power were concealed with the utmost care.
and advanced by address and refinements more na-
tural to her sex. By a dextrous application ofthofe
talents, she had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted
with the government of women; and without the
smallest right to any share in the administration of
affairs, had engrossed the chief direAion of them
into her own hands. But she did not long reft fa-
tisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious power,
which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition
of those who governed him, might lb eafilv disturb;
and fme began to set on foot new intrigues,, witl .
design of undermining him, and of opening to he:-
lelf a way to succeed him in that high dignity.
i-Ier brothers entered warmly into this icheme, and
supported it with all their credit at the court or
France. The French King v.illingly concurred in
a neafure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland
entirely under management, and in any future broil
with England, to turn its whole force upon thal
kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Queen Dowager had only one of two ways to choole;
eitherviolently to wrest the power out of the hands
of the Regent, or to obtain it bv his contnr. Un-

' ci(ler

der a minority, and among a warlike and factious BOOK II.
p.oplc, the former was a very uncertain and dan- "-S
rerous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
l s impracticable. To perfude a man voluntarily
to abdicate the supreme power, to descend to a le-
v-l with those, above whom he was railed; and to
bc content with the second placewhere he hathheld
tlhe firift, may well pass for a wild and chimerical
projec. This, however, the Quccn attempted;
and the prudence of the attempt was sufficiently
iuftified by its success.

THE Regent's inconitancy and irresolution, toge-

thcr with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his administration, raised the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people again it
him, to a great height; and the Queen fecretfl
iomented these with much industry. All who wilh-
ed for a change met with a gracious reception in
her court, and their spirit of difafFecion was nou-
rifhed by such hopes and promises, as, inevery age,
impose on the credulity of the factious. The fa- Courts the
vourers of the Reformation being the most nume- Re;obriers
rous and spreading body of the Regent's enemies,
Ihe applied to them, with a particular attention;
and the gentleness of her disposition, and seering
indifference to the religious points in ifpute, made
all her promises of protc'iun and indulgence pais
upon them for sincere. Finding so grcat a part of
the nation willing to fl! in with her mcafu.ecs, the
Q!tcen iet out for France, under prcnce of v-ifi- '.;s. s.50
ing her daughter, and took along with 1ic r .-l l.
noblemen, who poffeifed the greatest power ad
credit among their countrymen. Softcned i t, e
plafuires of an elegant court, f:ttcred by tL civI-
lities of the French King, and the ciarcf:s of the
houtie of Guise, and influenced by the I.'aon;b1e
distribution of a few favours, and the libcral pro-
mise of many more, they were brcuelt to approve
of 1l the Quecn's pretrnfions.

\ 1H1ILE

BooK lI. WHILE he advanced by there flow but fur

f-- teps, the Regent either did not foresee the danger
which threatened him, or negleEted to provide a.
gainft it. The first discovery of the train which
was laid, came from two of his own confidants,
Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross,
whom the Queen had gained over to her interest,
and then employed as the most proper instrument
for obtaining his content. The overture was made
to him in the name of the French King, enforced
by proper threatenings, in order to work upon his
natural timidity, and weetened by every promise
that could reconcile him to a proposal so disagree-
able. On the one hand, the confirmation of his
French title, together with a considerable pension,
the parliamentary acknowledgment of his right of
succession to the crown, and a public ratification
of his condut during his regency, were offered
him. On the other hand, the displeasure of the
French King, the power and popularity of the
Queen Dowager, the difaffeetion of the nobles,
with the danger of an after-reckoning, were re-
presented in the strongest colours.

IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so ex-

traordinary and unexpected, without some previous
struggle; and had the Archbishop of St. Andrew's
been present to fortify theirrefolute and paflive fpi-
rit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejected it with disdain. Happily for the Queen,
the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
this time, be no obstruction to her views. He was
lying at the point of death, and, in his absence, the
influenceof the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
per counterbalanced several of the strongest pas.
sions in the human mind, and obtained his confeni
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.
Dec., 55 . AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with

so much ease, the Queen returned into Scotland, in

fuL

ilil expectation of taking immediate poIffeon of BOOK II.
her new dignity. But, by this time, the Archbi- --
nop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that diftem-
per, which the ignorance of the Scottish physicians
had pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
the afiiltance of the famous Carden, one of thoic
irregular adventurers in plilofophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold ge-
ius led him to some useful dilcoveries, which me-
rit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild ima-

zination engaged him in those chimerical sciences,
hich drew the admiration of his cotemporaries.
s a pretender to astrology and magic, he was re-
vred and consulted by all Europe; as a proficient
n natural philosophy, he was but little known.
The Archbishop, it is probable, confidered him as
apowerful magician, when he applied to him for
rief; but it was his knowledge as a philosopher,
chich enabled him to cure his disease *.
TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop re-
,veted the entire government of the Regent, and
uickly persuadcd him to recall that hilhonourable
roimiicj which he had been educed by the artifices
f the Q een to grant. However great her furprize
nd indignation were, at this fresh instance of his
nccnftancy, ihe was cbligcd to difnemble, that fle
righl have cilure to renew her intrigues with all
arties; with the Protestants, whom rhe favour-
d and courted more than ever; with the nobles,
o whom ile rendered herself agreeable by various
rts; and with the Regent hlmfelf, in order to
in whom, she employed every argument. But

Cardlen hlilnelf was more desirous of being confidered as an
it;olger than a Ihilofosher in h;s book De G.nituris, we
n a calcultian of the Archbiflip's nativiry, tro.i which he
reends orl. to have preditted his dilniefe, and to ave effetied
's cure. l- rce vd, Iroln the A:chbifhop, a reward of iSoo
Ownis. A great u: u.n I.a; anee. D, Ii;afa,:a p. 3z
VOL. I. I whatever

Boos I. whatever impressions her emissaries might have
~L^~' made on the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-

reach or to intimidate the Archbishop. Under his
management, the negotiations were spun out to a
great length, and his brother maintained his fation
with that address and firmness, which its impor-
tance so well merited. The universal defecion of
the nobility, the growing power of the protestants,
who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reite-
rated solicitations of the French King, and, above
all, the interpofiion of the young Queen, who was
now entering the twelfth year of her age, and
claimed a right of nominating whom she pleased to

Prevailr. be regent, obliged him, at last, to resign that
t reRegi' high office, which he had held many years. He ob-
his ffice. tained, however, the fame advantageous terms for

himffelf, which had been formerly stipulated.

She obtains IT was in the Parliament which met on the ioth
theRegen- of April, 1554, that the Earl of Arran executed
C' this extraordinary resignation; and at the fame

time Mary of Guise was raised to thatdignity, which
had been so long the object of her wishes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman, and a ftran-
cer, was advanced to the supreme authority over a
rerce and turbulent people, who seldom submitted,
without reluctance, to the legal andancient govern-
ment of their native Monarchs.

.t .:.:- \VT--IL L the Qieen Dowager of Scotland contri-
;.--:": ';bured io much towards the progress of the Refor-
::;,ke rca ma rln, by the prorection which fie afforded it,

; '. from notives of ambition; the English Queen, by

her irdifcreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons
az-'ive in promoting thle fame cause. Mary ascend-
re- the throne of England, on the death of her

! '. 6 brother Edward, and soon after married Philip II.
, q:. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romifn

fupc-rtition, and the fiercenels of that age, fne
added the private refcntment of her own, and

f hier mothluers , furings, with which she loaded BooK !1.
tile Reformed Religion ; and the peevishness and X'- --
!iverity of her natural temper carried the acrimony
c all thcle pafions to the utmoi: extreme. The
I.-ucity of her per-iecution equalled the deeds of
tih!'e tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach
to human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could
i:urce keep pace with the impetuosity of her zeal.
lven the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on some
occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings.
Many among the molt eminent Reformers suffered
for the doctrines which they had taught; others
fled from the storm. To the greater part of thelc,
Switzerland and Germany opened a iecurc asylum;
and not a few, out of choice or neceflity, fled into
Scotland. What they had seen and felt in England,
did not abate the warmth and zeal of their indig-
nuion against Popery. Their attacks were bolder
and more fucccfsful than ever; and their doctrines
made a rapid progrels among all ranks of men.

T'iisE doc'rines, calculated to rectify the opi-
nions, and to reform the manners of mankind, had
litherto produced no other effe&s; but they soon
t::.n to operate with greater violence, and proved
ti:: uccafi)n, not only of fubvertng the established
!di:ion, but of shaking the throne, and endanger-
iil tie kingdom. ''he causes which facilitated .A i;w of
'!cinlrrodu&ionof thcf new opinions into Scotland, t' Pji'ti-
.nd which diflicmlinatcd them so fast through the Cail.' -'
nl.to:, merit, on that account, a particular and co!rribil;-
carcfui inquiry. The reformation is one of the editoard'
grcatef' events in the history of mankind, and in'1h't.
'hatever point of light we view it, is inftructivc
ind interesting.

THE revival of learning in the isth and 6ih
centuries rouzed the world from that lethargy, in
irhich it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mini felt its own strength, broke the fetters

I 2 of

BooK II. of authority by which it had been so long restrain.
h'"vJ ed, and venturing tomove in a larger sphere, push.

ed its inquiries into every fubjest, with great bold.
ness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of

exercising their reason, than religion was one of the
sirs obje&s which drew their attention. Long be-
fore Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the impofturt
and abiurdity of the established superstition. That
tubtle and refining people, satisfied with enjoying
those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to
aiTume the dangerous chara&er of Reformers, and
concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
gative of the wife, while vulgar minds must b
overawed and governed by popular errors. But
animated with a more noble and disinterested zeal,
the German Theologian boldly erected the ftanda
or truth, and upheld it with an unconquerablein.
trepidity, which merits the admiration and grad.
cude of all succeeding ages.

THE occaflon of Luther's being first difgufte

with the tenets of the Romish church, andhow,
from a finall rupture, the quarrel widened intoan
irreparable breach, is known to every one who ha
becn the least conversant in history. From th
he.i_- of Germany, his opinions spread, with ato
ini'ing rapidity, all over Europe; and wherevd
ith- came. endan-ered or overturned the ancien
but iii founded fyitem. The vigilance and addref
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigor
o the Aufsrian flmily, suppressed there notions 01
their rft appearance, in the southern kingdomso
Eurcpe. But the fierce pirit of the north, irrta
ted b- multiplied impositions, could neither b
molliied by the lame arts, nor subdued by the far

force

force; and encouraged by ome Princes from piety, BooK II.
and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down '"-'
tithe feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral
clergy.

THE superstition of Popery seems to have grown
to the most extravagant height, in thole countries
which are fituatedtowards the different extremities
of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and fen-
fibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of
southern climates, rendered them susceptible of the
ceepeft impressions of superstitious terror and cre-
dulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less fa-
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among
the northern nations. They knew little, and were
dlipofed to believe every thing. The most glaring
abiurdities did not filock their gross understandings,
and the moit improbable fi&ions were received
with implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-
vailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted and
illiberal kind. Those doctrines which are most apt
to shock the human underftan.ing, and those le-
gends which farthest exceed belief, were prcpofed
to the people without any attempt to paiiiate or dif-
uife them; nor did they ever call in question the
reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the other.

'HE power and wealth of the church kept pace

with the progress of superstition; for it is the na-
ture of that spirit to observe no bounds in its re-
Ipet and liberality towards those, whose character
esteems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demon-
rated how much they were under its influence, by
heir vast additions to the immunities and riches of
the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who

icquired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
ferred almost the whole crown-lands, which were
Rt that time of great extent, into the hands of

I 3 ecclefiafics.

BooK II. ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous Prince
,--'- was imitated by his successors. The spirit spread

among all orders of men, who daily loaded the
priesthood with new possessions. The riches of the
church all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scot-
land was one of those countries, wherein they had
farthest exceeded the just proportion. The Scot.
tifh clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on
land; and as there is no reason to think that, in
that age, they would be loaded with any unequal
hare of the burden, we may conclude, that, by
the time of the Reformation, little less than one
half of the property of the nation had fallen into
the hands of a society, which is always acquiring,
and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of their

property extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands, were let in lease at an
easy rent, and were possessed by the younger sons,

* Kei-:, and descendants of the bell families *. The con-
zi. .\:. nexion between fiperior and vasal, between land-

lord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave
rife to an union of great advantage to the church;
and in estimating the influence of the Popish eccle-
fiaftics over the nation, these, as well as the real
amount of their revenues, must be attended to,
and taken into the account.

THIS extraordinary fharein the nationalproperty

was accompanied with proportionable weight in
the fuprcme council of the kingdom. At a time,
when the number of temporal Peers was extreme-
iv fall, and when the Lesser Barons and repre-
lentatives of Burroughs seldom attended Parlia-
ments, the ecclesiastics formed a considerable body
there. And it appears from the ancient rolls oi
Parliament, and from the manner of choofing the
I ords of Articles, that the proceedings of that

high

high court must have been, in a great measure, un- BOOK II.
der their direcion *. --

THE reverence due to their sacred character, HiR. otthe

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed Cl.uch of
not a little towards the growth of their power. Scot. 449-
The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pilh clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
ects of that dominion, which they had acquired
over the reft of mankind. They were regarded
by the credulous laiety as beings of a superior fpe-
cies; theywereneither subjec to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
gion could supply, was placed around their power,
their possessions, and their persons; and endeavours
were used, not without success, to represent them
all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in place
ofthefe, were substituted studies, barbarous and
uninifrutive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were
conversant in them, this procured them esteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration
of rude ages which knew nothing. War was the
sole profession of the nobles, and hunting their
chief amusement; they divided their time between
theie; unacquainted with the arts, and mnim-
proved by science, they disdained any employment
toreign from military affairs, or which required
rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
]Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy
were entrusted; because they alone were properly
qualified for the trust. Almost all the high offices
in civil government devolved, on this account, in-
to their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the firif
subjet in the kingdom, both in dignity and in power.
i om the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the

I 4 death

BSo II. death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons has

'Crav; held that high office; and of these, forty-three had

o0F. of been ecciefiaftics *. The Lords of Seflion were lu-
Stre. preme Judges in all matters of civil right; and by

its original constitution, the president and one half
of the Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law oi
celibacy and undiftracted by those cares, and un-
incumbered with those burdens which occupy and
oppress other men, the interest of their order be-
came their only object, and they were at full
leisure to pursue it.

THE nature of their function gave them access

to all persons, and at all seasons. They could em.
ploy all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror
and of consolation, which operate most powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and
the credulous ; they bcfieged the beds of the sick
and of the dying. They suffered few to go outoi
the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by bestowing riches
upon those, who called themselves his servants.

W HEN their own industry, or the superstition of

mankind failed of producing this effect, the eccle.
fiaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. Whoever died itcate, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uscs. The church
rook poffefion of them. The children, the wife,
the creditors of the persons deceased were often ex-
cluded from any share in what was esteemed a a
*- - ;r cred property . As men are apt to truf to the

"'' continuance of life with foolish confidence, and
,-.' childishly shun every thing, that forces them to

think of their mortalitv, many die without fettling
t'hir affairs by will: and the bold usurpation of the

cler'

clergy in this cafe, of which there are frequent BooK 1I,
vestiges in our laws, though none in our historians, -
may be reckoned among the most plentiful sources
of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-

tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
.,nd by laws which the clergy themselves had fram-
ed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions of
there courts were enforced, added to their.autho-
rity. A entence of excommunication was no less
formidable than a sentence of outlawry. It was
pronounced on many occasions, and against various
crimes: and beides excluding those, upon whom
it fell, from Christian privileges, it deprived them
of all their rights as men, or as citizens; and the
:iid of the secular power concurred with the super-
ftition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of
the church no less deftruCive than terrible.

To thee general causes may be attributed the
immense growth both of the wealth, and power of
the Popish church; and without entering into any
more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a structure so stupendous
was erected.

BUT though the laiety had contributed, by their
own fuiperftition and profuseness, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at
tiir incroachments. No wonder haughty and mar-
tial Barons mhould view the power and poffeflions
o the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
.acive character of churchmen with the utmost
contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
.nd licentious lives of the clergy gave great and
· ft offence to the people, and considerably abated
::e veneration, which they were accustomed to
'id to that order of men.
lM?.;rT;: vwealth, extreme indolence, gross igno-

rance,

BooK II. rance, and, above all, the evere injuncion of ce.

libacy, had concurred to introduce this corruption
of morals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the submission of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their own
vices. According to the accounts of the Reform.
ers, confirmed by several Popish writers, the most
open and scandalous dissolution of manners pre.
vailed among the Scottiih clergy *. Cardinal Bea-
toun, with the fame public pomp, which is due to
a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawford's son i;
and, i we may believe Knox, he publickly conti-
nued to the end of his days a criminal correfpon-
dence with her mother who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gular and exemplary than their Primate .

MEN of f ch characters ought, in reason, to have

been alarmed at the first clamours raied against
their own morals, and the doctrines of the church,
by the Protestant Preachers; but the popish eccle-
fiafics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleted
the proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they

Winzet ap. Keith Append. zuz, 205. Lefl. de Reb. Grit.
Scot. 232.

t The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in
which he calls her mydaughter, are still extant. Keith, p. 42.

I A remarkable proof of the diflolute manners of the clergy

is found in the public records. A greater number of letters o(
legiiatimaon was granted during the first thirty years after the
Reformation, than during the whole period, that has elapsed
since that tin.e. Thele were obtained by the ons of the PopiIh
clergy. The ecceftaic, who were allowed to retain their be-
neric-s, alienated them to their children; who, when they ac-
quired wealth, were desirous that the itain ofillegitiilacy miight
no larger remain upon their families. In Keith's Cnatologueof
the Scottijb biJbcps, we find several intlances of such alienations
of church lands, by the popish incumbents, to their natural
children.

affeaed

affected to despise the censures of the people. And BOOK II.
while the Reformers, by their mortifications and -
aufterities, endeavoured to resemble the first propa-
gators of Christianity, the Popish clergy were com-
pared to all those persons, who are moit infamous,
in history, for the enormity and scandal of their
crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the ri-

gour, or colouring over the absurdity of the efta-
blifhed doctrines; instead of attempting to found
them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reaion,
they left them without any other support or recom-
mendation, than the authority of the church, and
the decrees of councils. The fables concerning
purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the me-
rits of the faints, were the topics, on which they
nfifted in their discourses to the people; and the
duty of preaching being left wholly to Monks of
the lowest and most illiterate orders, their compo-
fitions were still more wretched and contemptible,
than the fubjeas on which they insisted. While
the Reformers were attended by crowded and ad-
miring audiences, the popish preachers were either
universally defeyted, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imprudent and unsuccessful. As many doctrines
of their church had derived their credit, at firift,
from the authority of false miracles, they now en-
(leavoured to call in there to their aid *. But those * Spots-
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpici- wood, 69.
ous admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darknes and of ignorance, met with a
very different reception, in a more enlightened pe-
riod. The vigilance of the Reformers deteced
thele impostures, and exposed not only them, but

the

BooK I. the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices,
--v-.- to ridicule.

As the Popish ecclesiastics became more and

more the objcts of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the Reformers were listened to as so
many calls to liberty ; nd belides the pious indig-
nation which they excited againit those corrupt
oCdtrines, which hid perverted the nature of true
(Shrifrianiry; besides the zeal, which they inspired
for the knowledg of truth, and the purity of reli-
cion; they gave rile alto among the Scottih no-
bles, to other vi-s and pafi-ons. They hoped to
shake offthe yoke cf ecclcfiiftical dominion, which
they had long felt to be opprcfiive, and which they
now discovercd to be unchristian. They expected
to recover pof.cffion of the church revenues, which
they were now taught to confider as alienations
made by their ancestors, with a profusion no less
undifcerning than unbounded. They flatterd thcm-
selves, that a check would be given to the pride
and luxury of the clergy, who would be obliged,
henceforward, to confine themselves within the
sphere, peculiar to their sacred charater. An aver-
sion for the established church, which flowed from
so many concurring causes, which was railed by
considerations of religion, and heightened by mo-
rives of policy, spread fast through the nation, and
excited a spirit, that burst out at last with irrefift-
ible violence.

RELIGIOUS consideration., alone, were fuffcient

to have rouzed this spirit. The points in contro-
verfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to establish them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effect of some wild and en-
thufiaftic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt

to

to account for the eagerness and zeal with which Boo I.
our anccltors embraced and propagated the Pro- ""
teftalt doctrines, by taking a view of the political
morvtes, alone, which influenced them, and by
ihewing how naturally these prompted them to ac
with lo much ardor, will not, perhaps, be esteem-
cd an unnecessary digrefflon. We now return to
the course of the history.

THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent 554.

feeins to have transported her, at first, beyond the
known prudence, and moderation of her character.
She began her administration, by conferring upon The
foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a Q:een
Itep, which both from the inability of strangers to Regent
....... · ...

.. s rr * ibegins her

diicharge these offices with vigour, and from the adinii-
envy which their preferment excites among the na- ftration
tives, is never attended with good consequences. with some
Vilmort was made Comptroller, andentrufted with uepoprla
the management of the public revenues; Bonot
was appointed Governor of Orkney; and Rubay
honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and
the title of Vice Chancellor *. It was with the * Lefly,
highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of de Reb.

' Gest.

thcgrcateft eminence and authority, dealtout among scot. 1 8.
itrangers. By these promotions they conceived the
Queen to have offered an insult both to their under-
flandlings, and to their courage; to the iormer, by
tfppofing them unfic for thoifitations, which their
anccftors had filled with so much dignity; to the
latter, by imagining that they were tame enugh
not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

\HILE their minds were in this disposition, an
incident happened which inflamed their averficn
from French councils to the highett degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
lrctngrh by the fu'.ii and tbrnithableincurfionsof

their

BOOK II. their allies, the Scots. But as these inroads were

Y' ' seldom attended with any real advantage to Scot-

land, and exposed it to the dangerous resentment
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
less tractable than formerly, and scrupled any lon.
ger, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their
own quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing into the art of war, rendered
the assistance of the Scortifh forces of less import.
ance to the French Monarch. For these reasons,
Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would
take part in her husband's quarrel, was extremely
solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the assistance of
some troops, which would be more at his command
than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains who
were almost independent. In prosecution of this
design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles
from the expence and danger of defending the bor-
; 55. ders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parlia nent,

to register the value of lands throughout the king-
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to apply
that revenue towards maintaining a body of regular
troops, in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath in.
troduced into almost every part of Europe, was
unknown, at that time, and seemed altogether in-
consistent with the free andindependent spirit of the
feudal government. Nothing could be more shock-
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the en-
rrufting to mercenary hands, the defence of thofi
territories which had been acquired, or preserved,
by the blood of their ancestors. They received this
proposal with the utmost indignation. About 300
of the Lesser Barons repaired in a body to theQueeil
Regent, and represented their sense of the intended
innovation, with that manly and d:terinined bold-
ne , which is natural to a free people, in a martial

age.

ge. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so BOOK II.
firm a tone, and supported by such formidable num- -"-
bers, the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme,
which he found to be universally odious. As the
Queen herself was known perfectly to understand
the circumstances and temper of the nation, this
measure was imputed wholly to the suggestions of
her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were ready
to proceed to the molt violent extremities against
them.

THE French, instead of extinguiihing, added Attempts
fuel to the flame. They had now commenced hof- to engage
tilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed on the king-

dom in a

the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with war with
a considerable bodyof her troops. In order to de- England.
prive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he
projeced, to the Scots; and attempted to excite
them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a princess of Mary's charac-
ter, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
turbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
endeavouring to reclaim her hereticalfubjets; the
nobles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent
at Newbottl:, listened to the solicitations of the
French Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
dently declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
prize so dangerous and unnecdTary. What he
could not obtain by persuasion, the Queen Regent
brought about by a stratagem. Notwithstanding
the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, she commanded her French soldiers to re-
build a finall fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
ed, by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison
of Berwick rallied out; interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult rouzed
the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness
to revenge the least appearance of national injury
dilEpated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refo-
lutionswhich they had so lately formed. War was

determined,

Boo II. determined, and orders instantly given for railin[

a numerous army. But before their forces coul,
assemble, the ardor of their indignation had tiTm
to cool, and the Engliih having discovered no in.
tendon to push the war with vigour, the nobles re
fumed their pacific system, and resolved to ftanc
1556. altogether upon the defensive. They marched t

the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incur.
sions of the enemy, and having done what the)
thought sufficient for the safety and honourof thei
country, the Queen could not induce them, either
by her intreaties, or her artifices, to advance ano
ther ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inaivity;

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops
who possessed entirely the Confidence of the Queer
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en,
gage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to thi
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werlk
a garrison of the English. The Scots, instead ol
seconding his attempt, were enraged at his pre]
fumpton. The Queen's partiality towards Franct
had long been fufpeced; but it was now vifibl{
that she wantonly sacrificed the peace and fafet
of Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and
assuming ally. Under the feudal governments, il
was in camps, that subje&s were accustomed td
address the boldest remonifrances to their Sove
reigns. While arms were in their hands, they fell
their own strength; and at that time all their re,
prefcntations of grievances carried the authority
of commands. Oh this occasion, the indignatior
of the nobles broke outwith such violence, that thi
Queen, perceiving all attempts to engage them i
ation to bevain, abruptly difmiiTed her army, an(
retired with the utmost shame and disgust; having
discovered the impotence of her own authority

withou

without effeting any thing which could be of ad- BboK 11.
V-antage to France.

IT is obfcrvable, that this first instance of con-

t rpt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree;
be imputed to the influence of the new opinions in
rligion. As the Qcuen's pretensions to the Re-
gency had been principally supported by those who
a;voured the Reformation, and as she still heeded
them for a counterpoifi to the Archbishop of St;
Anirew's, and the partizans of the house of Hamil-
ton; they were now treated by her with great re-
Ipcft, and even admitted to no inconsiderable ihare
! her fvour and confidenice; Kirkaldy of Granges
,nti the other surviving conspirators against Cardi-
nal Bcatoun, were, about this time; recalled by her
irom banifhmerit; and, through her connivance;
the Proteltant preachers enjoyed an interval of tran-
quilliry, which was of great advantage to their
cauli. Soothed by these infrances of the Queen's
moderation and humanity, the Protestants left -to
others the office of remonstrating; and the lead-
ers of the opposite faction let them the first exam-
ple of disputing the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre- Tide
carious her authority was, while it depended on the Queen's
poile of these contrary fations, he endeavoured- to "'''p e
ellablilh it on a broader and more secure foundation, Dauphi;
by hastening the conclusion of he daughter's mar-
riage with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of
Scots then was in the bloom of youth, and confi-
derable as the territories were; which he would
have added to the French monarchy; reasons were
not wanting to dissuade Henry from compleating
his first plan of marrying her to his son. The Con-
itable Mohtmorericy had employed all his iitereft
to defeat an alliance, which reflected so much lustre
on the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the
npoffibility of maintaining order and tranquillity
VOL. I. K among

BSco03 . -.mong a turbulent people, during the abfenceo!
- their Sovereign; and fur that reason, had advifec

Henry to bestow the young Queen upon one o
the Princes of the blood, who, by residing in Sco,.
land, might preserve that Kingdom an useful all,
to France, which, by a nearer union to the Crown,
would become a mutinous and ungovernable pro.

*'.!.. vince . But, at this time, the Constable was a
Ie:ll. 5. prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards, and thi

Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their glo-
ry; and their influence, seconded by the charms
of the young Queen, triumphed over the prudent,
btr envious remonltrances of their rival.
Dec. 4, THE French King accordingly applied to the Par-

-:r liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of its
members T to represent the whole body of the na-
tion, at the marriage of the Queen. Among the
persons on whom the public choice conferred this
honourable charater, were ibme of the molt avow
ed and zealous advocates for the Reformation;
by which, may be estimated the degree of refpet
and popularity, which that party had now attain-
ed in the kingdom. The inftrudtions of the Par-

-; eli, liament to those Commifiloners still remain t$ and
.Aiper.d. do honour to the wisdom and integrity of that as-

ia rerrnblv. At the fame time that they manifested,
v;-ih refpe& to the articles of marriages a laudable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sove-
Feign, they emploved every precaution which pru-
dence culd dictate, for prelerving the liberty and
indc endence of the nation, and for ecuring the
1iuccdiion of the Crown in the house of Hamilton

V.z. 'I';- Archboi;op .i :a GAtow, the Bii'hp of Ross, the

;:h.?; o; Osk:rev, the SEri oiothes ;.nd CAti!T, Lord Flcln
:ng, L.. :d 'Seon, th- Poi: of St. Andrew's, and J)h!n Erfkinec!

xtVr =a

ITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain- BOOK tr.

ct waixveci r :'ati:faction their fear orjealoufy could `-
(iemand. The young OQueen, the Dauphin, and oftl'e

cii King of France ratified every article, with the F;ench in
noit olemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds the nrar-

1in torm, under their hands and feals. But on the 'age rea-
i, rt ot F rance, all this was one continued scene of '
itulieid and elaborate deceit. Previous to these pub-

.
lic trnia&ions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been perfiuaded to fubcribe privately three deeds,
equally unjust, and invalid; by which, failing the
heirs of her own body, ihe conferred the kingdom
of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or succession
Inight accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
f:r;mnce, declaring all promises to the contrary, which
thl necessity of her affairs, and the solicitations of
her ibjects had extorted, or might extort from
her, to be void and of no obligation*. As it gives Corps
us a proper idea of the character of the French Diploinat.
c:urt under Henry II. we may observe that the t°L 'V'2"
King himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the eith 7.
Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Iorrain, were
the perfcns engaged in condu&ing this perfidious
?nl ddiih.nourable project. The Queen of Scots
.as the only innocent actor in that scene of iniqui-
V. Hler yuuth, her inexperience, her education
in a foreign country, and her deference to her un-
c;c's will, mufl vindicate her, in the judgment of
every impartial perion, from any imputation of
bluae on that account.

T'is grant, by which Mary bestowed the inhe-
:ance of her kingdom upon strangers, was con-
tcaled with the utmost care from her fubjests.
They eem, however, not to have been unacquaint-
d with the intention of the French to overturn the
Cetlement of the succession in favour of the Duke
to Chatelherault. The zeal, with which the Arch-
bir1flp of St. Andrew's opposed all the measures of
he (Queen Regeat, evidently proceeded from the

K 2 I',rs

Boos II. fears and suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this

.-- head *.

April 14, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with
'558s great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto as-

feted to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-
land, began now to unfold their intentions without
any difguile. In the treaty of marriage, the depu.
ties had agreed that the Dauphin should assume the
name of King of Scotland. This they confidered
only as an honorary title; but the French laboured
to annex to it ome solid privileges and power. They
infilted that the Dauphin's title should be publickl.
recognized; that the Crown Matrimonial should be
conferred upon him; and that all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a Queen should be vested in
his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
married an heiress kept possession of her estate dur-
ing his own life, if he happened to survive her and

Reg. the children born of the marriage *. This was call.
Maj. lib. ed the coznrte5 of Scctland. The French aimed at
U. 58. applying this rule, which takes place in private in.

heritances, to the succession of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Cro-w'n Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
tifh historians, and which they have negle&ed to
explain. As the French had reason to expet diffi-
culties in carrying through this measure, they began
with founding the.depuies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage articles between their
Qucen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to
:.e aZc, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with
. hisch a f reigner should be admitted so near the
: .trone. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish depu-
:- ad, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,

* About this time, the French seem to have had ome deSgn

:. re: sing the Earl of Lenox's p;eterfions to the Succeflion,
i: crder to intimi-ate anrd a!ar;n the DLke of Chatelheraul.
Ii- ne, 215,21c. Foiber C.l.ect . c!. i, S9.

expreffd

Cxprncicd themselves with remarkable caution * BOOK If.
Their answer was in the fame spirit, refpe&tful, but Keith,
firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of consent- Append.
ing to nothing, that tended to introduce any alte-zo.
ration in the order of succession to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies t happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was uni-
vcerially imputed to the effects of poison, which was
supposed to have been given them by the emissaries
of the house of Guise. The historians of all nations
dlilcover an amazing credulity with respect to stories
of this kind, which are so well calculated to please
the malignity of ome men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that, in
every age, they have been swallowed without exa-
mination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots hould easily give credit to a sus-
picion, which received such trong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known character of the Princes of Lorrain, so
little scrupulous about the justice of the ends which
they pursued, or of the means which they employ-
ed. For the honour of human nature, it must,
however, be oblerved, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
fich a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. But the Socts of that age,
influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the
cafe with callnnefs, or of judging concerning them
with candour. All parties agreeed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this detestable ation;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase
the aversion for them, which was growing among
all ranks of men. TheRe-

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which gent pre-
their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonialails on

the Parlia-

tThcBifhop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of ment to
C-,ils, and Lord Fleming. grnt it.

K 3 met Nov. 29.

BoE II. met with from the Scottish deputies, the French
4cau- ventured to move it in Parliament. The partizans

of the House of Hamilton, suspicious of their de.
signs upon the succession, opposed it with great zeal.
But a party, which the feeble and unsteady condudt
of their leader had brought under much difreputa
tion, was little able to withfrand the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, fe-
conded, on this occasion, by all the numerous ad-
herents of the Reformation. Besides, that artful
Princess drefled out the French demands in a less
offensive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
seemed to render them of small consequence. Thele
either deceived the Scots, or removed their scruples;
and in compliance to the Queen, they pafled an act,
conferring the Crown i;Matrinmonial on the Dauphin;
and, with the fondest credulity, trusted to the frail
security of words and statutes, againit the danger-
ous encroachments of power*.

C-n:irues THE concurrence of the Protestants, with the
t^^p'- OQuecn Regent, in promoting a measure so accept-
te Pro-
eta.:.. able to France, while the Popish clergy, under the

influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, op.
'F:e:"47 posed it with so much violence t, is one of thole

singular circumstances, in the conduct of parties,
for which this period is so remarkable. It may be
ascribed, in some degree, to the dextrous manage-
rment of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation
of those who favoured the Reformation. The Pro-
teftants were, by this time, almoit equal to the Ca-
tholics both in power, and in number; and, con-

T.h A of Parl ament is w-orded v.'it': t'e ut:loft care,

-;t'h -, v:e..' to guard againlI any breach of the onide of Succtl-
'i.-r. B't the Duke, no: reiring on this alone, entered a (flemr.
p-o'e..ion to ecure his own righr. Keirh, -6. It is plain,
that re Iufpeeed t;ie French o having some irention o etaide
his ra.: on' fucceiion; and, indeed, if they had no design o0
'hat kird. the eagerne!s with which they urged their de.nand,

sciotus

fious of their own strength, they submitted with BooK IT.
ipaticnce to that tyrannical authority, with which
:;- ancient laws armned .the ecclefialticks against
,('m. They longed to be exempted fi-om this
,ri e

c jui-iftifion, and publickly to enjoy the

ib::-r: of professing thole opinions, and of exer-
:ling hat worflhip, which so great a part of the
:;ation deemcd to be founded in truth, and to be
::cceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which
lh' whole weight of priestly authority was opof-
c, there were only two ways of obtaining. Ei-
riwr violence mnuf extort it firom the reluctant hand
f theirSovereign; or, by prudent compliances,
hey might expe' it from her favour, or her gra-

(!u(e. The former is an expedient for the redress

, ; icvanccs, to which no nation has recourse fud-
|.il;ly and fiubjccts icldom venture upon resist-
, ricc, which is their last remedy, ut in cafes of
extreme neceitv-. On this occasion, the Reform-
rs wifely held the opposite course, and by their
zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped
to merit her protection. This disposition the
Qucen encouraged to the utmnof, and amused them
ol artfully with many promises, and some conceffi-
Jo;i, that, by their afliftance, fie surmounted in
Parliament the force of a national, and perhaps a
!uidable jealoulfy, which would, otherwise, have
:ivwaed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat to
acquire the Regent such considerable influence in

Phi Parliament. In Scotland, all the bifhopricks,

:nd those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat
in Parliament, were in the gift of the crown*. See
From the time of her accession to the regency, the Book
QIueen had kept in her own hands almost all those
,hiich became vacant, except such as were, to the
grea disgust of the nation, bestowed upon foreign-

Ars. Among these, her brother the Cardinal of
'!orrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Mel-

K 4 roTs,

BooK I. ross, two of the most wealthy foundations in th:
o,,xl g kingdom *. By this conduct, he thinned the ec

202. clefiaftical bench t, which was entirely under th

influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and
wvhich, by its numbers and authority, usually had
great weight in the house, so as to render any oppo
fition it could give, at that time, of little conic-
quence.

THE Earl of Arevll, and James Stewart Prior

of St. Andrew's, one of the most powerful, and tht
other the most popular leader of the Proteftantt
were appointed to-carry the Crown and other en-
signs of royalty to the'Dauphin. But from this
they were diverted by the part they were called to
act, in a more interesting scene, which now beginr
to open.

Elizabeth BEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceffarrto
fuccees observe, that, on the 17th of November, Mary of
to the England, finished her short, and inglorious reign.
Cron of Her filter Elizabeth took possession of the throne
tEglarn without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,

once more, established by law in England. The
accession of a Queen, who, under very difficult cir.
cumftances, had gien frong indications of tho!
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered
her reign so illustrious, attrated the eyes of all E.:-
rope. Among the Scots, bcth parties observed her
first emotions with the umoft concern, as they ea-
filv foresaw that she would not remain long an i-
diferent spectator of their transactions.

LUNrER many discouragements, and much o-

pression, the Reformation advanced towards a fitll
cfablifhment in Scotland. All the low country, rth
most populous, and, at that time, the nmo w';r!:i-:
Fart of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured with th

- It ns-_" s .:;oin the rolls of t!-ic P;.;::: en . v.hicl L

cI!s J ',i :u:! one, t:=t orl v '-.vt;,B "' .d li'e'r. Ab.

-';:
: .-r '-re' _= . .

p'o c~.:"'

i'roreftant opinions; and if the fame impressions BooK IT.
were not made in the more distant counties, it was
owing to no want of the fame dilpofitions among
the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whote
most indefatigable zeal could not iatisfy the avidity
of those, who desired their iniructions. Among a
!,cople bred to arms, and so prone to mutiny as the
Scots; and in an age, when religious passions had
taken such strong pofneffion of the human mind, and
moved and agitated it with ib much violence; the
peaceable, and regular demeanor of so numerous a
party is truly astonishing. From the death of Mr.
Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scotland
for the Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed,
and during so long a period, no violation of pub-
lic order or tranquillity had proceeded from that
i'Ctl ; and though rouzed and irritated by the molt
crucI excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in
no instance, transgress those bounds of duty which
the law prescribes to subjects. Besides the pru-
dence of their own leaders, and the protection which
the Queen Regent, from political motives, afford-
cd them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St.
.Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That
Prelate, whoe private life cotemporary writcrs
tax with great irregularities -, governed the church, 1 Knox,
tor fonme years, with a temper and prudence ofBuchana:1
which there are few examples in that age. But
jonme time before the meeting of last P'rliament,
;he Archbishop departed from those humane max-
is, by which he 'had hitherto regulated his con-
duc;'; and whether, in spite to the Queen, who
had entered into so cloe an union with the Pro-
rcftints, or in compliance with the importunities

*The murder of Cardinal Eentoun was ccc.,?:redi . pr;
ra:e re.vege, nd bIeing contrivedi and exctiited by 1].x. n per-
fns orly, c;i:,.ic:, with ju.llice, be i.i'lp :n! to the ivhi.c 'su-
:tdant par:y.

of

Boor II. of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of perfecu.
'-"*»' tion against the Reformed; sentenced to the flames

an aged priest, who had been convicted of em-
bracing the Proreftant opinions; and summoned
several others, suspected of the fame crime, to ap-
pear before a fynod of the clergy, which was soo
to convene at Edinh4rgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protest-

ants at this unexpeced and barbarous execution,
but the zeal, with which they espoused the defence
of a cause, that now seemed devoted to deftLrufion.
They had immediate recourse to the Queen Re-
gent; and as her success in the Parliament, which
was then about to meet, depended on their con-
currence, she not only sheltered them from the
impending form, but permitted them the exercilf
of their religion, with more freedom than they had
hitherto cnjoyed. Unfatisfi.d with this precarious
tenure, by which they held their religious liberty,
the Protestants laboured to render their poflefion
of it more secure and independent. With this
view, they determined to petition the Parliament
for some legal protection, against the exorbitant
and oppreffivejurifdiition of the ecclesiastical courts,
which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,
founded in the canon law, were led to sentences
the most shocking to humanity, by maxims the
most repugnant to justice. But the Queen, who
dreaded the effects of a debate on this delicate sub-
ject, which could not fail of exciting high and dan-
gerous pafions, prevailed on the leaders of the par-
ty, bv new and more solemn promiles of her pro-
tection, to desist from any appl: ation to Parliament,
where their numbers and influence would, in all
probability, have procured them, if not the entire
redress, at least, some mitigation of their grie-
vanlces.

THEY applied to another aiembiy, to a convo-
cation of the Popifi clergy, but with the fame ill-

iuccei.

uccefs, which hath always attended every propo- BooK 11.
Ial for Reformation, addressed to that order of men. L" '
To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative
rror, are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals
has, on some occasions, offered to truth; but frori
ny iocicty of men, no luch effort can be expeEted.
'le corruptions of a focicty, recommended by
common utility, and justified by universal t)tiHce,
re viewed by its members, without flamne g ho:'-
or; and Reformation never proceeds fi;o:i.te-n-
dIvs, but is always forced upon them by f;menc
!rcign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflex-
blc pirit, was the behaviour of the convocation in
5: pr:fent conjuncture. All the demands of the
roteftants were rejeted with contempt; and the
opilh clergy, far from endeavouring, by'any pru-
at concessions, to ooth and to reconcile luch a
umcrous body, asserted the doc'rincs of their
lurch, concerning some of the ir:oft exceptionable
rricles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new
fsnce *. *Kcith,8i,
DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Pro-
ftants first began to fufpcct some change in the
cCgcnts dcifpofition towarids themn. T hough join-
with them for many years, by intcrefit, and u-
i:ed, as they conceived, by the strongest ties of
fccion and of gratitude, ihe discovered, on this
caion, evident lymptoms, not only of coldness,
i:of a growing disgust and aversion. In order 1559.
,account for this, our historians do little more
I.n produce the trite observations concerning the
riitrcc of profpc-ity to alter the character, and
corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, hav-
rc.eachld the utmofi point to which her ambi-
;'i ali:ed, no longer pelerved her accustomed
uicrition, but, with an insolence usual to the
',tlnlate, looked down upon thofc, by whose as-
1h.ncc Ihe )lad been enabled to rife so hich. But

1*'

BOOK II. it is neither in tne depravity of the human heart, nor

in the ingraitude of the Queen's disposition, that
1559. we mull !car-h for the motives of.her present con.

duc-. 'Thc e were derived fro:n another, and a
mri-c rern.: iource, which, in order to clear the
fublcquenr tr:ninations, we shall endeavour to open
vlF.icrnme c .;'.

Ambitious '.^-.

ambition, o the Princes of Lorrain had

views Of '

let7s fu.ceisful than daring ; but all their

tePrnces b

-n o

. .an
ofLorrain. chei-4.wc--e ditngiifhed by being vat and ul.

bouided. Though ltranaers at the court of France,
their emiuent qualities had raised them, in a lior
time, to an hight of power, superior to that of all
other fubjcct, and had placed them on a level even
with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their
dire&cion. Nothing but the royal dignity remain-
ed untainted, and they were elevated to a near al.
liance with it, by the marriage of the Queen of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their
own vanity, and to render their niece more worthv
the heir of France, they set on foot her claim o
the Crown of England, which was founded on
prtc-nce no unplaufible.

T'IH :1-pi,-al amours and marriages of Hennr

VIII. .ire known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices ot his love, or of his resentment, that in].
paicent and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or
biheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he mar-
,r-.d. In order to gratify him, both his daughters
hci been declared illegitimate by At of Parlia-
rr.-nt; nd vyet wi-th that fantatfic inconfifence
--iNch dittilnirfncs his character, he, in his lafi
-;il!. v--her eb- he vwas impowered to f-ttle the or-
c:c;- cl' uccci'ior., callcd both of them to the throne,
ipon the deaoth of their brother Edward; and a
tic irle time.: pafifng by the poflerity of his eldest
iir, . i .-raet Q crn of Scotland, he appointe

tl."

the line of iucceffion to continue in the defcendentsBoo II.
of his younger sifter, the Dutchess of Suffolk. 1-*

IN consequence of this destination, the validity 'S59.

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in
t'ngland, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated
her accession to the throne, were obstacles to the
elevation of her filter Elizabeth, and rendered her
poffefion of it precarious and insecure. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protertant
Queen of such eminent abilities. The fame fu-
perftitious fears alarmed the court of Spain. And
France beheld, with indignation, a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many pretensions,
occupied by a rival, whole birth, in the opinion of
all good catholics, excluded her from any legal
right of succession. The impotent hatred of the
Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II.
would have produced no sudden or formidable es-
set. The ardent and impetuous ambition of the
Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, governed
the court of France, was more decisive, and more
to be dreaded. Initigated by them, Henry, soon Theyper-
after the death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in- fuadeMa-
law and her husband to assume the itle of Kingry to as-
and Queen of Ergland. They asseted to publifh.tile of
this to all Europe. They used that style and ap- Queen of
pllarion in public papers, obme of which till re-England.
main . The arms of England were engraved On Anders.
their coin and plate, and born by them on all OC-Diplom.
cafions. No preparations, however, were made tocot. No.
support this impolitic and premature claim. Eli- 68 & 164-
zabeth was already feated on her throne; he pof-
Ifeed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts
of policy, which were necessary for maintaining.
that fiation. England was growing into reputation
for naval power. The marine of France had been

utterly

BooK I. utterly neglected; and Scotland remained the on.
^- - V ly avenue, by which the territories of Elizabeth
Rio9ito could be approached. It was on that fide, therc
iRvade fore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined to
England. make their attack ; and, by using the name and
* Sorbes pretensions of the Scottish Queen, they hoped to
Co2lc,7.' rouze the English Catholics, formidable at that

time by their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the
change which she had made in the national religion

In order to IT was vain to expect the afiftance of the Scot-
this, ne- rifh Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all
CesTary o
check the Europe esteemed the guardian and defender of the
Reiorrra- reformed faith. To break the power and reputa-
tion in ton of that party in Scotland, became, for this
Sco!!ad. reason, a necessary ftep towards the invasion of

England. With this the Princes of Lorrain re-
solved ro open their scheme. And as persecution
was the only method for suppressing reigious opi.
nions, known in that age, or dictated by the de-
fpotic and anguinary spirit of the Romish fuperfti
tion, this, in its utmoit violence, they determined
to employ. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St.
Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, were

+Fobes i. marked out by them for immediate deftrucion ;
z;. and they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate

their followers. Inftrutions for this purpose were
sent from France to the Queen regent. That hu-
mane and sagacious Princes condemned a meafire,
which was equally violent and impolitic. By long
residence in Scotland, she had become acquainted
with the eager and impatient temper ot the nation;
fle well knew the power, the number, and popu
larity of the Protestant leaders; and had been .
witness to the intrepid and unconquerable .refolt!
don which religious fervour could inspire. What
then could be gained by rouzing this dangero'
ipirit, which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had

icarcT

scarce been able to restrain? if it once broke loose, oo I.
the authority of a Regent would be little capable '
to subdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if, 15 9-
in order to quell it, foreign forces were called in,
this would give the alarm o the whole nation, irri-
t.tcd already at the excessive power which the
French pofeffed in the kingdom, and suspicious of
all their designs. Amidst the ihock which this
might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate the
t'roteftant doctrine, it would be well if the whole
fabric of the eftablifed church were not shaken,
and perhaps overturned from the foundation.
These prudent remonstrances made no impreiflon
in her brothers, precipitant, but inflexible in all
their resolutions, they insisted n the full and ri-
gorous execution of their plan. Mary, paffionarely
devoted to the interest of France, and ready, on all
occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions to the in-
clinations of her brothers, prepared to execute their
commands, with implicit submission*; and, contra- M el. 48.
rv to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found Mlen. de
policy, the became the inftrurnent of exciting civil CatJenau
commotions in Scotland, which ended with the ap lcb
ruin of the French power, and of the Popish reli- V'"
gion in that kingdom.

FROM the time of the Queen's competition for Thre Rt-
the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the genttir
Popish clergy, under the direscion of the Archbi- hcr witho
lop of St. Andrew's, had let themselves in oppofi- regard o
iioi to all her measures. Her first ftep towards the PIJ"-
the execution of her new scheme, was to rg:in tetl t.
their favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matter
ofdifficuity. The Popifhcciefiafiics, separated from
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and moit flccefsful invention of human po-
lcy; and combined among themselves in the closest
ani most sacred union; have been accuitemed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pal-
sions to the dignity and interest of their order. De-

lighted

Boos I. lighted on this occasion, with the profpeEt of tr-
--v--i. umphing over a faction, whose encroachments the-

5;'9 had long dreaded, and animated with the hope;

of re-eitablifhing their declining grandeur on an
firmer bafls ; they, at once, cancelled the memor
of past injuries, and engaged to second the Quecn
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being secure of their as-
fiftance, openly approved of the decrees of the con.
vocation, by which the principles of the Reformers
were condemned; and at the fame time, she issued
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to oblerv
the approaching festival of Easter, according to the
Romiih ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake th:

Queen's intentions, the Protestants, who saw the
danger approach, in order to avert it, employed the
Earl of Glencairn, and Sir-Hugh Campbell of Lou-
don, to expostulate with her, concerning ts
change, towards severity, which their former er-
vices had so little merited, and which her reiterat-
ed promises gave them no reaibn to expect. She,
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her
resolution of extirpating the Reformed religion out
of the kingdom. And, upon their urging her for
mer engagements, with an uncourtly, but honft
boldness, he so far forgot her usual moderation,
as- to utter a sentiment, which, however apt those
of royal condition mav be to entertain it, prudence
should teach them to conceal as much as poflible.
"The promises of Princes, fays she, ought nt
to be too carefully remembred, nor the perform-
ance of them enacted, unless rt-fuits their own con-
veniency."

THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into

Summcns this rash expression, was nothing in comparison o
their that, with which ife was animated, upon hearing
tpeoppear that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
before.er. had been introduced into the town of Perch. At

once

ti-.ce Ihe threw off the maf, and commanded all BooK Ir.
ril, i'rocltacnt preachers in the kingdom to be fum- _
inon.i o a couIrtofjullice, which was to be held 1559.
;:r Srit iing on the tench of May. The Protestants,
,iilo, froIl their union, began about this time, to
i, dli!inguifhied by the nameof the CONCRECATION,
v.w-i alarmed, blu not inrimidated by this danger;
. .Tl infantly rblved not to abandon the men, to

il-homl tlhey were indebted for the most valuable of
iall blcflings, the knowledge of truth; At that time,
rhlere prevailed in Scotland, with t-efpea to criminal
tr!ils, a cllom, introduced, at firit, by the infti-
[ulti(ons of vaflalage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
i.rC;crwards, under a feeble government; any person
.ccufid of a crime was accompanied to the place of
ti'.l, by a retinue of his fiiends and adherents, as-
!rmbled( for that purpose, from every corner of the
..kingdom Authorised by, this ancient practice, the
Rdtornlmd convened, in great numbersi to attend
their paltors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their
approach with a train to numerous, though unarm-
cd., and in order to prevent them from advancing,
11c empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
:iiincnt authority with the party, to promise, in
i rno!ne, that ite would put a stop to the intend-
cl trial, on condition, the preachers and their re-
,-lir aidvancel no nearer to Stirling. Erskine,
b'i:-i: coivinced !imirflf of the QCieen's sincerity,
l:r'ricl her with the utinoit zeal. And the Protef-
ir.s, averle fi-om proceeding to any a of violence,
hi ,n I with pleaiure to ib pacific a proposition.
ilc preachers, with a few leaders of the party,
renained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
trreld from different parts of the kingdom, difperf-
ri, and retired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithitanding this olemn promise, the Breaksa
Q cen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to pronire
In: the persons who had been summoned, and up- hey hh
VOL, I. L en relied.

BooK . on their non-appearance, the rigour of justice took

559' place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this

ignoble artfice, so incompatible with real dignity,
and so inconsistent with that integrity which should
prevail in all transactions between Sovereigns and
their subjects, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Protestants,
fnocked no less at the indecency, with which si
violated the public faith, than at the danger which
threatened themselves4 prepared boldly for their
own cdefence. Erskine, enraged t having been
made the instrument for deceiving his party, in-
tantly abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth,
added to the zeal of his associates, by his reprefen-
tations of the Queen's inflexible resolution to fp
press their religion.

i :.i G:- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully fe.
cafkn: an conded his representations: He having been car,
insi arec-
t i" ID ricd a prisoner into France, together with the other
P-rth. persons taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon

made his escape out of that country; and residing
Sometimes in England, ometimes in Scotland, had,
ac lalt, been driven out of both kingdoms by the
rage of the Popish clergy, and was obliged to re,
tire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the lead,
ers of the Protefiants in Scotland ; and, in compli-
ance with their iflicitations, he let out for his na
tive country, where he arrived a few days before
the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried in-
ltar.riv to Perth, to harc with his brethren in the
common danger, or to assist them in promoting
the common caukc. While their minds were in
that ferment, which the Queen's perfidiound
and their own danger occasioned, he mounted the
pulpit, and by a vehement harangue against ido'
iatry, inflamed the multiLude with the utmost rage
th-e idiicretion of a priet, who, immediately as
;tr Knox's formon, was preparing to celebrate rma

W~~~~~~~~~~a~

,nd began to decorate the altar for that purpose, BooK If.
prccipitared them into immediate ation. With " '
,!i:liultuary, but irrifillible violence, they fell upon 59
(th churches in that city, overturned the altars,
tt-faced the pi&ures, broke in pieces the images;
;nd proceeding next to the monasteries, they, in a
sei hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almost le-
vel with the ground. This riotous infurredion was
not the effec of any concert, or previous delibera-
tion; centfred by the reformed preachers, and
publickly condemned by the persons of most power
arid credit with the party, it must be regarded mere-
ly as an accidental eruption of popular rage *,

BUT to the Queen herself, these proceedings ap- The Re-
pcared in a very different light. Besides their ma- gent
nileft contempt for her authority, the Protestants ""archcs
had violated every thing in religion, which lTe en.
dtcemed venerable or holy; and, on both there ac-
counts, she determined to inflict the severest ven-
eance on the whole party. She had already drawn
he troops in French pay to Stirling; with there,
nd what Scottish forces he could levy of a sudden,
e marched directly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
ng the Protestant leaders, before they could aflem-
ie their followers, whom, out of confidence in her
iingenuous promises, they had been rashly induced

l dimiifs. Intelligence of these preparations and
enaces was oon conveyed to Perth. The pro-
.hants would, gladly, have oothed the Queen, by
tidrefes both to herself, and to the persons of great-
ft credit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
ey, with great vigour, took measures for their
'l defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
creligion, and eager to expose themselves in lo
:od a cause, flocked in such numbers, to Perth,
at they not only secured the town from danger,
ut, within a few days, were in a condition to take

Knox, Hist. 127, 28.

L 2 the

BooK II. the field, and to face the Queen, who advance;
-,C~ with an army 700ooo strong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to en.

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised abovt
the sense of fear, or of danger. The Protestants
beheld with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and ome other eminent person.
of their party, still adhering to the Queen; and
d.;-!irute of their aid and council, declined ha.
7a'-ding an a&tion, the ill fuccels of which miAgh
t .hve proved the ruin of their caule. The proipc:
of an accommodation was for thee reasons highll
acceptable to both fides: Argyll and the Prior, who
were the Queen's commissioners for conductingthe
negotiation, eem to have been sincerely desirous oi
reconciling the contending factions; and the Eai
of Glencairn arriving unexpectedly with a powerful
reinforcement to the Congregation, augmented th

A treaty Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord.
c-rccluced ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, tha

both armies should be disbanded, and the gates o
Perth set open to the Queen; that indemnity should
be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and t
all others concerned in the late infurrecion; thatne
French garrison should be left in Perth, and n
French soldiers hould approach within three mil
of that place; and that a Parliament should immedi.
atelv be held, in order to compose whateverdiffe

i Keith rencrs might frill remain *
59. THE Leaders of the Congregation, diftruftfulo

the Queen's fncerity, and sensible that concession
sowing not from inclination, but extorted byt
neceffit of her affairs, could not long remain
'.;a 29. force, ertered into a new association, by which the

bound themselves, on the first infringement of th
pre-nt treaty, or on the leac appearance of dang
:' their rliiron, to rcaei:mble their followers, an

;'

a, take arms in defence of what they esteemed the BOOK 11.
. ;aue of God, and of their country *.

THE Queen, by her conduct, demonitrated these ' 59

preca:utions to be the result of no groundless or un- 3s.
nceltnry fer.r. No sooner were the Protestant forces B:cken hy
dil nifled, than she broke every article in the treaty. t"e^egent
'hie introduced French troops into Perth, fined some
of the inhabitants, banifihed others, removed the

lMagiftrates out of office, and, on her retiring to
Stirling, she left behind her a garrison of 600 men,
wih orders to allow the exercise of no other reli-
.i;in than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
certch, a place at that time of some strength, and
a.town the mnoft proper of any in the kingdom for
the fation of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill judged breach
of public faith; which he endeavoured to colour,
b! alledging that the body of men left at Perth was
entirely comproed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme bgan gradually to unfold;
it was now apparent, that not only the religion, but
the liberties of the kingdom were threatened; and
thar the French troops were to be employed as in-
Itru!nents for tfbduing the Scots, and wreathing the
!oke about their necks. Martial as the genius of
the Scots then was, the poverty of their country
made it impossible to keep their armies long aifem-
bled; and even a very small body of regular troops
might have proved formidable to the nation, tho'
consisting wholly of soldiers. But, what number
of French forces were then in Scotland, at what
riTme;, and under what pretext they returned, after
aving left the kingdom in I550, we cannot,
ith any certainty, determine. Cotemporary his-
,:ians often feleC, with little judgment, the cir-
-niftances which they transmit to pofteritv and,

LJ 3 with

BocK IT. with refpea to matters of the greatest curiosity and

-~~ importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
I559 dark. We may conjecture however, from ome

passages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at least to 3000 men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the
house of Guie ; and they were soon augmented to a
much more formidable number.

THE Queen, encouraged by having so confidera.

ble a body of well disciplined troops at her corn.
mand, and instigated by the violent counfelsci
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we had observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash action,
once more threw the nation into the most dangerous

The Pro- convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and Prior of St
tefrants a- Andrew's instantly deserted a court, where faith and
gain take honour seemed to them to be no longer regarded
armsi The Barons from the neighbouring counties repair-

ed to them, the preachers rouzed the people to
arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent
operations, which accident had occasioned at Perth,
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged.
multitude was let loose, and churches and monas
teries, the monuments of ecclesiastic pride and lux-
ury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, with-

out losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
but the zeal of the Congregation got the start, once
more, of her vigilance and activity. In that war-
like age, when all men were accustomed to arms,
and on the least prospect of danger were ready to
run to them, the leaders of the Protestants found
no difficulty to raise an army. Though they set
out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
hundred horse, crowds flocked to their standards
from every corner of the country through which
they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a

village

villiag only ten miles distant, they were able to BooK IT.
meet the Queen with superior force .

THE Queen, firprized at the approach of so for- ',5 59*

Krinux,

idable a body, which was drawn up by its Icader-s 141.
in filch a manner, as added greatly in appearance
to its numbers, had again recourse to negotiation.
She found however, that the preservation of the
Proteitant religion, their zeal foi which had at firit
rouzed the leaders of the Congregation to take
arms, was not the only object they had now in
view. They were animated with the warmest love
of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in im-
minent danger, from the attempts of the French
forces; and there two passions mingling, added re- iThey a
ciprocally to each others strength. Together with at redress-
more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation ing civil as

well as re-

filled the human mind with more liberal and gene- lgas re
pus sentiments concerning civil government. The grievances
genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the
power of Princes. The implicit submission to all
her decrees, which is exaaed by the Romish Church,
prepares and breaks the mind for political fervi-
tude; and the doctrines of the Reformers, by over-
turning the etablifhed system of fuperfition, weak-
ened the firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That
bold spirit of enquiry, which led men to reject the-
ological errors, accompanied them in other ciences,
and discovered every where the fame manly zeal
for truth. A new itudy introduced at the fame
rime, added greater force to the spirit of liberty.
Mcn became acquainted with the Greek and Ro-
man authors, who described exquisite models of
tree government, far superior to the inaccurate and
oppressive system established by the feudal law;
and produced such illustrious examples of public
virtue, as wonderfully suited both the circumftan-
ceq, and pirit of that age. Many, among the most
eminent Reformers, were themselves considerable

L 4 masters

BooK II. masters in ancient learning; and all of them ea,
'VL'' gerly adopted the maxims and pirit of the anc;

559 ents, with regard to government *. The rmol

ardent love of liberty accompanied the Proteftans
religion, throughout all its progress; and wherever
it was embraced, it rouzed an independent spirit,
which rendered men attentive to their privileges
as subjects, and jealous of the encroachments ci
their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers
of the Reformation, infused generous sentiment
concerning government into the minds of their
hearers, and the Scottifll Barons, naturally frae
and bold, were prompted to assert their rights with
more freedom and boldness than ever. Initead of
obeying the Queen Regent, who had enjoined them
to lay down their arms, they demanded nor only
the redress of their religious grievances, but, as,
preliminary toward fettling the nation, and fecur,
ing its liberties, required the immediate expulsion
of the French troops out of Scotland, It was not
in the Queen's power to make so important a con.
cession, without the concurrence of the French Mo-
narch; and as tome time was requisite in order to
obtain that, she hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would
insure the accomplishment of that design, which
the had twice attempted with unequal ftrengtb.
june 13. Mean while she agreed to a cessation of arms so;

eight days, and before the expiration of these,

* The excessive admiration of ancient plicy was the oc/fioi

of Knox's famlous bok concerning the G verrnlent ofl'iiai,
v. herein, conformable to the Ma,.i 's of the ancicnt legiflatolF,
which modern experience has proved to be ill-founded, he po
nounces the elevation ot' omen to the lupre.c authoity, ti
be utte lycetirudive of good gtvcinlienr. His principles; ai-
tholities, and examples wre all drawn frc:n aniicnt wiiter.
The fame obf'evation mnyv be 'made with egard to Hl:cilaliani
Dl..logue, De Jzure Rrn: uapud.''orts. Ir is ibunided r.o on he
n.axiil, of tetcal, but of anci.nt govelnient.

eng;ge>U

en ciagedto transport the French troops to the south BooK II.

oide of the Forth and to fend commiffloners to St. C-_

i Andrew's,vwho fIould labour to bring all differences '15 9
tu acconmmodation. As fie hoped, by means of the
French troops, to over awe the Protestants in the
fobuhern counties, the former article in the treaty
was punctually executed; the latter having been in-
ifrtdl merely to amuse the Congregation, was no
longer rememlbered.

By- these reiterated and wanton instances of perfi- A (ecd

I v, the Queen loft all credit with her adversaries; treaty vio-
and no safety appearing in any other course, they lated.
,ain took arms with more inflamed resentment,
,ind with bolder and more extensive views. The re-
moving of the French forces had laid open to them
all the country situated between Forth and 'Tay.
The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining fubjecded
to the insolence and exactions of the garrison, which
the Queen had left there, implored the affifiance
o0 the Congregation for their relief, Thither they
marched, and having, without effet required the
Qeecn to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty they prepared to besiege it in form. The
Quecn employed the Earl of Huntly and Lord Er-
!kine to divert them fiom this enterprize. But her
wVonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so
nften they could deceive no longer; and without
iiilcning to her offers, the Protestants continued
lie ficge, and soon obliged the garrison to capi-
ttl.;itc.

ArTFR the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavour- Rapik
tI io fcize Stirling, a place of some strength, and, Inarch and
':;om its command of the only bridge over the Forth, fl ccet of

the Pro-

cte great importance. But the leaders of the Con- tefian't.
!lrgation, having intelligence of her design, pre-
';rntcd the execution of it, by an hasty march thi-
hr, vitlh part of their forces. The inhabitants,
iicarily attached to the caui>, i.t open to them

the

BooK II. the gates of their town. Thence they advanced,
'----' with the lame rapidity, tow.ards Edinburgh, which
'559 the Queen on their approach abandoned with pre.

cipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kind.

led, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excesses of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries, the former were poiled
of every decoration, which was then esteemed fa.
cred the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt,
at this distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceftors magnificence, and among the noblest orna.
ments of the kingdom. But, amidst the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable;
and perhaps o one could have been permitted
more proper to allure and interest the multitude,
or more fatal to the grandeur of the eftabliffied
church. However absurd and ill-founded the fpe-
culative errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and
attention are requisite towards discovering them.
The abuses and corruptions, which had crept into
the public worship of that church, lay more open
to observation, and by striking the nses, excited
more universal disgust. Under the ong reign of
Heathenism, superstition seems to have exhausted
its talent of invention, so that when a fuperititious
spirit seized Christians, they were obliged to imi-
tate the Heathens in the pomp and magnificence
of their ceremonies, and to borrow from them the
ornaments and decorations of their temples. To
the pure and simple worship of the primitive Chril-
tians, there succeeded a species of splendid idola-
try, nearly resembling those pagan originals whence
it had been copied. The contrariety of such ob-

fervances,

fervances, to the spirit of Christianity, was almost BooK IT.
the first thing, in the Romish system, which a- 5
wakened the indignation of the Reformers, who
applying to these, the denunciations in the Old
Tefsament aainft idolatry, imagined that they
could not endeavour at fupprefing them, with too
much zeal. No task could be more acceptable to
the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fu-
perftition they ran with emulation to perform it,
and happy was the man whose hand was most ad-
venturous and successful in executing a work esteem-
cd so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain
this impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular
and violent as its allies were, they tended directly
to that end which they had in view; for by demo-
lifhing the monasteries throughout the kingdom,
and setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants,
they hoped to render it impossible ever to rebuild
the one or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a cir-
cumftance, which does honour to the conduct and
humanity of the leaders of the Congregation, de-
serves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
heir followers, and were able so to temper their
eat and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics
re exposed to any personal insult, and not a tingle
an suffered death *. e
AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with 23
hich these great revolutions were effeted, how
iolently the current of national favour ran towards
e Reformation. No more than 300 men marched
'ut of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior
itSt. Andrew's f-; with this inconsiderable force tKeith,94
hey advanced. But wherever they came, the peo-
lejoined them in a body, their army was seldom
ess numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every
own were thrown open to receive them; and,

without

CnoO ii without friiking a single blow, they took pofeffior

'--'of the capital of the kingdom.
'-i;' . THIS rapid and astonishing success seems to har

encouraged the Reformers to extend their views
and to rite in their demands. Not satisfied with
their firfl claim of toleration for their religion, they
now, openly, aimed at eftabliiing the Proreftan'
doctrine on the ruins of Popery. For this reaolb,
they determined to fix their residence at EIdinburgh
and, by their appointment, Knox and some other
preachers taking pofcEflion of the pulpits, which
had been abandoned by the affrighted clergy, de-
claimed against the errors of Popery, with,fuch
fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining mnany po-
l;-vtes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which she could not
reffil, observed with pleasure, that it now began to
uibfide. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the ex.
pences cf a campaign, protraced so long beyond
the usual time of ervice in that age, had exhauted
all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to lupply. The multi.
tude, dazzled with their fucceis, and concluding
the work to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous r
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in civii
wars with little difficulty, whatever was tranfaeed!
at Edinburgh, was oon known at Dunbar. And
the Queen, regulating her own condut by the si
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amlufed then
with the profpe& of an i nmediate acco:nmodationl
while, at the fame time, she, by fludied delays
spun out the negotiations for that purpose, to fuc
a length, that, in the end, the party dwindled t
an inconsiderable number, and, as if peace had
been already re-established, became careless of m-

litar

jiiary dilcipline. The Queen, who watched for BooK 1I.
;ch an opportunity, advanced unexpecaedly, by ' ~
t;idi(iden march in the night, with all her forces, 5'
,ndl appearing before Edinburgh filled that city
with the utmost consternation. The Protestants,
weakened by the imprudent dilperfion of their fol-
lower, durf' not encounter the Frencl troops ill
the open field; and were even unable to defend
an ill fortified town, against their assaults. Un-
willing, however, to abandon the citizens to the
Queen's meircy, they endeavoured, by facing the
nermies army, to gain time for collec&tng their own
associates. But the Queen, in spite cf all their
.clitance, would have easily forced her way into
the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce
had not procured her admiflion, without the effu-
liun of blood,

FTIEIR dangerous situation easily induced the

Congregation to liften. to any overtures of peace; tre
and as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
of a ltrong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pted great advantages from a ceflation of arms,
Ihe also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
Together with a suspension of hoflilities, from the
24th of July to the oth of January, it was fiipula-
icl in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Pro-
:ltaits flould open the gates of Edinburgh next
Inui,;l:i'; to the Queen Regent; remain in dutiul

Cubjedtiln to her governmlnct; abltain from all

liiiure violation of religious houses; and give w
intcrruption to the eftabliflied clergy, either in thl
dilcharge of their funclions, or in the enjoyment of
thcir benefices. On the other hland, the Qtueen a
areed to give no moleflation to the preachers or pro,
lciors of the Proteltant religion; to allow no other
form of worship in Edinburgh but the Reformed.
and to permit the free and public exercise of it all
over the kingdom. The Queen, by these liberal

concefflons

BooK II. concessions in behalf of their religion, hoped to foodt
'-' the Protestants, and expected, from indulging their
' 59- favourite passion, to render tem more compliant

with refpe& to other articles, particularly the ex.
puifion of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining
this body of men, rendered them, more and more,
the objes of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of them was therefore demand.
ed a-new, and with greater warmth; but the Queen,
taking advantage of the distress of the adverse par-
ty, eluded the request, and would content to no.
thing more, than that a French garrison should not
be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate state of their affairs, impoied on

the Congregation the necessity of agreeing to this
article, which, however, was very far from giving
them satisfaction. Whatever apprelenfions the
Scots had conceived, from retaining the French
forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified
during the late commotions. A small body of
those troops, maintained in constant pay, and rel-
dered formidable by regular discipline, had check-
ed the progress of a martial people, though anima-
ted with zeal both for religion and liberty. The
smallest addition to their number, and a confidera
ble one was daily expe&ed, might prove fatal to
public liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to
the danger of being reduced from an independent
kingdom, to the mean condition of a province, an-
nexed to the empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent cla-

mity, the Duke of Chatelherault, and Earl ot
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce,
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the molt potent, at
that time in Scotland, were the leaders of te
party which adhered to the eftablihed churcl

The

'i'hey had followed the Queen, during the late cor- Boo I1.
motions, and having accels to observe more nar- "-
rowly the dangerous tendency of her councils, their '59'
abhlorrence of the yoke which was preparing for
their country, surmounted all other considerations,
and determined them rather to endanger the reli-
gion which they profelfed, than to give their aid
;Iwards the execution of her pernicious designs.
ihey proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
(Ilencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
fhuild, with her usual insincerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refue to gratify the
vilhes of the whole nation, by dismissing her French
troops, they would, then, instantly join with their
countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public safety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered necessary *. * Knox,

ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; 154
jufl when he had adopted a system with regard to July 8
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility, have restored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom . Towards the close of his reign, the - Melev.
Princes of Lorrain began visibly, to decline in 49
favour, and the Constable Montmorency, by the
alffiance of the Dutchess of Valentinois, recovered
that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which
his great experience, and his faithful, though often
unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister impuctd the insurrections in Scot-
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, whose violence and precipitate councils
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
of moderation, men, whose minds were pofieffed
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from the
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in order
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivals
Iwith any groundless accusation, he prevailed to have

Melvil,

Poo II. Melvil , a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dil

patched into his native country, with initructjon,

*The u- to observe the motions both of the Regent, ando!
thorof theher adversaries; and the King agreed to regultir
iMemoirs his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mei.

vil's report.

DID hftorv indulge herself in there 1Ipeculation;,

it would be amusing to enquire what a diff'recn
direction might have been given by this reolutin,
to the national spirit; and to what a ditrrrent liic,
Mclvil's report, which would have let the conduc:
of the mlecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conducted the public diibrdets. Per
haps, b gentle treatment, and artful policy, thr
prcgrets of the Reformation might have bcc
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upp.
France. Perhaps, by gaining pofifiopn of thmi
avenue, the French might have nade their way into
Enrgland, and, under colour of supporting Mary's
title to the Crown, they might have re-ellablilhid
the Roman Catholic religion, and destroyed he li.
bertie; of that kingdom. But, into this boundlc
field of fancy and conje&ure, the historian mull
make no excurlions; to relate real occurrences, and
to explain their real causes and effecfs, is his pea.
liar anl only province.

.-\:!.; THE tragical and untimely death of the French
oC Francis Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacif;
ii o the _measures, wi:h regard to Scotland. The Duke or

o Guile, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-

ceilon of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and
without experience, assumed the chief direction oi
French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
:he marriage of their niece the Queen of Scon
with the young King, they now wanted but littk
of regal dignity, and nothing of regal power.
This power did not long remain ina&ive
their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi
tion, which they had planned out under the or

tr..

nl cr reign, were again refiumed; and they were ooK I.
,'nablkc, by ploffefling such ample authority, to pur- ~-
til tllem with more vigour, and greater probabi- t559
litv of luccs. 'They beheld, with inlinite regret,
thie progrels of the Protestant religion in Scotland;
|ad miinfible what an inuirmourtable obstacle it
,rouldl tprove to their designs, they bent all their
Illengtli to check its growth, before it rose to any
greater height. For this purpose, they carried on
heir preparations with all pofible expedition, and
incoraged the Queen their sifter, to expect, in a
Ihort tilme the arrival of an army, lo powerful, as
the zeal of their adversaries, however dclperate,
.oul.l not venture to oppose.
iNOR were the Lords of the Congregation either
inolrnt of those violent counsels, which prevailed
;n the court of France, since the death of Henry,
(r0 carclefs of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of
their cause, as well as their personal safety, depend-
ini: entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their
o'n refblutions, they endeavoured to guard against
ivifion, and to cement together more closely, by
nitring into a stricter bond of confederacy and
nairull defence. Two persons concurred in this
rw afociation, who brought a great accession both
i r-putation and of power to the party. These
.crc tlhe D-lke of Chatelherault, and his eldest son
ite Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, hav-
=g resided some years in France, where he com-
.indcd the Scottith guards, had imbibed the Pro-
ftant opinions concerning religion. Hurried along
y he heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered entiments, with refpet to the points
in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a

oigoted court, intent, at that juncure, on the ex-
nArtion of the Protestant religion; in order to ac-
omplifh which, the greatest excesses of violence
VOL. I. M were

Boo II. were committed. The church was suffered to wrea

its utmost fury upon all who were fufpeted of he
155. refy. Courts were erected in different parts o

France, to take cognizance of this crime, and b'
their sentences, several persons of diftin&ion were
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror

the princes of Lorrain resolved to select, for a fa
crifice, some person, whose fall might convince al
ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth, no
eminence in station, could exempt from punifn
ment, those who should be guilty of this unpar
donable transgression. The Earl of Arran was th

Thuan. person destined to be the unhappy victim *. Ash

lib x"iv. was allied to one throne, and the presumptive hei
PEit Frln to another; as he possessed the first rank in his owi
co.t country, and enjoyed an honourable station i

France; his condemnation could not fail of mak
ing the desired imprefilon on the whole kingdom
But the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some
expreflions, which railed Arran's iffpicions of th
design, he escaped the intended blow by a timel
Bight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt
ed him to eek revenge upon these persecutor
of himself and of the religion which he pro
sessed; and as he passed through England, on hi
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hop
and promies, inflamed thole paf'ions, and ent hi;
back into Scotland, animated with the fame imph
cable aversion to France, which possessed a gre!
Eirl°otAr-part of his countrymen. He quickly cornmun

isjoiis cated these sentiments to his father the Duke 0

t?,e P;o-
*c!ar:s. Chatelherault, who was already extreamlydigufta

with the meauiares carrying on in Scotland; and
it was the fare of that nobleman to be governed,
every intlance, by those about him, he now susser
himlrif to be draw-n f-rom the Queen Regent; ar

havil

;.:iri, oined the Congregation, was confidered, BooK IF.
i '(lla that time, as the head of the party. -

B' r with relpect to him, this distinction was
!,civ nominal. James Stewart, Prior of Sr. An-
c:-,-'s, was the perion who moved and atuated
i:, wlUuic body of the Protetants, among whom,
1,, polesed that unbounded confidence, which his
trinuiius adherence to their interest, and his great
blirics, io justly merited. He was the natural
on o james V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
ntn as that amorous Monarch, had left several
rhers a burden upon the Crown, they were all de-
tined for the church, where they could be placed

atiuons of dignity and affluence. In consequence
i this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had
ecn conferred upon James: but, during so busy a
riud, he loon became dilgufted with the indo-
ence and retirement of a monastic life; and his
nterprifing genius called him forth, to a a prin-
pal part on a more public and conspicuous thea-

'e. The scene, in which he appeared, required

aknts of different kinds: Military virtue, and po-
.ical dilcernment, were equally necessary in order
render him iiluftrious. Thele he poffiefed in an
'nincnt degree. To the molf: unquestionable per.
.nai bravery, he added great skill in the ar of
r, r.nd irn every enterprize his arms were Crown-
with Il.cefsl. Hlis agacity ard penetration in
1l affairs enabled him, a:nidf the reeling and
r.rbui,ece of factions, to hold a prosperous course.
'.iic his boldness in defence of the Reformation,
'.dier with the decency, and even leverity of his
.nners, lecured him the reputation of being fin-
elv attached to religion, without which it was
p'iffible, in that age, to gain an afeendant over
anklind.
IT was not without reason, that the Queen dread-
the enmity of a man, so capable to obftuc;a
rdefigns. And as fie could not, with all her

iM 2 address,

BcoK II. address, make the least imprefiion on his fidelity tc
'---' his associates, she endeavoured to lessen his influ.

9 ence, and to scatter among them the feeds ofjea.

lousy and distrust, by insinuating that the ambitio1
of the Prior, aspired beyond the condition of;
subjet, and aimed at nothing less than the crowa
itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but littl

credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre.
fumption of unexpected success, and his elevatio,
to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may be al
ledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period
it is certain that, at this juncture, he could form n
finch vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who wa
lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs; wh!
had been guilty of no action, by which she coul
forfeit the -fteem and affection of her fubjef&s; wh
could employ, in defence of her rights, the force
of a kingdom, much more powerful than her own
and to fubfitkute, in her place, a person, whom i,
illegitimacy of his birth, by the practice of all ci
-ilized nations, rendered incapable of any inhei
tance, either public or private; was a project, i
chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition woul
scarce entertain, and could never conceive to b
practicable. The promise, too, which the Pri
made to Mclvil, of residing constantly in France

....i on condition the public grievances were redressed'

!
' the confidence rpofed in him by the Duke of Ch

telheraulr and his son, the presumptive heirs tod
Crown ; and the concurrence of almost the who
Scottilh nobles, in promoting the measures,
which he gave offence to the French court, gof
towards his vindication from those illegal and a
minal designs, with the imputation of which, t
Queen endavoured, at that time, to load him.

or; -.r- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers cot
':":: penf-tJ, in oime degree, for the loss whicht
' ( i '

Ouleen sustained by the defection of the Duke of BooK I.
|Chatelherault. These were, immediately, corm-
lmanded to fortify Leith, in which place, on account '559
of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plentiful
country, the Queeen resolved to fix the head quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular mea-
fire, by the manner of executing it, was rendered
still more unpopular. In order to bring the town
entirely under their command,( the French turned
out a great part of the ancient iihabitants, and
taking poffefionl of the houlfes, which they had ob-
lied them to abandon, presented, to the view of
t',e Scots, two objects equally irritating and oen-
i';e; on the one hand, a number of their country-
nen expelled their habitations by vioience, and
wandcring witlout any certain abode ; on the other,
a colony of foreigners, fettling, with thir wives
and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing
inro strength by dily reinforcements, and openly
reparing a yoke, to which, without some timely
exertion of national spirit, the whole kingdom must,
f necessity, submit.
IT was with deep concern that the Lords of ther p.
ongregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep, tc-l.lnt.r-
taken by the Queen regent: nor did they hesitate nmonfira.c
ar.noment, whether they flouli employ their whole a,.,inf;
rength, in one generous eflort, to rescue their re- t:."'
igin and liberty from impending destruction. But,
n order tojuftify their own conduct, and to throw
he blame entirely on their adverlaries, they relblved
opreferve the appearances of decency and refpe&
oards their superiors, and to have no recourf to
ns, without the most urgent and apparent necef-
iv. They joined, with this view, in an address Sept. 29.
o the Regent, representing, in the strongest terms,
:r dinfarisfacion with the measures she was pur-

M 3 suing,

BosK . suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and

iealoufies of the nation, by desisting from fortifyin,
i:jS Leith. The Queen, conscious of her present ad

vantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of
f cfh uccours, was in no disposition for listening to
demand<, utterly inconsistent with her views, and
urged wi;h that bold importunity, which is so little
acce,-Ilb!e ro Princes.

The Re- THE fuggeitions of her French Counsellors con-
genrt '-- tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still farther

I' from any scheme of accommodation. As the Queen
f:nces. was ready, on all occasions, to discover an extraor-

dinarv deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation ofr
the violent measures they were driving on, took
care to place near her such persons, as betrayed her,
by their insinuations, into many actions, which her
own unbiaffed judgment would have highly con-
demned. And as their success in the present junc-
ture, when all things were hastening towards a cri.
i, depended entirely on the Queen's firmness, the
Prirces of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the in-
fiuence of their ordinary agents; but, in order to
add the greater weight to their councils, they called
in aid the Ministers of religion; and, by the autho-
rity of their sacred chara&er, they hoped effecually
to recommend to their sifter, that system of severity

* LeCi, which hey had espoused *. Waith this view, but
^ i5 .as,- under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
1eb,. -on. the skill of such able matters in controversy, they
:'i. 4, appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-

;- land. At the head of there, and with the charac-

ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bifhopo0f

-r Davila, Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Cardinal
b.:l:toee. of Sen, a furious bigot, servilely devoted to thef

house of Guise, and a proper instrument for re-|
commending or executing the moll outrageous'
nimalures

A liDS''

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these BooK II.
poctors had little opportunity to display their ad- -
,ldres in the use of their theological weapons. But '559
they gave no small offence to the nation by one of
their actions. They persuaded the Queen to seize
the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
remained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
:heProteftants; and having, by a new and solemn
consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane ministrations
of the Protestants to have defiled it, they, in direct
contradition to one article in the late treaty, re-
rlfablilhed there the rites of the Romish church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Queen received their remonstrances,
convinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not only vain to expect any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary
to take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as They take
well as every consideration of good policy, prompt- arms in
ed them to take this bold ftep without delay. Ittheir own
was but a finall part of the French auxiliaries which defence
had as yet arrived, The fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fait, were still far from being
compleat. Under these circumstances ofdifadvan-
tage, they conceived it possible to furprize the
Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
blow, to prevent all future bloodhed and conten-
tion. Full of these expeEtations, they advanced
rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army.
But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, oa. 6.
lo vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent.
With her usual sagacity, ihe both forelaw the dan-
ger, and took the only proper course to avoid it.
nftead of keeping the field againif enemies, fupe-
rnor in number, and formidable on a day of battle,
by the ardour of their courage, he retired into

M 4 Leith,

BoorK . Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival

*---.'J of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished as
75j9' the fortifications of that town then were, she did

not dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military stores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, erected all over the kingdom, in defence
of private property against the incursions of ban.
ditti.

No, did the Queen, mean while, neglect to

have recourse to those arts, which she had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries. Bv
private solicitations and promises, she hook the
fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By open re-
proach and accusation, he blasted the reputation,
and diminilhed the authority of others. Her emif-
saries were every where at work, and, notwithftand-
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then
animated the nation, they seem to have laboured
not without success. We find Knox, about this
period, abounding in complaints of the lukewarm
and languid spirit, which had begun to spread a-

Kno, mong his party . But if their zeal slackened a lit
8o. tle, and suffered a momentary intermission, it soon

blazed uptwith fresh vigour, and rose to a greater
height than ever.

Renew THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the
their re- reply which ihe made to a new remonstrance from
rnoniran- the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their arri-

ces val at Edinburgh, they once more reprefeted to

her the dangers arising from the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be deftruc-
tive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom; and
In this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order to
put a tfop to such dangerous encroachments. To

a remon-

a reionftrance of this nature, and urged with so Boo IL
Imuch boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less "''
igorous and explicit. She pretended that she wasBu i9th
not accountable to the confederate lords for anyoutfuc-
part of her condu&t; and upon no reprefentationcefs.
of theirs, would fle either abandon measures,
w hich she deemed necessary; or dismiss forces,
whlich fle found ufcful; or demolish a fortification,
which might prove of advantage. At the fame
time, flhe required them, on pain of treason, to dif-
band the forces which they had assembled.

THIS haughty and imperious itile founded harsh-
I to Scottish nobles, impatient from their national
character, of the slightest appearance of injury;
accustomed, even from their own Monarchs, to the
most rcfpectful treatment; and polffeing, under an
arillocratical form of governmen. t, such a share of
power as equalled, at all times, and often control-
led thar of the Sovereign. They were sensible, at
once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's
intentions ; and as there now remained but one ftep
ro take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refo-
jution to take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from Deliberate
the established forms of the conititution, for which, conceln-
cven amidit their most violent operations, men al- ing the
v.a;ls retain the greatest reverence, they assembled corie
the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of theyought
burroughs who adhered to their party. These form- to take.
id a convention, which exceeded in number, and 0o. 2-.
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parlia-
n,,nt. The leaders of the Congregation laid before
:lem the declaration which the Queen had given in
aniwer to their remonitrance; repreented the una-
voiahble ruin, which the measures, she therein
a"-cci ;ind juiified, would bing upon the king-

dom;

BooC 11. dolm; and requiring their direction with regard to
--,- the obedience clue to an administration so unjust and
;59' oppressive, they iubmitted to their decision, aquef-

tion, one of the moit delicate and intereftingthat
can poiiibiy fall under the consideration of tubiects

THIS afierbly pioceeded to decide, withnolefs

dipatch, than unaniiry. Strangers to thole forms,
which protract bufineis; unacquainted with the arts,
which make a figure in debate ; and much more
fitted for action, than diltc urfe; a warlike people
always haitLn to a concluion, and bring their de.
liberations to the hortet illue. It was the work
but of one day, to examine and to reiolve this nice
problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjests to-
wards a ruler who abuies his power. But, however
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were not
destitute offolemnity. As the determination of the
point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were
called to assist with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and ex-
amples in scripture, that it was lawful for subjects
not only to refifl tyrannical princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, be-
comes an instrument for destroying those, whom
the Almighty ordained them to prote&c The de-
cifion of persons revered so highly for their sacred
character, but more for the zeal and their piety,
had great weight with the whole assembly. Not
fatisnied with the common indiscriminate manner o
signifying content, every person present was called

The ,'e- in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up
pr:v the in order, all gave their fuifrages, without one dil-
Quee, t'f senting voice, for depriving the Queen of the ot-
tRc'enc. fice of Regent, which she had excercifed so muic
· Kns, to the detriment of the kingdom *

~: :~4. THI{~Tr

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less BooK II.
to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In-
the a of deprivation, religious grievances are The,,igts
lightly mentioned; and the dangerous incroach-of their
ments of the Queeen upon the civil constitution are condut
produced by the Lords of the Congregation, in
order to prove their conduct to have been not only
just, but necessary. The introducing foreign troops
into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the
fcizing and fortifying towns in different parts of the
country; the promoting strangers to offices of
great power and dignity: the debating the current
coin ; the ubverting the ancient laws; the impo-
sing of new and burdensome taxes; and the at-
tempting to subdue the kingdom, and to oppress
its liberties, by open and repeated aIds of violence,
are enumerated at great length, and placed in the
ltrongeft light. On all thee accounts, the Congre-
gation maintained that the nobles, as counsellors
by birth-right to their monarchs, and the guardians
and defenders of the constitution, riad a right to
interpole; and therefore, by virtue of this right,
in the name of the King and Queen, and with ma-
ny expreflions of duty and submission towards them,
they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and
ordained, that, for the future, no obedience should
hc given to her commands t.

VIOLENT

'Tu E standard of money in Scotland was continually varying.
l t: c i6rh ot James V A. 1) 29, a pound weight of gold,
;hen coined, produced io81. of current money. But un-
er the Queen Regent's adminifflation, A. D. 1556, a pound
:'ight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably
tr.crcased, produced 1441. current money. In 1529, a pound
'tight of silver, when coined, produced 91. 2s.; but in 1556, it
!:oduced 131. current money. Ruddin. Pefat. ad Anders.
i)ploat. Scota, p. 80, 8r, from which it appears, that this
c:n:plaint, which the nalecontents often repeated, was not al-
;t.ether deditute of foundation.

t M.. Caftlenau, after condemning the dangerous councils of
i: t'"icsa of L.oirain with regard to the affairs of Scotland, ac-

knowledges,

BooK II. VIOLENT as this action may appear, there wanted

not principles in the confitution, nor precedents in
5s59' the history of Scotland, to justify and to authorize

it. Under the ariftocratical form of government
efrablifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sove-
reign was extremely limited. The more confi.
derable nobles were themselves petty Princes, pof.
fefiing extensive jurifditions, almost independent
of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals,
who, in every coneft, espoused their chieftain's
quarrel, in opposition to the King. Hence the
many instances of the impotence of regal authority,
which are to be found in the Scottish History. In
every age, the nobles not only claimed, but exer-
cifed the right of controlling the King. Jealous
of their privileges, and eager to take the field in
defence of them, every error in adminiration was
observed, every encroachment upon the rights of the
aristocracy, excited indignation, and no Prince ever
ventured to transgress the boundaries, which the
law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting
resistance, which hook, or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the constitution, and
countenanced by the example of their ancestors,
the Lords of the Congregation thought it incumr
bent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into the
mal-administration of the Queen Regent, and to
preserve their country from being enslaved or con.
quered, by depriving her of the power to execute
such a pernicious scheme *.

knowledges with his usual candour, that the Scots declared wvat
againlt the Queen Regent, rather from a desire of vindicatir;
their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion Mem. 446.

* THE at of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the

Congregation to the Queen Regent, are frill extant, Knox, 184.
They discover nor only that masculine and undaunted spirit, n-
tural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are reniarkab!t

,

'or a precision, and vigour of expression, which we are furprized BOOK I.
to meet with in an age so unpolifhed. The fame observation may r
be made with refpetc to the other public papers of that period. 1559.
The ignorance or bad taste of an age mayrender the compositions
ot authors by profeflion oblcure, or affe.ed, or absurd; but the
language of bufnefs is nearly the fame at all times; and where-
ever men think clearly, and are thoroughly interested, they ex-
press themnfelves with perspicuity and force.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE

HI S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

B O O K III
BooK HI. Ir H E Lords of the Congregation soon found,

T- 11 that their zeal had engaged them in an under-

TheC;9. taking, which it was beyond their utmost ability to
The Con-
gregation accomplish. The French garrison, despising their
involvedin numerous, but irregular forces, refused to furren-
difficulie. der Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor

were they sufficiently skilful in the art of war to re-
duce the place by force, or possessed of the artillery
or magazines, requisite for that purpose ; arid their
followers, though of undaunted courage, yet be-
ing accustomed o decide every quarrel by a battle,
were strangers to the fatigues of a long campaign,
and soon became impatient of the severe and con-
ftant duty which a siege requires. The Queen'
err.miTrles, who found it easy to mingle with their
counrrvmen, were at the utcmot pains to heighten
their difgul, which discovered irfelf at first in mur-
murs and compil-.nts, but on occasion of the wan'
of money for paying the army, broke out into open
mutiny. The mot c!ninent leaders were scarce
secure from the unbridled insolence of the soldiers
while ome of inferior rank, interposing too raily
in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their
rage. Discord, consternation, and perplexity reign-
ed in the camp of the Reformers. The Duke,
their General, funk, with his usual tmidirv, unde!

t.he

the terror of approaching danger, and discovered BOOK I.
the manifest symptoms of repentance for his rash- --
ness, in espousing such a desperate cause, j55)9

IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation A Dp to

had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protection Elzabeth
they could derive their only reasonable hopes of tor cit'-
luccefs. Some of their more agacious leaders, hav- .c
ing forfcien that the party might probably be in-
volved in great difficulties, had endeavoured to fe-
cure a resource in any such exigency, by entering
into a secret correspondence with the court of Eng-
I.lnd*. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs * Burn.
which the Princes of Lorrain had formed againit Hlin' Ref.
ilir crown, was early sensible of how much impor- 3.A.pend.

1 z7$;.eith,

ance it would be, not only to check the progress .\poend.
of the French in Scotland; but to extend her own 2.'
influence in that kingdom t-; and perceiving how t See
effctually the present infurreftions would contri- Append
bute to retard or defeat the schemes formed against
England, Ihe listened with pleasure to these appli-
cations of the malecontents, and gave them pri-
vate assurances of powerful support to their cause.
Randolph I, an agent extremely proper for con- t Keith,
duecing any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Append.
Scotland, and residing ecretly among the Lords of 29.
the Congregation, observed and quickened their
motions. Money see-ned to be the only thing
theyl wanted at that time; and it was owing to a
fcalonable remittance from England , that the § Kor,
Scottifn nobles had been enabled to take the field, 2zi4Kt;b,
a::i to advance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth Ap
, d.

44.

s diftrufirul of the Scots, and itudious to prc-
ihrve appearances with France, her subsidies were
bcfeowcd at first with extreme frugality. The
fubflfance of an army, and the expences of a siege,
Gon exhausted this penurious supply, to which
the Lords of the Congregation could make little

addition

Boos III. addition from their own funds; and the ruin and
' ' dispersion of the party must have inftantlv fol-

'559' lowed.
She ufendll I order to prevent this, CockLurn of Ormifion
fums of was ent, with the utmost expedition, to the go-
roney, vernors of the town and castle of Berwick. As Ber-

wick was, at that time, the town of greatest im-
portance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler
and Sir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure,
were employed to command there, and were en-
trusted with a discretionary power of ifpplving the
Scotdfh malecontents, according to the exigency
of their affairs. From them Cockburn received
4ooo crowns, but little to the advantage of his

which is party The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's in-
intercept- figation, lay in wait for him on his return,. dif
ed. perfed his followers, wounded him and carried off

the money.

THIS unexpected difappoltmeit proved fatal

to the party. In meer despair, some of the more
zealous attempted to assault Leith, but the French
beat them back with digrace, seized their cannon,
and purluing them to the gates of Edinburgh,
were on the point of entering along with them.
All the terror and confusion, which the profpeft o
pillage or massacre can excite in a place taken by
storm, filled the ciry on this occasion. The inha-
bitants fled from the enemy by the opposite gatre
the forces of the Congregation were irresolute and
dil;ayed ; and the ueecn's partizans in the town
openli insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles
ventured to face the enemy, who, after plundering
iome houses in the suburbs, retired with their
booty, and delivcred the city from this dreadful
alarm.

A SECOND ikirmifh, which happened a few days

after, was no less unfortunate. The French fen:
out a detachment to intercept a convoy of provi-
sions which was designed for Edinburgh. The

Lordo

Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of o II.
this, marched in all haste with a considerable body ---'
of their troops, and falling upon the enemy btween
Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than good
conldut, were almost surrounded by a ccond party
oriFrench, who advanced in order to Iupp)r their
own men. In this situation a retreat was the only
thing which could have saved the Scots; but a r-
treat over marshy ground, and in the face of an
enemy superior in number, could not long be con-
ducted with order. A small body of the enemy TlTey re-
hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into the tire i;oil
unoft confusion, and it was entirely owing to the Leith in
cotion of the French, that any of the party escaped onfu
being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of
the Congregation funk altogether. They did not
think themnfelves secure, even within the walls of
Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire to
ionc place at a greater distance from the enemy.
In vain did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few
o:hers oppose this cowardly and ignominious flight.
The dread of the present danger prevailed over both
the lene of honour, and zeal for the cause. At
midnight, they set out from Edinburgh, in great Nov. 6.
confusion, and marched without halting till they
arrived at Stirling

DURING this last insurrection, the great body of
;hc Scottish nobility joined the Congregation. The
Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only persons
r rank who took arms for the Queen, and aifted
her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favour- K eith,
Ce her cause, but resided at his own house. The Append.
Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy 3''
which distinguishes his character, amused the lead-
ers of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to
dlift, with many fair promises, but never joined
them with a ingle man t. The Earl of Morton, t Ketb-
3 member of the Congregation, fluctuated in a pp K

OL. , N fiate zUz.

Boos III. fate of irrefolurion, and did not a heartily for

'-.~ the common cause. Lord Erikine, Governor ot
";' Edinburgh castle, though a Protestant, maintain.

ed a neutrality, which he esteemed becoming the
dignity of his office; and having been entrusted by
Parliament with the command of the principal for.
trefs in the kingdom, he resolved that neither sac-
tion should get it into their hands.

Miitland A FEW davs before the retreat of the Congrega.
revol-s tion, the Queen suffered an irreparable loss by the
Q2ene dcrction of her principal Secretary, William Mlait.
Dov. aer. land of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re-

ligion, together with his warm remonstrances againif
the violent measures which the Queen was carr.
ing on, exposed him so much to her refentmeni
;.nd to that of her French Counlellors, that he, full
pccEing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly
from Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congre-

s K:ox, gation ; and they, with open arms, received a
19-- convert, whose abilities added both strength and

reputation to their cause. Maitland had early ap
plied to public business admirable natural talents,
Improved by an acquaintance with the liberal arts;
arnd, at a time of life, when his countrymen of the
fame qiua5iy we-re following the pleasures of the
chl-, or ierving as adventurers in the armies of

.-n1 --. , was a.itiictd into all the secrets ofthe
ca-blnc, and put upon a level with persons ofth.
r.o:Jl conlummate experience in the management
of ali-rs. He puifriitd, in an eminent degree, tha
!)::re-i pi ':;it, which delights in pursuing bold de-
i;..r ., -:i vi.' no U1!s iinaLter of that political a
_.; X ;A:,;ri- which is nccfary for carrying the

-. ':L.'I i;ccl,. Bu thele qualities were deepl
]iLIl; i'C v.rith Sie nelhbouring vices. His addre
ib- , i:rcs degenerated into cunning; his acutene
bord.--rcd upon excel: of lubtletv and refinement
his i:n-.-nitin, over f-rrilc, ;lggefted to him, oi
i.:,:- : occaiions, chimerical lfyvlcs of policy, little

fuitabli

;;itable to the genius of the age; and his enter-BooK IlI.
'riling pirir engaged him in projets vast and fplen- -
,ij, but beyond his utmost power to execute. All '559
rhc cotemporary writers, to whatever faftion they
bclong, mention him with an admiration, which
nr);hing could have excited but the greatest fupe-
-:oriry of penetration and abilities;

TTHE precipitate retreat of the Congregation in-
created, to such a degree, the terror and confusion
which had eized them at Edinburgh, that before
thev reached Stirling, their army dwindled to an
inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, how-
ever, still remained undaunted and erec, and hav-
ng mounted the pulpit, he addressed to his def-
ponding hearers, an exhortation which wonderfully
animated and revived them. The heads of this
dilcourfi are inferred in his history *, and afford a * Knox,
triking example of the boldnels and freedom of'93-
reproof afiumed by the first Reformers, as well as
a pccimen of his own kill in choofing the topics
mot fitted to influence and rouze his audience.
A MEETING of the leaders being called, to con- TheLordsa
fiir what course they should hold, now that their of the

Congre-

ow.n uources were all exhausted, and their deftruc- gaten ap-
tin appeared to be unavoidable, without foreign plyagain
a;; they turned their eyes once more to England, to Ellza-
a. rc!ulved to implore the afliftance of Elizabeth beth'
ra'zrds finifling an enterprize, in which they had
tt illy experienced their own weakness, and the
:angthiof their adversaries. Maitland, as the most
alc negotiator of the party, was employed in this
baffv. In his absence, and during the inactive
icaon of the year, it was agreed to dismiss their
o!loiers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
vhich had so far exceeded the usual time of service.
But, in order to preserve counties most devoted to
:eir interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part
' a;b leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke of

N 2 Chatelheraut,

Boo in. Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his residence at
"-J Hamilton. There was little need of Maitand's
IS9- address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take

his country under her proteftion. She observed
the prevalence of the French counsels, and the pro.
grefs of their arms in Scotland, with great concern;
and as he well foresaw the dangerous tendency of
their schemes in that kingdom, he had already come
to a resolution with regard to the part he herself
would at, if their power there should grow ffill
more formidable.

Motives IN order to give the Queen and her privy coun.
hlch de- cil a full and diftin& view of any important mat-
tesrined -
her to a- ter which might come before them, it seems to
fiA: them. have been the practice of Elizabeth's Ministers to

prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated the
point under deliberation, laid down the grounds of
the conduct, which they held to be most reafona.
ble, and proposed a method for carrying their plan
into execution. Two papers of this kind, written
by Sir William Cecil with his own hand, still reI

eBurn.vol. main *; they are intitled, " A short discussion
iii.Append , the weighty matter of Scotland," and do honou
283Keith, .D
Appendz+ to the industry and penetration of that great Mini.

fter. The motives, which determined the Queen
to espouse so warmly the defence of the Congrega
tion, are reprelented with perspicuity and force
and the consequences of suffering the French t
establish themselves in Scotland, are predicted wi
great accuracy and discernment.

He lays it down as a principle, agreeable to thi

laws both of God and of nature, that every focietj
hath a right to defend itself, not only from prefen
dangers, but from such as may probably ensue;
which, he adds, that nature and reason teach eve
r, Prince to defend himself by the fame means
which his adversaries employ to distress hin
Upon there grounds, he establishes the right

Englan

rngland to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and BOOK Ilr.
:n prevent the conquest of that kingdom, at which ' '
the French openly aimed. The French, he ob- '5S9
fervcs, are the ancient and implacable enemies of
England. Hostilities had fubfitted between the two
nations for many centuries. No treaty of peace,
into which they entered, had ever been cordial or
sincere. No good effect was therefore to be ex-
pcced from the peace lately agreed upon, which
being extorted by present necefiity, would be neg-
igently observed, and broken on the slightest
rretences. In a very ihort time, France would
recover its former opulence5 and though now
drained of men .nd money by a tedious and unfuc
cefsull war, it would quickly be in a condition for
ating, and the restless and martial genius of the
people would render ation neceffarv. The Prin-
cesofLorrain, who, at that time, had the'entire di-
recion of French affairs, were animated with the
r.ot virulent hatred against the English nation.
They openly called in question the legitimacy of
the Queen's birth, and by advancing the title and
pretensions of their niece the Queen of Scotland,
iudied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With
this view, they had laboured to exclude the Eng-
ilh from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and
endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
Qleen of England; and even since the conclusion
ofthe peace, they had solicited at Rome, and ob-
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be il-
legitimate. And though the wisdom and modera-
on of the Constable Montmorency, had, for some
time, checked their career, yet there restraints
eing now removed by the death of Henry II. and
h disgrace of his Minister, the utmost excesses
violence were to be dreaded from their furious

N 3 ambition,

Boor III. ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scotland
`---' is the quarter, whence they can attack England

with molf advantage. A war on the borders of
that country exposes France to no danger, but one
unsuccessful action there may hazard the Crown,
and overturn the government of England. In po-
litical condut, it is childish to wait till the designs
of an enemy be ripe for execution. The Scottilh
nobles, after their utmost efforts, have been o-
bliged to quit the field; and far from expelling
the invaders of their liberties, they behold the
French power daily increasing, and must at last
cease from struggling any longer in a contest foun.
equal. The invading of England will immediate
follow the reduction of the Scottiih malecontents,
by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the
French, Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies
into the heart of her own kingdom, and expose it
to the calamities of war, and the danger of con.
quest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a ditance from England,
and by supporting the Congregation with a power.
ful army, to render Scotland the theatre of the war,
to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain i.
their infancy, and, by such an early and unexpeced
effort, to expel the 'rench out of Britain, before
their power had time to take root, and grow up to
any formidable height. But as the matter was ot
as much importance, as any which could fall under
the consideration of an Englilh Monarch, wisdom
and mature counsel were necessary in the first place,
and afterwards vigour and expedition in conduct
the danger was urgent, and, by losing a single ro
ment, might become unavoidable *

THESE arguments produced their full etiTc up!

The arguments which the Scots epl aycO, in order to o'

:ain E!izabeth's all'iance, are urged with ,'a; ibrcc, in: p?
cer of \lN!-''s,. See .Arendx, N) I.

;1

,n Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme de- BOOK 11I.
rrce, of every pretender to her Crown, and no less
,nxious to preserve the tranquillity and happinets '9
cif Ihe lubjeEs. From these motives fle had aled,
ii granting the Congregation an early upply of
:oncy; and from the fame principles fle derer-
mined, in their exigency, to afford them more es-
rctrual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in-
fantly dispatched into Scotland with the ftrongcft
afiurances of her protection, and the Lords of te
Congregtation were desired to nd c;ommifluionrs
into England, to conclude a treaty, and to fette
the operations of the campaign, wikh the Dulke of, .
Nxrfolk'. 4.

MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom The
no motion of the Congregation could long be con- Qicn
caled, dreaded the success of this negotiation with Dow'agr

..... m neanwhile

the court of England, and foresaw how little me in.,51 her
would be able to resist the united efforts of the two French
kingdoms. For this reason she determined, if po- troops
fibl, to get the start of Elizabeth; and by ven- "
turing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the win-
terfeafon, to attack the malecontents in their pre-
lent dispersed and helpless situation, ile hoped to
put an end to the war, before the arrival of their
Englilh allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,
who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crofled the
Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife, de-
ilroving and plundering, with exceflive outrage,
ite houses and lands of those whom they esteemed
their enemies. Fife was the most populous and
powerful county in the kingdom, and most devot-
ed to the Congregation, who had hitherto drawn
from thence their most considerable supplies, both
cf men and provisions; and therefore, besides

N 4 punishing

BooK IIl.purnining the difaFefion of the inhabitants, b
----- pillaging the country, the French proposed to feiz

')9' and fortfv St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a gar

rifon ftu: cient to bridle the mutinous spirit of th(
province, and to keep poffefion of a port fituatec
on the main ocean.

BuT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's

Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few o
the most active leaders of the Congregation, per.
formed, bv their bravery and good conduct, a ser.
vice of the utmoll importance to their party. Hay.
ing a-einbled fix hundred horse, they invested the
French with continual incursions, beat up thei
quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions
cut o their straggling parties, and so harraffed,
them wirh perpetual alarms, that they prevented
K.o-, them for more than three weeks from advancing*

AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, wa
*'*'" coniRrained to retire, and the French set out from

Kirkaldv, and began to move along the coat to
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but
feSw miles, when, from an eminence, they descried
a powerful fleet steering its course up the Firth of
J-'-':-y Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeu

was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
;ith a numerous army, they hafily concluded thar
theflc iips belonged to him, and gave way to the
rmoir immoderate transports ofjoy, on the profpet
or tis long-expected succour. Their great guns
were alr adv fired to welcome their fiiends, andto
p read the tidings and terror of their arrival among
te ir enemies, when a small boat from the oppofire
T1^ E - coat landed, and blaited their premature and hort-

l ved triumph, by informing them, that it was the
- c c .r England which was in fight, intended for
-: ' ;--;: ti: al of the Congregation, and was soon to be

:::' ' brl;'
;-- ' a formidable land army 1t.

THRO-UCIH

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was BooK IITI
cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude in'--
executing her resolutions, joined to the deliberation 56.
with which she formed them, her administration
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for
its wifdon-. No sooner did she determine to afford
her protection to the Lords of the Congregation,
than they experienced the aivity, as well as the
extent of her power. The season of the year would
not permit her land army to take the field ; but left
.he French hould, in the mean time, receive new
reinforcements, he instantly ordered a strong squad-
ron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems,
by) her inftruaions to Winter her admiral, to have
been desirous of preserving the appearances of friend-
(lip towards the French *. But these were only ap- * Keth,
pearances; if any French fleet should attempt toAppend.
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every a 45.
of hostility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occasioned at first so much joy
among the French, but which oon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effects of
heir vengeance. Apprehensive of being cut off
om their companions on the opposite shore, they
treated towards Stirling with the utmost precipi-
ation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads
amoift impassible, arrived at Leith, hrrafaed and
exhausted with fatigue t. f Knox,

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of zo.
eith, and continuing in that station till the con-
lusion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Lith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
derably facilitated the operations of their o';n
rces by land.
SOON after the arrival of the Englifll squadron, Theycon-
e Commiffloners of the Congregation repaired to deude a
Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of Norfolk, peace with
treaty, the bond of that union with Elizabeth, Fb~7

which

Boob mI. which was of so great advantage to the cause. To

0V3' give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of
156'0 the French arms in Scotland, was the proftffed de.

sign of the contraaing parties. In order to this,
the Scois engaged never to susser any closer union
of their country with France; and to defend them.
selves to the utrermoft against all attempts of con.
queit; and for their afliftance,' Elizabeth promised
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook tojoin with all their forces; no
r.lace in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the
Lnglish w vhatever Ihould be taken from the enemy
was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at their
choice; if an invasion should be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themfelvcs to
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protestations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not in-
consistent with their religion, and the liberties of

'Knox, their country *.
217. THE English army, consisting of fix thousand
lifhear foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
lays siege of Lord Grey of Wilton, entered Scotland early in
to Leith. the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-
April 2. fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their

new allies; and having joined them with great mul-
titudes of their followers, they advanced together
towards Leith. The French were little able to keep
the field againfr an enemy o much superior in num-
b--. A itrong body of troops, destined for their
relief had been iattered by a violent storm, and
had either perif.ed on the coat of France, or with
di~cul-v had reco-ered the ports of that kingdom'.

+'vle. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
CG'ai- Pri- ', f
t L.--.-.;:n 'should make good the magnifi-

<*:*CIz~~~~~~~~~~ '''·~ cent

:ent promises of assistance, with which they daily BooK III.
encouraged them; or till fcarcityof provisions should - '
constrain the English to retire into their own coun- 1560
try. In order to haften this latter event, they did
not neglet the usual, though barbarous precaution
for difireffing an invading enemy, by burning and
laying waste all the adjacent country . The zeal,, ,
however, of the nation frustrated their intentions; ^
eager to contribute towards removing their oppref-
tors, the people produced their hidden stores to sup-
port their friends; the neighbouring counties sup-
plied every thing necessary, and far from wanting
lilbfiftence, the English found in their camp, all
skits of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had for
some time been known in that part of the king-
dom+. t .CKnox,

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen
Regent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her
health was now in a declining state, and her mind
broken and depressed by the misfortunes of her ad-
ministration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of a
siege, she committed herself to the protection of
Lord Erskine. This nobleman frill preserved his
neutrality, and by his integrity and love of his
country, merited equally the esteem of both parties.
He received the Queen herself with the utmost ho-
nour and refpe&, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the
cale . t Forbes's

i

e "rie 5

j . r i_ * -i * 1 Colle~t.

A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the ol.1.o3.
Englith invested Leith. The garrison, shut up, Keith,
within the town, was almost half as numerous as 'Z1.
the army which fat down before it, and by an ob- April. 6.
binate defence protra&ed the siege to a great length.
The circumstances of this iege, related by cotem-
porary historians, men without knowledge or ex-
perience in the art of war, are often oblcure and
!n.perfEt, and at this distance of time are not con-
dcrtable enough to be entertaininzg.

AT

BooK IIT. AT irft the French endeavoured to keep pofref.
'-vJ--- sion of the Hawk Hill, a riing ground not far dif.
A 56or tant from the town, but were beat from it with

great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French
had their full revenge; having allied out with a
strong body, they entered the English trenches,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at leat double the number they had loftin
the former kirmifh. Nor were the English more
fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the
place by assault; they were met with equal courage,
May 7. and repulsed with considerable loss. From the de-

tail of there circumstances by the writers of that
age, it is easy to observe the different characters of
the French and English troops. The former, train-
ed to war, under the active reigns of Francis I.
and Henry II. defended themselves not only with
the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The
latter, who had been more accustomed to peace,
still preserved the intrepid and desperate valour
peculiar to the nation, but discovercd few marks
of military genius, or of experience in the praice
of war. Every misfortune or disappointment dur-
ing the siege must be imputed to manifest errors
in conduct. The success of the besieged in their
rally was owing entirely to the security and negli-
gence of the English: many of their officers were
absent; their soldiers had left their ifations and
the trenches were almost without a guard. The
ladders, which had been provided for the assault,
wanted a great deal of the necessary length; and
the troops employed in that service were ill sup-
ported. The trenches were opened, at first, in an
improper place; and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour were loft.
The weakness of their own Generals, no less than
the strength of the French garrison, rendered the

progrels

progress of the English wonderfully flow. The BooK III.
length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part L
of their magazines by an accidental fire, reduced 5
the French to extreme diitrefs, which the profpe&
of relief made them bear with admirable fortitude.

WHILE the hopes, and courage of the French
protra&ed the siege so far beyond expectation, the
leaders of the Congregation were not idle. By new
associations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfealy to unite their party. By publickly ratify-
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endea-
voured to render the alliance with England firm and
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these pa-
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others
who had not hitherto concurred with the Con-
gregation in any of their measures *. Several of Burn.
these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, frill vol. ;ii.
adhered to the Popish church; but on this occasion, Knoxz21
neither their religious sentiments, nor their former
cautious maxims, were regarded ; the torrent of na-
tional refentmtent and indignation against the French
hurried them on t.

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than
the cause of involving Scotland in those calamities,
under which it groaned at that time, died during
the height of the siege. No Princess ever possessed
qualities more capable of rendering her adminiftra-

t The dread of the French power did, on many occasions,
furniount the zeal, which the Catholic nobles had for their re-
I'^cn. Besides the presumptive evidence for this, arising from
'ie m)emorial mentioned by Burnet, History of the Reformation,
vro ii. 281, and published by him, App. . 278; the inllruc-
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all
dbubt, that many zealous Papit's thought the alliance with Eng-
land to be necesSary for preserving the liberty and independence
of the kingdom. Keith, i58. Huntly himself began a corref-
pzndence with Elizabeth's Minilters, before the march of the
Engliih army into Scotland. Haynes's State Papers, 26I, 263.
See Append. No III.

tion

BooK IIl. tion illustrious, or her people happy. Of much
'' discernment, and no less address, of great intrepi.
156o.

Deathand dity, and equal prudence gentle and humane, with
character out weakness; zealous for her religion, without bi.
Of the gotry; a lover ofjuftice, without rigour. One cir.
DWager. cumfRance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
June o. virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all these great

qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the intereftof
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with most passion-
ate fondness; she departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wisdom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great measure, that reputation and popularity, which
had smoothed her way to the highest station in the
kingdom; and many examples of falhood, and
some of severity, in the latter part of her admini-
ftration, totally alienated from her the affections of
a people, who had once placed in her an unbound
ed confidence. But, even by her enemies, these un.
justifiable actions were imputed to the facility, no;
to the malignity of her nature; and while they ta-
ed her brothers, and French counfello.s, with ralh-
ness and cruelty; they still allowed her the praiie

Buchan. of prudence and of lenity *. A few days before
124- her death, fe desired an interview with the Prio:

of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs
of the Congregation. To them she lamented th:
fatal issue of thole violent councils, which she had
been obliged to follow; and, with the candour na-
tural to a generous mind, confessed the errors of
her own administration, and begged forgiveness of
those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at
the fame time, she warned them, amidst their trug
gles for liberty, and the shock of arms, not to lo

t Les:-. fiht of the loyalty and fubjetion, which was dt
Ge eSuO to their iovereign ]. The remainder of her time
222.

,fle employed in religious meditations and exercises. BOOK In.
She even invited the attendance of Willox, one of '- ~'
the nmot eminent among the Reformed preachers, 156
littened to his instructions with reverence and at-
tention +, and prepared for the approach of death t Knox,
wsith a decent fortitude. 8.

NOTHING could now save the French troops, slut Motivesof
up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a theFrench
peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from the to con-
continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused theirCUade.
party in Scotland, with continual expectations of the
latter, and had thereby kept alive their hopes and
their courage. But at last, the situation of France,
rther than the terror of the English arms, or the
remonstrances of the Scottish malecontents, con-
irained them, though with reluctance, to turn their
thoughts towards pacific councils. The Protestants
in France were, at that time, a party formidable by
their number, and more by the valour and enter-
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered,
by every ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin those who profefled
it. At the profped of this danger to themselves,
arid to their cause, the Protestants were alarmed,
but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
ed with resentment, they not only prepared for their
owvn defence, but resolved, by ome bold ation, to
anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all
the King's violent mealures, they marked them
GUi, to be the firit viclims of their indignation.
Hence, and not from any disloyalty to the King,
proceled the famous conipiracy of Amboile; and .:rch I
though the vigilance and good fortune of the Prin-
ces or Lorrain discovered and disappointed that de-
sign, it was easy to observe new itorms gathering
in severy province of the kingdom, and ready to

burst

BooK III burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war,

In this situation, the ambition of the house of Lor.
560. rain was called off from the thoughts of foreign

conquests, to defend the honour and dignity of the
French crown, and instead of fending new rein.
forcements into Scotland, it became necessary to
withdraw the veteran troops already employed in

Ley, that kingdom *
The nego- IN order to conduct an affair of so much impor.
tiations fortance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made
that pur- choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and of the
pose. Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the fGr-

mer, were reckoned inferior to no persons of that
age, in address and political refinement, Elizabeth
opposed to them ambassadors of equal abilities;
Cecil her Prime Minister, a Man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office;
and Wotton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in
the art of negotiating under three successive Mo-
narchs. The interetts of the French and Englilh
courts were oon adjusted by men of so great dex-
terity in business; and as France easily contented to
withdraw those forces, which had been the chief
occasion of the war; the other points in difpure,
between that kingdom and England, were not mat-
ters of tedious, or of difficult discussion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redrets,
employed longer time, and required to be treated
with a more delicate hand. After so many open
attempts, carried on by command of the King and
Queen, in order to overturn the ancient contitu-
tion, and to suppress the religion which the
had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not think
themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier
againit the future encroachments of regal power.
But the legal steps towards accomplishing this were
not so obvious. The French a:nbaffadors confi-

dered

:red the entering into any treaty with the fubjets, BOOK II[.
nd with rebels, as a condescension unworthy the -,ó

56o.

iinity of a Sovereign; and their scruples on this
rlt might have put an end to the treaty, if the
mpatience of both parties for peace had not fug-
iled an expedient, which seemed to provide for
ie ecurity of the subjet, without derogating from
he honour of the Prince. The Scottish nobles Artcles of
greed on this occasion, to pass from the point of the treaty.
iht and privilege, and to accept the redress of
heir grievances, as a matter of favour. Whatever
ditional security their anxiety for personal safety,
their zeal for public liberty, prompted them to
ei.and, was granted in the name of Francis and
ary, as ats of their royal favour and indulgence.
nd left concessions of this kind should seem pre-
rious, and liable to be retraced by the fame
wer, which had made them, the French Ambaf-
dor agreed to inlert them in the treaty with Eli-
beth, and thereby to bind the King an Queen
violably to observe them *. * Keith,
IN relating this tranfation, cotemporary hifto- s34, &c.
ans have founded the concefflons of Francis and
ar, to the Scotifih fubjets, with the treaty be-
veen F'rance and England the latter, beides the
tification of former treaties between the two king-
oms, and stipulations with regard to the time and
rnner of removing both armies out of Scotland,
.ntained ai article, to which, as the source of
.n; important events, we shall often have occa-

to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her cro-wn
thereby, acknowledged in the ltrongelt terms;
d Francis and Mary blemnly engage, neither to
liume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
ueen of England in any time to come.
ilONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth
:if; the conditins fne obtained for her allies the
'3'OL. I. 0 Scots

BaoK IlI. Scots were no less advantageous to them. Mo..
'-~ luc and Randan, conented, in the name of Franc

and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should
inifantlv be lent back into their own country, ant
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into th
kingdom, without the knowledge and confentoi
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar should immediately be razed, and no nn
fort be erected without the permifflon of Parlia
ment; that a Parliament should be held on th
first day of August, and that afTembly be deemed
as valid, in all reapecs, as if it had been called by
the express commandment of the King and Queen
that, conformable to the ancient laws and cufto
of the country, the King and Queen should notde
dare war, or conclude peace, without the concu
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queen's a
le.ce, the adminirfration of government should
veiled in the council of twelve persons, to be chole
out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven
vihich council to be elected by the Queen, and fiv
by the Parliament; that hereafter, the King an
£ucen should not advance foreigners to places
t-ult or dignity- in th.- kingdom, nor confer the o
;ices of Trair;-er cr Comptroller of the revenu:
:.epoi an eccliitiatic; that an act of oblivion, a
ilL.;lg the guil ani mncmory of all offences, con
i!-:..ed ince the óih of March, 558, should
-.-tid in rth cniuPin Parliament, and be ratifi
v '.-e King anid Q.ecn that the King and Quee
i(i,;::idl nr, under c - iiur of punishing any violado
(;f thcir auoritv dur-ng that period, fcek to d

:.-.- an,- or their fubiets of the offices, benefice

, :- .ttecs which they now hcld ; that the redre
i:uc to churchmen, for the injuries which they h
ikutained during the late infurreaions, hould
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. Wi
recard to rcligious controversies, the Ambaffado

declare

I

.:,;)'1l that they would not presume to decide, BOOK III
.i-. permitted the Parliament, at their first meeting, -
:i, xaine the points in difference, and to represent
fir ino of them to the King and Queen . Keith,
To such a memorable period, did the Lords of 37' &c.

*, by the' d per e- 1The es-

the Congregation, by their courage and perfeve- fe.s of it,
ir:nce, conduct an enterprize, which, at first, pro-
r:ld a very different issue. From beginnings ex-
:rc:nyl feeble, and even contemptible, the party
:re by degrees to great power; and being favour-
,i y many fortunate incidents, baffled all the es-
forts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of a
m)r.e considerable kingdom. The sovereign au-
toiitv was, by this treaty, transferred wholly into
he hands of the Congregation: that limited prero-
ative, which the crown had hitherto pofiiTed,

almost entirely annihilated; and the ariftocra-

cal power, which always predominated in the
corrifh government, became supreme and incon-
roulable. By this treaty, too, the influence of
rance, which had long been of much weight in
affairs of Scotland, was greatly diminished, and
otonly were the present incroachments of that
Ti ltou ally refrained, but, by confederating

i:h Elgland, protection was provided against any
u:re attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame
', the controversies in religion being left to the
%i'.lertion of Parliament, the Protestants might
:kon upon obtaining whatever decision was most
aourable to the opinions which they professed.
A rFw days after the conclusion of the treaty,
3:hthe French and Engliflh armies quitted Scot-
'"*d'. _A Paria-
TrE eyes of every man in that kingdorn were menreid.

ted owa-ds the approaching Parliament. A

liing, fuimmoned in a manner so extraordinary,
riJch a critical uncure, and to deliberate upon

0 2 matters

BooK II1 matters of so nuch consequence, was expeaedwit

the utmost anxiety.

A. SCOTTISH Parliament suitable to the ariftocr

tical genius of the government, was properly a
aflembly of the nobles. It was composed of Bi
ihops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commifioner
cf burroughs, who met altogether in one house
The Lefier Barons, though possessed of a right t
be preient, either in person, or by their reprcfenta
tives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attend.
irg, according to the fashion of the times, with;
numerous train of affals and dependants; the in.
attention cf the age, to any legal or regular system
(,f overnment; but above all, the exorbitant au.
thority of the greater nobles, who had drawn the
w;hole power into their own hands, made this pi.
vilege of so little value, as to be almost negleced.
It appears f-om the ancient rolls, that during tims
of tranquiiity, few commissioners of burroughs,
cnd almot none of the Lefler Barons, appearedin
f'ai-liamenr. The ordinary administration of go.
' c-nrlenr \.-s abandoned without cruple or jealou.
:;,, to the King and to the greater Barons. Butin
. rri-oi-;inary conjuncures, when the ftrugglefor
!.b-r,' \was Vi(,li:', and the spirit of opposition to
th. trown role to an height, the Burgesses and
ic-ii.r Barons \'cre roused from their inaivity,
a:in it .oi forth to vindicate the rights of their coup
ir. T ll- turbulent reign of James III. affordsex-

' ;:-ir- ..:-:pl.s i; proof of this observation *. The public
;--- i'-_,g:.t.i:,n againit the rash designs of that weak

,:'!.i il-advifted Prince, brought into Parliament,
i:--:'.s the greater no.bles and prelates, a confide-
;.bic nu:Lber of the Lciir Barons.

'i'ir 1:itire cauIes occalioned the unusual conflu
rc all O:il r of i;-,cn to the Parliament, which
:i.<-t on the firi'l of Aurgft. The universal palion
.ib' ]bcv, rr \
' l :' , wini wI-;ch had feizr

c:,il :~ .....'.:.,O_-l., ::~n~~ ..d 7

,he nation, suffered few persons to remain uncon- BOOK I.
cerned fpeaators of an aembly, whose ats were
likely to prove decisive with refped to both. From 1 ;60
all corners of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the fe-
nate, the fame cause, which they had defended
with their swords in the fiedl. Betides a full con-
vention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there
appeared the representatives of almoit' all the bur-
roughs, and above a hundred Barons, who, though
of the lesser order, were Gentlemen of the first rank
and fortune in the nation *. * Kehii,

THE Parliament was ready to enter on business 146.
with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was itarted
concerning the lawfulnets of the meeting. No
Conmifioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their content and
approbation was yet received. These were deemed,
by many, essential to the very being of a Parlia-
rment. But, in opposition to this entiment, the
expres words of the treaty of Edinbu rgh were urged,
by which this assembly was declared as valid, in all
relpecs, as if it had been called and appointed by
the express command of the King and Queen.
As the adherents of the Congregation greatly
out-numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion
prevailed Their boldest leaders, and those of
mol approved zeal, were chosen to be Lords of the
Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importance in the Scottiflh Parliament.
The deliberations of the Lords of the Articles,
were carried on with the moilf unanimous and active
zeal. The ata of oblivion, the nomination of
twenty four persons, out of whom the council, en-
trulfed with supreme authority, was to be eleted;
rnd every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
r which seemed necessary to render it effec'tual,

0 . pafied

Bcc IiI passed wihour dispute or delay. The article of re.
-~r-- iion employed longer time, and was attended
I p:- e

wih greater difficulty. It was brought into Parlia-

ceec.-gs menr by a petition from those who had adopted
v.wih ie- the principles of the reformation. Many dorines

r; of the Popish church were a contradition to reason,

- nd a disgrace to religion; its discipline had be-
come corrupt and oppressive; and its revenues
were both exorbitant and ill applied. Against all
these, the Protestants remonstrated with the utmost
severity of stile, which indignation at their abfur-
diry, or experience of their pernicious tendency
could inspire; and encouraged, by the num-r
and zeal of their friends, to improve such a favour.
able juncture, they aimed the blow at the whole fa-
bric of Popery; and besought the Parliament o
interpose their authority for recifying these multi
* Kncs, plied abuses *.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the a,

cient fuperition were present in this Parliament,
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teftants they isood confounded, and at a gaze,
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They esteemed it impossible to resist or di
vert that torrent of religious zeal, which wasfill
in its full strength ; they dreaded that their oppo
fition would irritate their adversaries, and excite
them to new acts of violence; they hoped that the
King and Queen would oon be at leisure to put a
stop to the career of their insolent subjects, an
tlat, after the rage and havock of the present florn,
.he former tranquilliry and order would be restore
to the church and kingdom. They ere willing
perhas, to sacrifice the doctrine, and even t
power or the church, in order to inlure the fafet
of their ow-n peron-,, and to preilrve the pnofliii
cf those revenues, -hich w.ere still in their han!s
From v-hatv: r.':ctiv-s tl:hcr' .cd, th'ir filerse,

. . ..

.ichil was imputed to the confcioulhefs of a bad BooK II11
(:ull, ahforded matter of great triumph to the Pro-
tdit.lns, and encouraged them to proceed with 6
;s;-rr boldnes and alacrity . * Knox'

'iI'E Parliament did no chink it enough t con- 253.

,!limn thoie dostrines mentioned in the petition of
tllc Protelfants ; they, moreover, gave the sanction
fr t[cir approbation to a ConfeFlfon.of Faith pre-
rinted to them by the Reformed teachers t, and t 1. ibid.
compol:d, as might be cxpeced from iuch a per-
formance at that juncure, on purpose to expose the
ablfrd tenets and pracices of the Romish church.
By another aft, the jurifdiclon of the cclefiaftical
courcs w;'s aboliflhed, and the causes, which for-
mnerly came und r their cognizance, were transfer-
rai to the decision of civil judges $. By a third t Keith,
Ilatute, the exc'ciile of religious worship, according z
to the rites of the Romifhi church, was prohibited.
The manner in which the Parliament inforced the
observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
alfcmbly the first tranfgrefiion subjected the offen-
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpo-
ral punifment, at the discretion of the judge ba-
nifrnent was the penalty of a second violation of
the law; and a third aft of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital §. Such strangers were men, § Knox,
at that time, to the ipirit of toleration, and to the 254.
l.!as of hulmanity; and with such indecent haste
did the very perions, who had just e'?cped the ri-
cour of ecclefiaf-ical tyranny, proceed to imitate

eofe examples of severity, of which they them-

lves had to justly complained. With re-
THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, gard to the
in a few days, the ancient system of religion, which revenues
had been etablifled so many ages. In reforming church.
the ldotrine and discipline of the church, the no-
bles kept pace with the ardor and expectations
cMun of Knox himself. But their proceedings,

0 4 with

BooK III. with respect to these, were not more rapid and in-

petuous, than they were flow and dilatory when
they entered on te consideration of ecclefaftiicai
revenues. Among the lay members, ome w.ec
already enriched .ith the spoils of the church, and
others devoured in expectation the wealthy ben-
sices which il11 remained untouched. The altera-
tion in religion ha aed

a mrded any of the dignified

ccclcfiaflics themselves, an opportunity of gratify.
ing their avarice or ambition. The demolition of
the monasteries, having let the Monks at liberr;
from their confinement, they instantly dispersed ail
cver the kingdom, and commonly betook them.
selves to fomre secular employment. The Abbot,
if he had been o fortunate as to embrace the prin.
ciples of the Reformation, frc.n conviction, or so
cunning as to espouse them out of policy, seized
the whole r venues of the fraternity, and, except
what he allowed for the subsistence of a few super.

, -e;:b, annuated Monks *, applied them entirely to his
. -. own use. The proposal, made by the Reformed
\ '-~.- teachers, for applying these revenues towards die
- 95:. r-,ainrenaice of Minilters, the education of youth,

and the lipport of the poor, was equally dreaded
bv all rhefe orders of men. They opposed it with
the utnmot warmth, and by their numbers and au-
thori. -, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give

-: Ar-io car to fich a diiaLreeable demand -. Zealous
t ':' N as the nrfl Reformers were, and animated with a

spirit fiucrior nt the low considerations of interest,
'-iev beheld thcic early f:mnptoms of felfifhnefs and
a-.arice aona thcir adherents, with indignation,
a;-d e nrild Knox expreTing the utmost fenfibilin

:' : 'r contenipt, with which they were treated by
1 '_' !;;,r-'.-, I'!-! wrb.oin e ypeted a more generous

.. . ' '

' ; ' ' i' c - .' r
,' '-ig on, and the honour

-

-· - :- 1' ,i_ 'S :
.

This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this dif- BooK Il.
rlrce of time of no importance, is founded on the V"'
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the 560
?arliament was permitted to take into consideration
:he Rate of religion, and to signify their sentiments
,f it to the King and Queen. But, instead of pre-
-nting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble form of a supplication or address, the Parlia-
ment converted them into so many acts; which,
although they never received the royal assent, ob-
tair.ed all over the kingdom, the weight and au-
thority of laws. In compliance with their injunc-
tions, the eftablifned system of religion was every
where overthrown, and that recommended by the
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality
and zeal of the people overlooked or fipplied any
dt ifct in the form of there ats of Parliament, and
irendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been ielded to the ftatltes of the
most regular or conititutional assembly. By those
proceedings, it muff, however, be onfeffed, that
rheParliament, or rather the natio , violated the
last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
exceeded the powers which belong to subje&s. But
lwhen once men have been accustomed to break
through the common boundaries of fubje&cion; and
1ieir minds are inflamed with the passions which
i!vil war inspire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
0 nteaiurne their conduct by thmfe rules, which
(cn be applied, only where government is in a state
.; ortler and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged
:J employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of
:: liberticas, avails itself oi every thing which can
pronote this great end ; nd the necessity of the

':, and the importance of the objec:, justify any
1til.rrrf tfrom the common :a.l lablilhed forms
'-. ;:)hc ;-'i::l: itlto;'.IN

IN

BooK III. IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, a

-' ~ well as by the ordinary forms of business, it became

AbaIa- necessary to lay the proceedings of Parliament be.
ors sent fore the King and Queen. For this purpose, Sir
bythePar-James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
liacnt to appointed to repair to the court of France. After

holding a course so irregular, the nobles had norea.
son to flatter themselves that Francis and Man,
would ever approve their conduct, or confirm i
by their royal aent. The reception of their Am.
baffador was no other than they might have expet.
ed. He was treated by the King and Queen with
the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtain-
ing the ratification of the Parliament's proceedings
From the Princes of Lorrain and their prtizans,
he endured all the scorn and insult, which it was
natural for them to pour uponr the party he repreo

C Knox, sented *.
255.Buch. THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and
327. Maitland of Lerhington, the ambassadors of the
And to
Elizabeth. Parliament to Elizabeth their prote&refs, met with

a very different reception; they were not more fuc-
cefsful in one part of the negotiation intrusted to
their care. The Scors, sensible of the security which
thev derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this
view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their
party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for
that seasonable and effecual aid which she had as
forded them, and at the ame time, to beseech her
to render the friendship between the nations perpe-
tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a subject, was narly allied to thi
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commission Elizabeth

listened with the utmost fatisfadtion, and encouraged
the Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the

continuance

continuance of her good offices; with regard to the BooK II.
latter, she discovered those sentiments to which she C-
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from 1560.
inarriage, as ome pretend through choice, but
more probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
cef.; ould never admit any partner to the throne;
but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled ex-
crcilc of power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of
that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown to her
own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arrar could not be attended with any such extraor-
tlinary advantage, as to fiake this resolution; ihe
declined it, therefore, but with many expreflions of B.
uood will towards the Scottilh nation, and of refpe& Append
for Arran himself 3oS.Keith

IOWA RDS the conclulfon of this year, diftinguifli- 154, &c.
edt by o many remarkable events, there happened Thedeath
one of great importance. On the 4th of Decem-
ber, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble conftitu-
tion, and of a mean understanding. As he did not
leave any issue by the Queen, no incident could
have been more fortunate to those, who, during
thelate commotions in Scotland, had taken part
with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of
her beauty, had acquired an entire ascendant over
her hlufband, and as the transferred all her influence
to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Francis fol-
!nR.ed them implicitly in whatever track they were
[!!ealed to lead him. The power of France, under
Lich direction, alarmed the Scottish malecontents,
with apprehensions of danger, no less formidable,
than well founded. The intestine disorders which
raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
England in behalf of the Congregation, had hither-
!t prevented the Princes of Lorrain trom carrying
their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
lridlcr their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impofible that the commotions in France could
!he of long conrnuance. ,and] many things might

Po.s 1IT. fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the future,
'---J from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these

'' events, the Scots would stand exposed to all the

vengeance, which the resentment of the Frencl
court could infict. The blow, however long fulf
pended, was unavoidable, and must fall at last with
redoubled weight. From this prolpect and expec-
tatin of danger, the Scots were delivered by the
death of Francis; the ancient confederacy of the
two kingdoms had already been broken, and by
this event, the only bond of union which remained
was difolved. Catherine of Medicis, who, during
the minority of Charles IX. her second son, engrossed
the entire direction of the French councils, was far
from any thoughts of vindicating the Scottilh
Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been
rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
had contended for the government of that weak
and unexperienced Prince; but as the charms of
the wife easily triumphed over the authority of the
mother, Catherine could never forgive such a dif-
appointment in her favourite paflion, and beheld
now, with secret pleasure, the difficult and perplex-
ing scene, on which her daughter-in-law was about

Ma re- to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow
r!es rom which so fad a reverie of fortune could occasion,
the cou!t flighted by the Queen mother *; and forsaken by

F .^re. the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun-

shine of prolperity, retired to Rheims, and there,
in folitudc, indulged her grief, or hid her indigna-
tion. Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
contract their views ; to turn them from foreign to
domestic objects; and instead of forming vati pro-
jets with regard to Britain, found it necessary to
think of acquiring, and eitablifhing an interest with
:he new administration.

IT is impofmible to describe the emotions of joy,
-'I:c:. on ail tiele accounts, the death of the

French
' -n-iu, io. Caeln . 454.

I;rcnch Monarch excited among the Scots. They BOOK II[
regarded it as the only event, which could give rj

n . ' i 56o.
irmrnes and ifability to that iyfrem of religion and
covernment, which was now introduced; and it is
ro wonder cotemporary historians ihould ascribe it
to the immediate care of Providence, which, by
1unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and
hapinefs of kingdoms, in those situations, where
human prudence and invention would utterly de-
pair *. * Knox,

ABOUT this time, the Protestant church in Scot- 2s9.
land began to assume a regular form. Its princi- ,,e -
pies had obtained the fancion of public authority, Prelbyteri-
,11d fume fixed external policy became necessary for an church
the government and preservation of the infant so- Dower-
ciery. The model introduced by the Reformers,
differed extremely from that, which had been so
long established. The motives, which induced them
to depart o far from the ancient system, delerve to
be explained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at firt, excited
the indignation of mankind, and rouzed that spirit
of enquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
Popifih iytem; as this disgust at the vices of ec-
clfliaftics was oon transferred to their persons, and
ltifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled
alaft on the offices which they enjoyed; the effcts
,' thic Reformation would naturally have extended
not only to the docrine, but to the government
or the Popish church; and the fame pirit which
abolilhed the former, would have overturned the
!.ater. But, in a great part of Germany, in Eng-
land, and in the northern kingdoms, its operation.
wr;-cclecked by the power and policy of their Prin-
'cs; and the ancient Episcopal juriidiction, under

f. lew limitations, was still continued in thole

chIulches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be
I;l(re conformable to the praLtice of the church,
iile C hriJtianity became the established religion of

th'

BooE III. the Roman empire. Tle ecclesiastical government
' was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil;
i 563 the first not only borrowed its form, but derived its

authority from the latter; and the dioceses and
j urifdicions of Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops,
corresponded with the division and constitution of
the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries,
the nature of the gcvcrn.ient allowing full scope
to the genius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence
of order in the church was destroyed, and an equa-
lity established more suitable to the spirit of repub-
lican policy. The fituatlon of the primitive church
suggested the idea, and furnished the model of the
latter system, which has since been called Pretlyie.
riam;. The first Christians, oppressed by continual
persecutions, and obliged to hold their religious
assemblies by stealth, and in corners, were con-
tented with a form of government extremely simple.
The influence of religion concurred, with the sense
of danger, in extinguishing among them, the spirit
of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank.
the effect of their sufferings, and the cause of mans
of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were re-
ceived, among the Protestants of that age, with
incredible fubmifilon, was the patron and reftorel
of this scheme of ecclesiastical policy. The church
of Geneva, formed under his eve, and by his li-
rection, was esteemed the most pertct model (c
tis gov-ernment; and Knox, -.ho, duing his rcii-
dence in that city, had itudied, an. admired i;.
-warmiv recommended it to the il-it.tion of hi:
cc ntr-men.

AMioxc the Scottish nobility, ime hated the

persons, and others coveted the wealrh of the dig
nified cler-y; and by abolishing that order of mrren.
the former indulged their refenrnen, and the lat
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people
inflamed with the most violent aversion to Popery,
and approving of every fehcrr.e that depa:rtcd far-

thelt

tl:hf from the practice of the Romish church, were BOOK Ill.
delighted with a system, so admirably suited to '
their predominant passion. While the friends of s56°'
civil liberty beheld, with pleasure, the Protestant
clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that
fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their prede-
ceffors had reared with so much art and industry;
and flattered themselves, that, by lending their aid
to strip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their
exorbitant and oppressive jurifdi&ion. The new
mode of government easily made its way among
men, thus prepared, by their various interests and
paflions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introdution of his system, Knox
did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from
the ancient form *. Instead of Bishops, he pro- Spot'-
poled to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in wood,i'8.
different parts of the kingdom. These, as the
name implies, were impowered to infpcc the life
and doctrine of the other clergy. They presided
in the inferior judicatories of the church, and per-
formed several other parts of the Episcopal function.
Their jurisdiction, however, extended to facrc;
lhings only; they claimed no ieat in Parliament,
and pretended no right to the dignity, or revenuIs,
ofthe former Bishops.

Ti-iE number of inferior clergy, to whom r.ic
care of parochial duty could be conumic!, v;;,:
Jill extremely finall; they had embraced the prin-
ciples of the Reformation at different times, andi
<iom various motives; during the uublic coinnlo-
ions, they were scattered, merely by chance, over
the different provinces of the kingdom: and, in
a flaw places only, vere formed into regular clafTcs
or societics. The irft General Assembly of the D:.-.
church, which was held this year, bears all the
miarks of an infant and unformed focietv. The
:rembers were but few in number, and of no

con fdrable

BooK ItI. considerable rank; no uniform or consistent rul

'ó' seems to have been observed in elecing them

' From a great part of the kingdom no reprefenta

tives appeared. In the name of some entire coun
ties, but one person was present; while, in other
places, a single town or church ent several mem.
bers. A convention, so feeble and irregular, coulc
ponefs no great authority; and conscious ofthei
own weakness, the members put an end to theh
debates, without venturing upon any decision ol

Keith, much importance *.
498. IN order to give greater strength and consistence

s56i. to the Presbyterian plan, Knox, with the assistance

of his brethren, composed the first book of difci.
pline, which contains the model or platform of the

+ SpUtfw. intended policy t. They presented it to a conven-
IS2. tion of estates, which was held in the beginning
Jn. I'. of this year. WThatever regulations were proposed

with regard to ecclesiastical discipline and jurifdic-
tion, would have easily obtained the fanacion of
that affemblv; but a design to recover the patri-
mony of the church, which is there insinuated, met
with a verv different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages

w*hich would accrue to the public, by a proper
application of ecclesiastical revenues. In vain did
they propole, by an impartial distribution of this
fund, to promote true religion, to encourage learn-
ing, and to support the poor. In vain did they
even intermingle threatnings of the divine difplea-

re,, against the unjust detainers of what was ap-

propriated to a sacred use. The nobles held fall
the prey, which they had seized; and bestowing
upon the proposal, the made of a devout imaginatioll,
thev affected to confider it, as a projec altogethel

5. -' vrific.ary, and treated it with the utmost scorn :.

The THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. An.
Qjecr. i- drv.'s to repair to the Queen, and to invite her tc
l.:_d to returr

return into her native country, and to assume the BooK 11.
rcins of government, which had been too long -ó
comnmitted to other hands. And though some of z
i:c'- bies dreaded her return, and others forelaw
cn aecrouls consequences with which it might be at-
lKntled *, the bulk of them desired it with so much See Ap-
ardour, that the invitation was given with the great- pendix,
tl appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the
Roman Catholics got the tart of the Prior in pay-
ing court to Mary; and Lefly, afterwards Bishop
ot Ross, who was commiiffoned by them, arrived
before him at the place of her residence t. Lefly t Le
endeavoured to infuse into the Queen's mind fufpi- 227.
cions of her Protestant fubjets, and to persuade her
to throw herself entirely into the arms of those who
adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
infifrtd that she should land at Aberdeen; and as
the Protestant doctrines had made no confidera-
ble progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave
her assurance of being joined, in a few days, by
2o,ooo men; and flattered her, that with such an
army, encouraged by her refence and authority,
fee might easily overturn the .Reformed Church,
before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

BUT at this juncure, the Princes of Lorrain were
not diliofed to liften to this extravagant and dan-
gerous proposal. Intent on defending themselves
againit Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious policy
w.1s employed in undermining their exorbitant pow-
er, they had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wished their niece to take poffeflion
of her kingdom, with as little disturbance as pof-
ble. The French officers, too, who had served
n Scotland, dirfuaded Mary from all violent mea-
ires; and, by representing the power and number
Ofthe Protestants to be irresistible, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to employ
VOL. I. P the

Boor 11. the leading men of that party as her Minifteri,

.~ than to provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to
Melv-.61. become her enemies *. Hence proceeded the con-

fidence and affecion, with which the Prior of St.
Andrew's was received by the Queen. His reprc-
fentation of the state of the kingdom gained great
credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Estates was held in

May. The arrival of an Ambassador from France,
kerns to have been the occasion of this meeting.
He was instructed to solicit the Scots to renew their
ancient alliance with France, to break their new
confederacy with England, and to restore the Po.
pish ecclefiafhcs to the possession of their revenue,
and the exercise of their functions. It is no eafv
.matter to form any conjecture concerning the in-
tentions of the French court, in making these ex-
traordinary and ill-timed propoftions. They were
rejected with that scorn, which might well have
t Knox, been expected from the temper of the nation t.

, 2 ' IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not

obtain a more favourable audience than formerly,
and their profpec of recovering the patrimony of
the church still remained as distant and uncertain as
ever. But with regard to another point, they found
the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The
book of discipline seemed to require, that the mo-
numents of popery, which still remained in the
kingdom, hould be demolilhed t; and, thought
,. '- neither the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame

ungovernable rage of the people, remained to jufti-
ir or rxculc this barbarous havock, the Convention,
cuunfi.lring every religious fabric as a relick of ido-
larr-, paised lfntence upon them by an act in form;
anid v-r!uns, the most remarkable for the ativityr
ti, thci ze:-.i, v.'crc aplpointcd to put it inexecution.

Abbies,|

Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, BOOK 1U.
and even the sepulchres of the dead, perished in y-
,.,e common ruin. The first storm of popular in- 156
lirreclion, though impetuous and irresistible, had
.xcndied only to a few counties, and oon spent its
:.; b uhr now a deliberate and universal rapine
I,,;,- icatcd the dcvtation of every thing, venerable
ni ii.inificnt, which had elfaped its violence . ) Spots-

- thec mcean time, Mary was in no haife to re- 'wod,i74.

tli'!l into Scotland. Accufomed to the elegance, .y
ilendlor, and gaicty of a polite court, she still fond- pae lor it.
- lingered in france, the cene of all these enjoy-
::;rnt, and contemplated with horror, the barba-
;mn o: her own country, and the turbulence of her
iubjes, which )prelentcd her with a very different
:,: of things. The impatience, however, of her
rcopic, the perfiafions ot her uncles, but above all,
.le fLudied and rmortifying neglet:, with which she
.vas treated by the Queen MAother, forced her to
.hink of beginning this dilagrecable voyage t. Bt t Bran-
xhile she was preparing for it, there were sown be- tomlej

t:'cen her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal Jebb, vol.

icaloufy and discord, which imbittered the life, and
ihortened the days of the Scottish Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh Ori;;i of
iwas the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; thedifcord
:he true causes of it lay much deeper. Almost between
every article, in that treaty, had been executed by ier adh
both parties, with a scrupulous exatnefs. The for-
:i.ca ons of Leith were denolifhed, and the armies
i France and England withdrawn within the ap-
pointed time. The grievances of the Scottish male-
contents were redressed, and they had obtained
';hatever they could demand for their future fecu-
:it'. With regard to all thefc, Mary could have
iltle reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the
;atificadon of the treaty.

P 2: TH£

BoCK 1IT. THE sixth article remained the only source of
W'^^ ' contest and difficulty. No minister ever entered

;56 'more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign, or

pursued them with more dexterity and uccefs than
Cecil. In the conduct of the negotiation at Edin.
burgh, the found underitanding of this able politi-
tian had proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc's
refinements in intrigue, and had artfully induced
the French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge
that the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right
belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to promise, that,
in all times to come, Mary should abstain from!
uing the titles, or bearing the arms of those king.
doms.

THE ratification of this article would have been

of the most fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown
of England was an object worthy of her ambition.
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and im-
portance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
tide was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth.
Among the English themselves, the Roman Catho-
lics, who formed, at that time, a numerous and
active party, openly espoused this opinion; and
even the Proteiants who supported Elizabeth's
throne, could not deny the Queen of Scots to be
her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to avail
herself of all these advantages, could not, in the
cou:-fe of things, be far distant, and many incidents
might fall in, to brine this opportunity nearer than
was expected. In these circumstances, Mary, by
rativiinr the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which she had hitherto held among the neigh-
houring Princes; the zeal of her adherents mull
have gradually cooled; and he might have re-
nounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever
,wearing the English crown.

NON.E of the beneficial confcquences escaped

the penetrating eve of Elizabeth, who, for this
r':-aon, had recourif to every thing, by which she

could

could hope either t. sooth or frighten the Scottish BooK liT,
Queen into a compliance with her demands; and '--- -
if clat Princess had been so unadvised as to ratify 56
the rash concefflons of her ambassadors, Elizabcth,
by that deed, would have acquired an advantage,
.hich, under her management, must have turned
[o great account. By such a renunciation, the
queltion, with regard to the right of fucccflion,
would have been left altogether open and undccid-
cd; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either
have kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and de-
pendance, or, by the authority of her parliament,
!hc mnight have broken in upon the order of lineal
lucceffion, and transferred the Crown to ome other
ddlccndant of the royal blood. The former con-
,duCt she obierved towards James VI. whom, dur-
ing his whole reign, he held in perpetual fear and
fubjecion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding, would, in all probability have been
employed against Mary, whom, for many reasons,
,he both envied and hated.

NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unprece-
dented in the history, or inconsistent with the con,
ilitution of England. Though succession by here-
&2iary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been established almost in every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable in-
lances of deviations from that rule. The Crown
of that kingdom having once been seized by the
inind of a conqueror, this invited the bold and en-
erprifing in every age to imitate such an illuhtrious
example of fortunate ambition. From the time of
William the Norman, the regular course of descent
had seldom continued through three successive
reigns. Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour
opened to them a way to the throne, called in the
authority of the great council of the nation to con-
nrm their dubious titles. Hence Parliamentary
a:;l hereditary right became in England of equal

P 3 consideration.

BcoK II. consideration. That great aembly claimed ani
._---- _
a&cually possessed a power of altering the order oi

regal fuccefon; and even so late as Henry VIII
an act of Parliament had authorized that capricious
Monarch to fettle the order of succession at hi
pleasure. The English, jealous of their religious
liberty, and averse from the dominion of itrangers,
would have eagerly adopted the passions of their
Sovereign, and might have been easily induced to
exclude the Scotrilh line from the right of ficceed.
ing to the Crown. These seem to have been the
views of both Queens, and these were the difficulties
which retarded the ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be

traced no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alteration in the words of it, might have brough
the prelent question to an amicable issue. Thein.
definite and ambiguous expression, which Cecil had
inserted into the treaty, might have been changedi
into one more limited, but more precise; and Ma.
ry, instead of promising to abitain from bearingi
the title of Queen of England in all times to come,
might have engaged not to affiune that ile, during
the lie of Elizabth, or the lives of her lawful p1o:
serirv.

SUCH an amendment, however, did not uit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had bec:
obliged to suspend, for some time, the profecurcni
of her title to the English crown, she had n:,
however, relinquifed it. She determined to re-
vive her clim, on the firit prolpeft of ifccefs, and
was unwilling to bind herself, by a pofitiv c enga2-
ment,, nor to take advantag of any such torruna;ic
eccurrence. 'or woul the alteration have ba:l
more acceptable to Elizabeth, wlo, by agrei ^
to it, would have tacitly recognized the right l
her rival t aicend the throne after her deceaic
B'Er nr'i:hc: the Scoti:h nor Englih Q(een rdu

avow theie secret sentiments of their hearts. Any BOOK 1I1.
open di!covery of an inclination to disturb the tran- '-''
q'illity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of
Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to Mary.
Anv suspicion of a design to alter the order of iuc-
ce.lion, and to set aside the claim of the Scottili
Queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much and
deserved censure, and have railed up againfi
her many and dangerous enemies. Thele, how-
ier carefully concealed, or artfully disguised,
were, in all probability, the real motives which
ectermined the one Queen to solicit, and the other-
) refuie the ratification of the treaty, in its origi-
al form while neither had recourse to that expli-
cation of it, which to an heart unwarped by poli-
tical interest, and incerely desirous of union and
concord, would have appeared so obvious and na-
tural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occa-
lioned this rupture between the British Queens, ri-
ralfllip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
ci their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
xtraordinary qualities, by which fife equalled or
,urpalicd such of her sex, as have merited the
areareit renown, discovered an admiration of her
s::n person, to a degree, which women of ordinary
..derftandings either do not entertain, or prudently
rndeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, her
'b!icitude to display her charms, her love of flat-
iryv, were all exceflive. Nor were these weaknetFes
co)nined to that period of life, when they are more
pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the
wiltt woman of that, or perhaps of any other age,
wore the garb, and affected the manners of a gill*.

Johnston Hilt. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699.
C!talogue of Royal and Noble Authols. Article Fix.

P 4 Though

BooK In. Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Marn.
'--- > in beauty, and gracefulness of person, as she ex:

156'' celled her in political abilities, and in the arts of

government, the was weak enough to compare

° Mevl, herself with the Scottish Queen *; and as it was
98. impossible ihe could be altogether ignorant how

much Mary gained by the comparison, she envied
and hated her as a rival, by whom she was eclipsed
In judging of the conduct of Princes, we are apt
to ascribe too much to political motives, and too
little to the passions which they feel in common
with the reft of mankind. In order to account for
Elizabeth's present, as well as her subsequent con-
duct towards Mary, we must not always confider
her as a Queen, we must ometimes regard her as a
woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's diffi-

culties with respec't to the treaty, continued to urge

t Ket;', her, by repeated applications, to ratify it t. Mary,
57, 60, under various pretences, still contrived to gain
&c'. time, and to elude the request. But while the one

Queen solicited with perlevering importunity, and I
the other evaded with artful delay, they both flu-
died an extreme politeness of behaviour, and load-
ed each other with professions of sisterly love, with
reciprocal declarations of unchangeable esteem and
amity.

Elizabeth It was not long before Mary was convinced,
T Itues that, among Princes, there expressions of friendlhip
ffe' are commonly far distant from the heart. In fail-
condut. ing from France to Scotland, the course lies along

the English coast. In order to be fate from the in-
fults of the English fleet, or in cafe of tempestuous
weather, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that
kingdom, Mary ent M. D'Oviel to demand of
Elizabeth a safe conduct during her voyage. This
requefr, which decency alone obliged one Prince to
grant to another, Elizabeth rejcted, in ltch a man-

ncr,

ner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design, BooK Ill'
either to obftruA the passage, or to intercept the '.
person of the Scottish Queen *. 6i.

Pi 1 ~ Keith,

THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled ,.
Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de- Caniden.
parture from France. She was accompanied to See Ap-

pendix,

Calais, the place where she embarked, in a manner N Vl.'
suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two power- Mary be-
ful kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, gins he;
with many of the most eminent among the French voyage.
nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who fe-
cretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with
every circumstance of m gnificence and refpe&.
After bidding adieu to her mourning attendants,
with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in rears, Mary
left that kingdom, the short, but only scene of her
life, in which fortune fniled upon her. While the
French coast continued in fight, file intently gazed
upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful posture, on
that height of fortune whence she had fallen, and
presaging, perhaps, the disasters and calamities
which imbittered the remainder of her days, he
sighed often, and cried our, " Farewel, France
"Farewel, beloved country, which I hall never
"more behold !" Even when the darkness of the
night had hid the land from her view, she would
neither retire to the cabin, nor taste food, but com-
manding a couch to be placed on the deck, he
there waited the return of day, with the utmost
impatience. Fortune toothed her on this occasion;
the galley made little way during the night. In
the morning, the coast of France was still within
fight, and he continued to feed her melancholy
with the prospect; and as long as her eyes could
ditinguifh it, to utter the fame tender expressions
of regret -. At last a britk gale arose, by the fa-

t Brantonie, 43. He liimfdf was in ;the fame glicy with the
Qleen.

VOiur

BooK 111. vour of .which for onme days, and afterward under

--ó~r the cover r . thick fog, Mary elcaped the English

Arrives j-. l--t, which la in wait to intercept her *; and on
Scoth!-i the Igth or Augult, after an absence of near thirteen

Gocd'. -ears, landed fiaely at Leiih in her native king-

vol. Z3

,Fti. .
7 dom.

MARY was received by her fubiets with flouts

and acclamations of jov, and with every demon-
,iration or .elcome and regard. But as her arrival
was unexpected, and no suitable preparation had
been mad- for it, they could not, with all their
eforts, hide from her the poverty of the country,
and were obliged to conduet her to the palace or
Holyrood-houie with little pomp. The Queen ac-
culfomed from her infancy to splendor and magni-
ficence, and fond of them, as was natural at her
age, could not help obfrving the change in her
situation, and seemed to be deeply affe-led with

T Bra. it '.
4. 4 NEV£R id any Prince aend the throne at
Stare of
tihe*f^ a juncture which called for more wildom in council,
dom a5 or more courage and teadincfs in action. The
that i::e. rage of religious controverly was till unabated.

The meo or ps

or p p pression cxaiferated the

Pr.otcaifti; the finart of recent injuries rendered
the IP'pisi; diperate; both were zealous, fierce,
and i-rconcilable. The blence of their Sovereign
;,ad accustomed the nobles to independence; and
during the late commotions, they had acquired
ifch an increase of wealth, as thrlew great weight
into the icale of the Aristocracy, which flood not
in need of any accef-ion of power. The kingdom n
had long been under the government of Regents,
who exercised a delegated jurisdiction, attended
-ith iittle authority, and which inspired no reve-
rence. A state of pure anarchy had prevailed for
the two last years, without a Regent, without a

-Keith, supreme council, without the power, or even the
Apped. form of a regular government $. A licentious fpi-
9- '
rit,

,i:, unacquainted with subordination, and disdain- BooK 111.
.nil the reltraints of law and justice, had spread -^
.tmong all ranks of men. The influence of France, '56'
the ancient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn
or delpifed. The English, of enemies become
confederates, had grown into confidence with the
nation, and had gained an ascendant over all its
councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not derive
more splendor or power from the friendship of the
former, than they had reason to dread injury and
di:inution from the interposition of the latter.
LEvery consideration, whether of intereif, or of self
prelervation, obliged Elizabeth to dcprefs the roy-
al authority in Scotland, and to create the Prince
perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit of
Jifaffection among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when
the administration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
wlth the manners and laws of her country, a itran-
-er to her subjects, without experience, without
aliies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find
;me circumtances, which, though they did nor
,J:ianc these diladvantages, contributed, however,
toJ aiicviate them; and, with skilful managen.nt,
;ight have produced great efiLs. Fie r ilbjecls,
unaccustomed so long to the residence o rtheir Prince,
were not only dazzled by the novelty and 'iplcnldor
or the royal preience, but inspired with aw, a;lilt r-
verence. Beides the places of power a:.! pr-oit
bestowed by the favour of a Prince, hi.s pi';-o.c'ion,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
inli win the hearts of men. From ail corlner of
!,e klingdom, the nobles crowded to icllify their
!uty and afe-tion to their Sovereign, and ituied,
h every crt, to \vwipe out the memory or palt mif-
-c.nd!ict t, and to iv, in a tock of future merit. The

amuliements

BooK 111. amusements and gaiety of her court, which was
'/'"2 filled with the molt accomplished of the French no-

bility, who had attended her, began to soften and
to polish the rude manners of the nation. Mary
herself possessed many of there qualifications, which
raise affection, and procure esteem. The beauty
and gracefulness of her person drew universal ad-
miration, the elegance and politeness of her man-
nrs commanded general respect. To all the charms
of her own ex, she added many of the accomplilh-
mrents of the other. The progress he had made in
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteem-
ed nceffary or ornamental, was far beyond what
is commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour-
teous affability, which, without lessening the dignity
of a Prince, steals on the hearts of fubjccts with a
bewitching insinuation.

FROM there circumrfances, notwithstanding the

threatning aspect of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which ga-
thered on every hand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different issue of her reign;
and whatever sudden gusts of facion he might have
expected, he would never have dreaded the deftruc-
tive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who should

discover the most dutiful attachment to the Queen,
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable instance. On the funday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be ce-
lebrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
mour of this occasioned a secret murmuring among
the Protestants who attended the court complaints
and threatnings oon followed; the servants be-
longing to the chapel were insulted and abused;
and, if the Prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably
inrerpofed, the rioters might have proceeded to the

ox' tnoft excesses .
2_4. or

Ir is impoffibie, at this distance of time, and BOOK IlL

under circumtances so very different, to conceive '--J
the violence of that zeal against Popery, which then 56.
possessed the nation. Every instance of condefcen-
(ion to the Papists was esteemed an aft of apoftacy,
and the toleration of a ingle mass pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the invasion of
ten thousand armed men *. Under the influence Knox,
of these opinions, many Protestants would have 287.
ventured to go dangerous lengths; and, without
attempting to convince their Sovereign by argu-
ment, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have
abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God
in that manner, which alone fie thought accepta-
ble to him. But the Prior of St. Andrew's, and
other leaders of the party, not only restrained this
impetuous spirit; but in spite of the murmurs of
the people, and the exclamations of the preachers,
obtained for the Queen and her domestics the un-
disturbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near
an hundred years after this period, when the vio-
lence of religious animofities had begun to subside,
when time and the progress of learning had inlarged
the views of the human mind, an English houie of
Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sove-
reign in the private use of the mals. The Protef-
tant leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praise
both of wisdom and of moderation for condut so
different. But, at the fame time, whoever reflcEt.
upon the encroaching and anguinary spirit of Po-
pery, will be far from treating the fears and caution
of the more zealous Reformers as altogether imagi-
nary, and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance
with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Re-
formed doctrine, though eftablilhed all over the

kingdom,

BooK III. kingdom, had never received the countenance c
`-- fancion of royal authority. On this occasion, the
Aug. 2; Queen declared any attempt towards an alteration
* Keith, or subversion of it to be a capital crime .
504- THE Queen conformable to the plan which had
She em- been concerted in France, committed the admnini
ploys only
ProYret- ftration of affairs entirely to Proteitants. Her
an;sin the council was filled with the most eminent pe'lons or
2dl;;in- that party-, not a single Papist was admitted into
itn any degree of confidence t. The Prior of St. An-
2s 3 ' drew's and Maitland of Lethington itemed to hold

the first place in the Queen's affection, and poffefikd
all the power and reputation of favourite Minilers.
Her choice could not have fallen upon perons
more acceptable to her people; and, by their pru-
dent advice, Mary conducted herself with o imu
moderation and deference to the Icntiments of the
nation, as could not fail of gaining the affection of

Levy, her fubjeEts ~, the firmest foundation of a Prince'
-2. power, and the only genuine source of hs hanpi.

ness and glory.

Attempts A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was
to gain E- another object of great importance to Mary; and
fizabehurs thouh she seems to have had it much at heart, in

the beginning of her adminiltration, to accomplish
such a deirable conjunction, yet many events oc
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach.
The formal offices of friendship, however, are cli-
dom neglected among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obstruct the Queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratu-
late her fare return. Mary, that ihe might be on
equal terms with her, ent Maitland to the Englili
court, with many ceremonious expreflions of re-

§ Keith, gard for Elizabeth §. Both the Ambassadors were~
181, &-. received v.kh the utmoit civilitv; and on each

fide, the profeffons of kindne ., as tr' -.' ere ma.J

wt'a|

with little sincerity, were listencd to with propor-BooK II.
tional credit. ,..

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something
more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with frelh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
aimufe Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
condu&t of his Miftrcfs with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival
in Scotland, the importance of the question in dil-
pute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
H whom she was obliged in decency to consult, ere
the pretences offered in excuse for her conduc;
the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate hcrfclf
out of these difficulties, into which the treaty of
Edinburgh had led her, Mary was brought to ield
a point, which formerly she seemed determined
never to give up. She inftrusted Maitland to fig-
nify her willingness to disclaim any right to the
crown of England, during the life of Elizabeth,
and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure of thtef
ihe were declared next heir by a& of parliament . Camden,

REASONABLE as this propoial might appear to 387.Buch.
Mary, who thereby precluded herself from disturb- 329'
ing Elizabeth's pofFeflron of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's interest,
ormore contradictory to apaffion, which predomi-
nated in the charaer of that Princess. Notwith-
ilanding all the great qualities which ith-ew fiuch
lustre on her reign, we may observe, that fne \.:
tinctured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerou
aftions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infufc
this passion. It descended to her from HF-nry VII.
her grandfather, whom, in several features (, his

(chb ir,

Boos III. characer, he nearly resembled. Like him file
` suffered the title by which she held the Crown, to
15 ' remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than

submit it to parliamentary discussion, or derive any
addition to her right, from such authority. Like
him, she observed every pretender to the succession,
not only with that attention, which prudence pre.
scribes; but with that aversion which suspicion in-
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the
right of succession, operated for Elizabeth's advan-
tage, both on her fubjets, and on her rivals. A-
mong the former, every lover of his country re-
garded her life as the great security of the national
tranquillity; and chore rather to acknowledge a
title that was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was de-
cided, were held in dependence, and obliged to
court her. The manner in which she received this
ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She rejet-
ed it in a peremptory tone, with many expressions
of a resolution never to permit a point of ib much
delicacy to be touched.
.,t . . ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public

entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was neglected, which could express the duty and
affection of the citizens towards their Sovereign.
But amid{f these demonstrations of regard, thege-
nius and sentiments of the nation discovered them-
selves, in a circumstance, which, though incon-
fiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As it was
the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at
every public solemnity; most of these, on this oc-
cafion, were contrived to be representations of the
vengeance which the Almighty hath inflicted upon

'Keitb, idolaters *. Even while they tudied to amuse and
:S9. to

to flatter the Queen, her fubje&ts could not refrain BOeK Ilf.
from testifying their abhorrence of that religion'"ó
which she professed.

To restore the regular administration of justice, Refrains
and to reform the internal police of the country, thelicenfe
became the next object of the Queen's care. The Ofthe bor
laws enacted for preservation of public order, and erer.
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized coun-
try. But the nature of the Scottifl constitution,
ti;e impotence of regal authority, the exorbitant
power of the nobles, the violence of faction, and
the fierce manners of the people, rendered the ex-
ecution of these laws feeble, irregular, and partial.
In the counties which border on England, this de-
reft was most apparent; and the consequences of
it most sensibly felt. The inhabitants, firangers
to industry, averse from labour, and unacquainted
with the arts of peace, subsisted intirely by spoil and
pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans,
committed there excesses not only with impunity,
but even with honour. During the unsettled state
f the kingdom from the death of James V. this
dangerous ic.enfe had grown to an unusual height;
ad the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were
become no less intolerable to their own country-
men, than to the English. To restrain and pu-
nifh these outrages, was an ation equally popular
in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was
:he person chosen for this important service, and
extraordinary powers, together with the title of the
Queen's lieutenant, were vcfted in him for this
purpose.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accuf-
tom.ed to regular government, than the prepara-
tons made on this occafiori. They were such as
Imight be expected in the rudest and most imperfect
itate of society. The freeholders of eleven Ieveral
counties, with all their follower~ compietely armed,
'Vol. I. Q i er

Bc, o- II. were summoned to assist the Lieutenant in the dif

charge or his office. Every thing resembled a mi

'
ó*. litary expedition, rather than the progress of a cour

Keith, ofjuftice . The Prior executed his commiffior
9 8. with such vigour and prudence, as acquired him;

great increase of reputation and popularity amonc
his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffereK
the punifhmernt due to their crimes; and, by the
impartial and rigorous administration of justice,
order and tranquillity were restored to that part ol
the kingdom.

The Pa- DURING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's,
pi:is at- the leaders of the Popish faction seem to have taken
eainp, lt some steps towards insinuating themselves into the
into flvour Queen's favour and confidence . But the Arch.
with her. bishop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable per.
{bid. 203. son in the party for abilities and political address,

was received with little favour at court; and what.
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who professed the fame religion with herelf,
she discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the administration of affairs out of the hands, to
which she had already committed it.

THE cold reception of the Archbishop of St.

Andrew's was owing to his connection with the
houie of Hamilton; from which the Queen was
much alieinated. The Duke of Guise and the Car-
dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the
Duke of Chatelherault and his son the earl of Arran
had eilouled the caue of the Congregation. Princes
fcldom view their successors without jealousy and
iiruft. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps,
drcaded the Duke as a rival in power. All thef
aules concurred in infusing into the Queen's mind
an aversion for that family. The Duke, indulgin
his love of retirement, lived at a distance fro!l
court, without taking pains to insinuate himfe
into favour; and though the Earl of Arran openly
nfpired to marry the Queen, he, by a most unpar-

donable

:,enable at of imprudence, was the only noblemah BooK I1.
, Tiltindion who opposed Mary's enjoying the ex- "ó
;'rcf of her religion; and by rashly entering a pub- 156
ii protestation against it, entirely forfeited her fa-
vour*. At the fame time, the fordid parsimony of* Keith,
his father obliged him either to hide himself in 201, 204.
Iinme retirement, or to appear in a manner unbe- Kox'26.
coming his dignity as firt Prince of the blood, or
::is high pretensions as suitor to the Queen -. His t Keith,
:le, inflamed by disappointment, and his impati- 96'
, ce, exasperated by neglect, preyed gradually on
hLis rcaion; and, after many extravagancies, broke
uLz at last in ungovernable freniy.
TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of Dec. o.
Eiartes was held chiefly on account of ecclesiastical
htairs. The assembly of the church, which fat at
ile fame time, presented a petition, containing
any demands with refpe& to the suppressing of Po-
rery, the encouraging the Protestant religion, and
tie providing for the maintenance of the clergy ~. t Keith,
The last was a matter of great importance, and zlo.
the steps taken towards it deserve to be traced.
THouGH the number of Protestant preachers A new re-
was now considerably iricreafed, many more were gulation
Itill wanted in every corner of the kingdom. No Cncern'ng

the reve-

legal provision having been made for thenm, theynuesofthe
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsist- chrch.
ence from the benevolence of their people. To
susser the Ministers of an established church to con-
tinue in this state of indigence and dependence, was
sn indecency equally repugnant to the principles of
rligion, and to the maxims of found policy; and
would havejuftified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the Reformation was then loaded by its
enemies. The revenues of the Popish church were
the only fund, which could be employed for their
ielief; but during the three last years, the state of
tef¢ was greatly altered. A great majority of

~Q^Z Abbots,

Boo: inT. Abbots, Priors, and other heads of religious houses,

ó-- - had, either from a sense of duty, or from views ot
56. interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and,

notwithstanding this change in their sentiments,
they retained their ancient revenues. Almost the
whole order of Bishops, and several of the other
dignitaries, fill adhered to the Romish uperftition
and though debarred from every spiritual function,
continued to enjoy the temporalities of their bene-
sices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
acive in promoting the Reformation, had, under
various pretences, and amidift the license of civil
wars, got into their hands possessions, which be-
longed to the church. And thus, before any par;
of the ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be ap-
plied towards the maintenance of the Protestant
Ministers, many different interests were to be ad.
justed; many claims to be examined; and the
prejudices and passions of the two contending par-
ties required the application of a delicate hand.
After much contention, the following plan was ap-
proved by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in
even by the Popish clergy themselves. An exact
account of the value of ecclesiastical benefices
throughout the kingdom was appointed to be ta-
ken. The present incumbents, to whatever party
they adhered, were allowed to keep possession:
two thirds of their whole revenue were reserved for
their own use, the remainder was annexed to the
Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook to
aifign a sufficient maintenance for the Protestant

'Keith, cler-.
Append- As most of the Bishops and several of the other
Kno;x,,4. dignitaries were still firmly attached to the Popil

religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rathe
than an act of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been expected from the zeal of the preachers
and from the spirit which had hitherto animate
the nation. But, on this occasion, other principle

obftrutcde

obftruaed the operation of such as were purely re- BOOK 111.
ligious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, --V
tvo paflions extremely opposite, concurred in deter- 15'
mining the Protestant leaders to fall in with this
plan, which deviated so manifestly from the max-
ims, by which they had hitherto regulated their
conduc.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to at with-
out controul, and to level all diftincions in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclefi-
aftical dignities could not, with any colour ofjuftice,
have been retained by those in whose hands they
now were; but must either have been distributed
among the Protestant clergy, who performed all
religious offices, or muff have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater
part of them was originally derived. The former
icheme, however suitable to the religious spirit of
many among the people, was attended with mani-
fold danger. The Popish ecclesiastics had acquired
a hare in the national property, which far exceed-
ed the proportion that was consistent with the hap-
piness of the kingdom; and the.nobles were de-
termined to guard against this evil, by preventing
the return of those vast poffefflons into the hands
of the church. Nor was the latter, which exposed
the constitution to more imminent hazard, to be
avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed
prerogative, which the Scottish Kings possessed,
was the object of jealousy to the nobles. If they
had allowed the Crown to seize the spoils of the
church, such an increase of power must have fol-
lowed that accefflon of property, as would have
raised the royal authority above controul, and have
rendered the most limited Prince in Europe the most
absolute and independent. The reign of Henry
VIII. presented a recent and alarming example of
his nature. The wealth which flowed in upon that

Q 3 Prince,

BooK III. Prince, from the suppression of the monasteries, no
'-*<-' only changed the maxims of his government, bu

'5'. the temper of his mind; and he who had formerl

submitted to his Parliaments, and courted his pet
pie, diaated, from that time, to the former, wit!
intolerable insolence; and tyrannized over the la;.
rer with unprecedented feveritv: and if his policy
had not been extremely short-sighted, if he had r.ot
squandered what he acquired, with a profusion
equal to his rapaciousness, and which defeated i
ambition, he might have established despotism i
England, on a basis so broad and strong, as all th(
efforts of the fubiects would never have been able td
fbake. In Scotland, where the riches of the der
gy bore as great a proportion to the wealth of
kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands wouli
have been of no less importance to the Crown, a,
no less fatal to the aristocracy. The nobles, si
this reason, guarded against such an increase ofth
royal power, and thereby secured their own indc
penderice.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern

the irirereft of their order. The re-uniting the po
sessions of the church to the Crown, or the befto
ing them on the Protestant clergy, would have bee
a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by frau
or violence, seized part of these revenues, and
those Abbots and Priors who had totally renounc
their ecclesiastical character. But as the plan, whi
was proposed, gave ome fanEion to their usurp
tions, they promoted it with their utmost influenc
The popish ecclesiastics, though the lopping off
third of their revenues was by no means agreeab
to them, consented, under their present circu
stances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions,
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the
mainder; and after deeming the whole irrecoverat
loft, they confidered whatever they could retrieve

£(

ib much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries BooK III.
were men of noble birth; and as they no longer ~\'N
rntertained hopes of restoring the Popish religion, ' 5
they wished their own relations, rather than the
Crown, or the Protetant clergy, to be enriched with
the spoils of the church. They connived, for this
rrafon, at the encroachments of the nobles; they
even aided their avarice and violencej they dealt
out the patrimony of the church among their own
relations, and by granting fees and perpetual leafes
f lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their
power, ome colour of legal possession, to what was
formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such
alienations still remain*. The nobles, with the Keith.
concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended their 507.
rncroachments, and gradually stripped the ecclesias- Sp0'': -
tics of their richest and most valuable possessions. '75'
Even that third part, which was given up in order
to silence the clamours of the Protestant clergy,
and to be some equivalent to the Crown for its
claims, amounted to no considerable um. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially
by such as had embraced the Reformation, were
almost universally remitted. Others, by producing
fraudulent metals; by eimating the corn, and
other payments in kind, at an under value; and by
the connivance of collectors greatly diminished the
charge againt themselves : and the nobles had + Kcrl,,
much reason to be satisfied with a device which, at Append.
so finall expence, secured to them such valt pof-' Ss.
iclrions. 3pow.

NOR were the Protestant clergy confiderablc The Pro-
gainers by this new regulation; they found it to teilant
be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, than to clelgy no
xtinrguifhl avarice. Those very men, whom for- gailers b

It.

merly they had swayed with absolute authority,
were now deaf to all their remonstrances. The
Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, the Earl
Ji Morton, and Maitland, all the moll zealous

Q_ 4 leaders

BooK III.leaders of the Congregation, were appointed to

ó'^ afflgn, or as it was called, to modify their ipends.

An hundred merks Scottif was the allowance which
their liberality afforded to the generality of Ministers.

Knox, To a few three hundred merks were granted *.
3c1. About twenty-four thousand pounds Scottish appears

to have been the whole um allotted for the mainte-
nance of a national church established by law, and
esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church

-t Kei::, of God t. Even this fum was paid with little ex-
Append. acnefs, and the Ministers were kept in the fame
iss. poverty and dependance as formerly.

;6:. THE gentleners of the Queen's administration,

D.er ti- and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in
ons amon°
t;e no!-: some degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac-

customed them to greater mildness and humanity;
while, at the fame time, her presence and authority
were a check to their factions and tumultuary
fp'ir. But, as a tate of order and tranquillity
was not natural to the feudal aristocracy; it
could not be of long continuance; and this year
became remarkable for the most violent eruptions
of intestine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could possess little authority,
and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdicrion.
The interring of inrereft, the unsettled state of
propertv, the frequency of pub'ic commotions, and
the erc.neis of their own manners, owed, among
the treat families, the feeds of many quarrels and
conrentions. Thece, as we have already observed,
were decided nor by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the Mo-
narch, or acknowledging his superior authority, f-
fembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with
his estate and honours, everv nobleman transmitted

fonme

some hereditary feud to his posterity, who were Booc r.
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with -
the fame inveterate rancour. 's2.

SUCH a dissention had subsisted between the house
of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and was
heightened by mutual injuries during the late com-
motions . Both the Earl of Arran and Bothwell Keith,
happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their 215'
followers quarrelled frequently in the streets of
Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that
city. At last, the mediation of their friends, par- February.
ticularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement,
but an unfortunate one to both these noblement. t Knox,

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and 305.
with the utmost terror and confusion, confeffd f.rft
to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's, that,
in order to obtain the sole direction of affairs, Both-
well and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspircd
to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other fa-
vourites of the Queen. The Duke of Chatelhe-
rault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had sup-
planted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the Blood. Both-
well, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late com-
motions, was no less exasperated againit him. But
whether he and the Hamiltons had agreed to
cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed
only in the frantic and disordered imagination of
the Earl of Arran, it is impossible, amidst the
contradi&ion of historians, and the defe&ivenefs of
records, positively to determine. Among men in-
flamed with resentment, and impatient for revenge,
raft expressions might be uttered, and violent and
criminal expedients proposed; and on that foun-
dation, Arran's distempered fancy might rear the

whole

Boos III. whole fuperftruiure of a conspiracy. All the
t---r persons accused, denied their guilt with the utmost

1 56. confidence. But the known characters of the men,

and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to
the probability of the accusation, and abundantly
justify the conduet of the Queen's Ministers, who
confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the Icrong castle of Dunbarton, which
he had held ever since the time of his resigning the

* Kn.o, office of Regent .
EG 3C3. THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the
20'2" Prior of S. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro-
The Earl duced more memorable and nmofc tragical events,
of Hunt- George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one
lysenian- Of the nobles who conspired againif James III. and
rv ro the ' ' · "
Qreeh's who raied his son James IV, to the throne, enjoyed
Mllnite!s. a great share in the confidence of that generous
t Crf.. Prince : By his bounty, great accessions of wealth
Ofcers of and power were added to a family, already opulent
Ste, 56. and powerful. On the death of that Monarch,

Alexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend for offices at court; and
retiring to the north, where his estate and influence
lay, resided there, in a kind of princely indepen-
dence. The Chieftains in that part of the king-
dom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dan-
gerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his
encroachments. Some of his rivals he fecrerly un-
dermined, others he subdued by open force. His
efcate far exceeded that of any other subjet, and
his ivperiorities and jurisdictions extended over many
of the northern counties. With power and possel-
sions so immense, under two long and feeble mino-
rities, and amidst the hock of civil commotions,
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the most
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an

activ

active and enterprising spirit was not the charaEte-Booc Iir.
riftic of that family, and whatever object their am- -_
bition might have in view, they chore rather to ac-
quire it by political address, than to seize it openly,
and by force of arms.

THE condu& of George the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfe&tly suitable
to the charafter of the family, in that age, dubi-
ous, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he'
afiilted the Queen Regent in her attempts to crufn
them. When their affairs put on a better afpeEt,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by
each of the contending parties; both conpived at
his encroachments in the North; and, by artifice
and force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added
every day to the exorbitant power and wealth
which he possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and autho-

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's, with the great-
eft jealousy and concern, and confidered him as a
rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish
religion seemed to give him a preferable title.
Personal injuries soon increased the mifunder-
standing occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The
Queen having determined to reward the services
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him
an Earl, he made choice of Mar, as the place
whence he hould take his title; and, that he might
be better able to support his new honour, bestowed
upon him, at the fame time, the lands of thatSeb. t0.
name. These were part of the royal demesnes *, * Crawf.
but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for Peer. 297.
several years, to keep poffefion of them -. On this t Buh.
occasion, the Earl, not only complained, with ome 334.
reason, of the lots which he sustained, but had

real

Boor. Ill. real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a for-

midable neighbour into the heart of his territories,
562z v.-ho might be able to rival his power, and excite

his oppressed vassals to shake off his yoke.
Ju=e 27. A incident, which happened soon after, en-

crealed and confirmed Huntlv's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, andt Lord Ogilvie, had
a dilpute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened
unfortunately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh,
and being both attended with armed followers,
a cuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was danger-
oufly wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates
seized both the offenders, and the Queen command-
ed them to be strictly confined. Under any re-
gular government, such a breach of public peace
and order would expose the person offending, to
certain punishment. At this time, ome severity
was necessary, in order to vindicate the Queen's
authority from an insult, the most heinous which
had been offered to it, fmce her return into Scot-
land. But in an age accustomed to license and
anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her power
in ordering them to be keptin custody, was deemed
an at of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each
partr began to convene their vassals and dependants,
in order to overawe, or to frustrate the decisions of

* Kciti, justice*. Mean while, Gordon made his escape out
223. of prison, and fiving into Aberdeenfhire, corn-

plained loudly of the indignity with which he had
been treated; and as all the Queen's aions were,
at this juncture, imputed to the Earl of Mar, this 3
added not a little to the resentment, which Huntly
had conceived against that nobleman.
Aug7. AT the very time when these passions fermented,

with the utmost violence, in the minds of the
Earl of Huntly and his family, the Queen happened
to set our on a progress into the northern parts of
the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of i

Mar

Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other leaders ofBoos IIH.
that party. The pretence of the Queen, in a "
country where no name greater than the Earl of 1562.
IHuntly's had been heard of, and no power superior
to his had been exercised, for many years, was an
event, of itself, abundantly mortifying to that
haughty nobleman. But while the Queen was en-
tirely under the dire-tion of Mar, all her ations
were more apt to be misrepresented, and construed
into injuries; and a thousand circumitances could
not but occur to awaken Huntly'sjealoufy, to offend
his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst
the agitations of so many violent passions, orme
eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the North, Huntly employ-
ed his wife, a woman capable of executing the com-
mission with abundance of dexterity, to ooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should
again deliver himself into the hands of justice, and
rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to
do so; and being enjoined by the Qeen to enter
hi:nfelf prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised
likewise to obey that command. Lord Erskine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this fort.
The Queen's severity, and the place in which she
appointed Gordon to be confined, were interpreted
to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented
the hatred of the Gordons againit him.

MEAN time, Sir John Gordon let out towards sep?. .
Stirling; but instead of performing his promise to
the Queen, made his escape from his guards, and
returned to take the command of his followers,
who were rising in arms, all over the north.
These were deitined to second and improve the
blow, by which his father proposed secretly, and
at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and- Maitland,

his

BooK III. his principal adversaries. The time and place so:

,'-~ó' perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently ap-

52. pointed; but the executing of it was wonderfully

prevented, by ome of those unforeseen accidents,
which so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and

*Keith, to intimidate the hearts of afaflins*. His own
230. house at Strathbogie was the last and most conve-

nient scene, appointed for committing the intended
violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen
heard of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and
refuing, in the first transports of her indignation, to
enter under the father's roof, by that unfortunate

t Knox, expression of her resentment, saved her Ministers
a.earms from unavoidable deftrution t.
against the THE ill success of there efforts of private revenge
Queen. precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the

Queen was entirely under the direction of his rivals,
it was impossible to work their ruin, without violat-
ing the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates a-
gainft her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the town,
which was open and defenceless; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl'sfol-

, Crawf. lowers t. The utmost consternation seized the
Officers of Queen, who was attended by a very slender train.
Sr; te, 87,
gse ''7, She every moment expected the approach of the re-

bels, and some ships were already ordered into the
river to secure her escape. The loyalty of the Mon-
roes, Frazers, Mackintoshes, and ome neighbour-
ing clans, who took arms in her defence, saved her
from this danger. By their assistance, he even for-
ced the catfle to surrender, and inflicted On the Go-
vernor the punishment which his insolence deserved.

THIS open act of disobedience was the occasion

of a measure more galling to Huntly than any
the Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erskine,
having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,

Stewart

Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame BooK II.
time Mary conferred upon him the title of Earl of 6
Murray, with the estate annexed to that dignity,
which had been in the possession of the Earl 6f
Huntly since the year I548 *. From this he con- Crawf.
cluded that his family was devoted to deftruaion; Peer. 359.
and dreading to be stripped, gradually, of those
poleffions, v.hich in reward of their services, the
gratitude of the Crown had bestowed on himself
or his ancestors, he no longer disguised his inten-
tions, but, in defiance of the Queen's procla-
mation, openly took arms. Instead of yielding
those places of strength, which Mary required him
to surrender, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces
the parties which he dispatched to take possession
of them t; and he himself, advancing with a con- + Knox,
liderable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which 3 '9
place the Queen was now returned, filled her small
court with consternation. Murray had only a
handful of men in whom he could confide $. In Keith,
order to form the appearance of an army, he was 230'
obliged to call in the assistance of the neighbouring
barons; but as most of there either'favoured Hunt-
ly's designs, or flood in awe of his power, from them
no cordial or ee ual -rvice could be expected.

WITH these troops, however, Murray, who Ocober
could gain nothing by delay, marched briskly to- 28.
:rards the enemy. He found them at Corrichie,
polled to great advantage; he commanded his
northern aflbciates instantly to begin the attack;
but on the first motion of the enemy, they treache-
roufly turned their backs; and Hunt-l's followers,
throwing aside their spears, and breaking their
ranks, drew their fwvords, and rushed forward to
I he pursuit. It was then, that Murray, gave proof He is de-
both of steady courage, and of prudent condut. eated by

the Earl of
He stood immoveable, on a rising ground, with the Murray.

ifinall

BOOR 11. small but trusty body of his adherents, who pre-

V~ ifenting their pears to the enemy, received them
6z. with a determined resolution, which they little ex-

pected. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In every
civil commotion, the superiority of the latter has
been evident, and has always decided the contest.
On this occasion, the irregular attack of Huntly's
troops was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion.
Before they recovered from the confusion occasioned
by this unforeseen resistance, those who had begun
the flight, willing to regain their credit wi':h the
victorious party, fell upon them, and compleated
the rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely cor-
pulent, was trodden to death in the pursuit. His
ions, Sir John and Adam, were taken, and Murray
returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

THE trial of men taken in actual rebellion against

their Sovereign was extremely ihort. Three days
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at
Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned on
account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had
been privy to his father's designs, was seized in the
ibuth; and, upon trial, found guilty of treason;
but, through the Queen's clemency, the punih-
inent was remitted. The first Parliament proceed-
ed against this great family, with the utmost ri-
gour of law, and reduced their power and fortune
to the lowest ebb *.

As

a This confp-racy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the mnof in-

:ricate and rmylerious passages in the Scottish hiltory. As it was
a tranilaaion purely domeltic, and in which the Englilh were
little intere(ted, few original papers concerning it have been
found in Ceci.'s Col ecion, the great torehoufe of evidence an'
information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan fippoles Mary to have formed a design about tiis
titme, of deflraying lMuray, and of employing the power i

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most im- BOOK 11r.
Fortant event of this year, it would have been im- -

1562.

proper

:.e E l of HIunly for this purpose. But his account of this
l..!ole rtanfacticn appears to be lb void of truth, and even of
; ,tatiliy, as to delerve no fe ious exanIinition. At that time,
'lv:y wanted power. .,nd seens to have had o inclination to
;,.ii!:it any ast of violence upon her brother.

i o other hyppti'ltes have been advanced, in order to ex-
in this miatter; but rhey appear to be equally removed from

I. It cahnot well be conceived, that the Qieeh's journey to
!ti. noirh as a fcheiii concerted by Murray, in order t ruin
t!h Eil of Huntly. r. H-lulrly. had reliiled at court almolt ever
,sce the Qeen's retuin, Keith, 198 Append. 175, &c,
Tr.is was the proper place in which to have fieized limn. To
st(ack him in Aberdeenflire, the leat of his power, and in the
nidtt of his valials, vas a project equally ablurdl and hazardous.
2 The Queen was not accompanied with a body of troops,
capable ofattempting any thing against Huntly by violence; her
irain wns not more numerous, than was usual in tilles of greatefl
tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3. There remain two original letters
with regard to this conlpiracy, one from Randolph the Englith
Reiident, and another from Maitland, both directed to Cecil.
They talk of Huntly's teafures as notoriouny treasonable. Ran-
dolph entions his repeated attempts to affaflinate Murray,
&c. No hint is given of any previous resolution, formed by
Mary's Minilters to ruin Huntly and his family; Had any such
de¢ign ever exilled) it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it
nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the Englih
secretary. Keiths 229, 232;

I1. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for
[izing the Queen, and her miniflers, seems to be no less im-
probable. On the Queen's arrival in te North, he laboured,
ill good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his on. Knot, 318. 2. He met the Queen, firlt at Aberdeen,
and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any luch treasonable resolution. Knox,
1i8. 3. His conduct was ii relblute and wavering, like that of
amllan uilconcerted by an unf refeen danger, not like one exe-
cuting a concerted plan. 4. The molt coniderable persons of
ti clan fubnitted to the Queen, and found surety to obey her
tomntands. Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previofly deter-
mined to rife in arms against the Queen, or to seize her Ministers,
it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal follow-
trs, nor would they have deserted him in this manners
Vol. I. R For

Boors III. proper to interrupt the narrative, by taking noticeof
^6/2 lesser tranfa'tions, which may now be related with

62. "equal propriety.

An inter- I- the beginning of summer, Mary, who was de-
vie- be- firous of entering into a more intimate correfpon-
tween "E!i-dence and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed
zabeth and
Mary po- Maltland to desire a peronal interview with her,
posed. somewhere in the North of England. As this pro-

pofal could not be rejected with decency, the time,
the place, and the circumstances of the meetingwere
instantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, 2. rival,
who outshone herself, so far, in beauty, and grace-
fulness of peron ; and who excelled so eminently,
in all the arts of insinuation andaddrefs. Underpre-
tence of being confined to London, by the attention
which she was obliged to give to the civil wan
Keith, in France, he put offthe interview for that season*,

and prevented her subje&s from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whose appearance, and beha-
viour, The envied, and had ome reason to dread.

DURING this year, the Assembly of the church

TDne 2-, met twice. In both these meetings, were exhibited
5. many complaints of the poverty and dependence of

the church; and many murmurs againif the neg-
ligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed
to collect, and to distribute the small fund, appro-

:-. , priated for the maintenance of preachers-. A
'' -;- petition, craving redress of their grievances, was

prfesnted to the Queen; but without any effect.|
TIherc was no reason to expect that Mary would
diicover any forwardness to grant the requests

i'.r here rca.ona, we have, on the one hand, vindicated tie
.:o 'Ioflu;ray ironll any deliberate intention of ruining the fa

oii'y oi GorJon ; and on ith other hand, we have imputed th

\iolent condud or the Earl of Huntlv, to a udden start of rg
len:ment. without chargieg hi:n w.ith any premeditated purpose
of r bellion. .

· . fucl

fch fiupplicants. And as her ministers, though all BooK III:
imolt zealous Protestants, were themselves growing 6
,ich on the inheritance of the church, they were
qua;lly regardlefs.of the indigence and demands of
their brethren.

MARY had now continued above two years in a 'i-
ihtc of widowhood. Her gentle administration (ioisawith
hi:l iecured the hearts of her subjects, who were regard
ilpatient for her marriage, and wihed the Crown r the
to dclfcnd in the right line from their ancient Q,,en's
Monarchs. She herielf was the most amiable
womn of the age, and the fame of her accom-
Do!ifhmcnts, together with the favourable circum-
hnce of her having one kingdom already in her
oflciion, and the piofpct of mounting the throne
ir another, prompted many different Princes to
iolicit an alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by its
iiuation, threw so much weight and power into
whatever scale it fell, that all Europe waited with
solicitude for Mary's determination; and no event
in that age excited stronger political fears and jea-
loulies; none interested more deeply the paflions of
ieveral Princes, or gave rife to more contradictory
iatrigues, than the marriage of the Scottish Queen.

T":: Princes of the house of Austria, remember- Sheis oli-
¢i what vast projets the French had founded on di'tre t

b

ieir former alliance with the Queen of Scots; and Princes.
though the unexpected death, first of Henry and
then of Francis, had hindered these from taking
eFrt, yet if Mary should agair make choice of a
husband among the French Princes, the fame
efigns might be revived and prosecuted with bet-
;r success.

Is order to prevent this, the Emperor entered in- By the
o a negotiation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who A ch Iuk
ad proposed to marry the Scottish Queen to the
Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son. The mat-
!:r was communicated to Mary; and Melvil, who,
a that time, attended the Elector Palatine, was

RI 2 commanded

BooK II1. commanded to enquire into the character and fitua.
-'"' tion of the Archduke *
' Me63. PPILIP II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's
63, 6, failing once more into the hands of France, envied
Keith, his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of so important
239. See a prize; and as his own insatiable ambition grasped
Aopend.
N. 11

V.at all the Kingdoms of Europe, he employed his

BrDon ambassador at the French court, to solicit the Prin-
_r)los of ces of Lorrain in behalf of his on Don Carlos, at
'pal, . that time, the heir of all the extensive dominions,
6, el. which belonged to the Spanish monarchy t.

\t. a CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand,
1 bor. dreaded the marriage of the Scottish Queen with

,- ,!h-' any of the Austrian Princes, which would have ad-
rLe of ded so much to the power and pretensions of that

. ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of

Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an alliance,
which, by securing them the proteEtion of the Em.
peror or King of Spain, would give new boldness
to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set
the power of the Crown, which they already rival-
led, at open defiance: And as she was afraid that
these splendid proposals of the Austrian family
would dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dif-
patched Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in
marriage the Duke of Anjou, the brother of heb
former hufoand, who soon after mounted th

X Caien. throne of France t.
4', . MARY atent;-ely weighed the pretensions of f

l!','.; ma.:nv rivals. Thr archduke had little to recom

m,: .- mend him, but his high birth. The example o
- TrI-erv XII.v \*i

. w. n

a w aning againfi contracting a

m-rr:a ,-? t r-'-: brother of her former hufbandj
ncr co 'ld !c ear the thoughts of appearing il
Fr.:-e. :n . rank! inferior to that which he had for{

c:'i-- 'tidi that kingdom. She listened there

-, v-,rh rrtialit, to the Spanilh propofitionsi

-. .
:' .-. -;,e c t .i.ch vafc power and dominion

flattere

.attered the ambition of a young and apiring Booic Il.
Princcfs. "-"-

THREE several circumstances, however, concur- 1563
red to divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign
alliance.

THE first of these was the murder of her uncle
theDuke of Guiie. The violence and ambition of
that nobleman had involved his country in a civil
,ar; which was conducted with furious animosity,
and various fucccfs. At last the Duke laid siege to
Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and
he had reduced that city to the last extremity, when
be was assassinated by the frantic zeal of Poltrot.
This blow proved fatal to the Qeen of Scots.
The young Duke was a minor ; and the Cardinal
of Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing, wanted
that undaunted and enterprising courage, which
rendered the ambition of his brother so formidable.
Catherine inflead of encouraging the ambition, or
furthering the pretensions of her daughter-in-law,
.ook pleasure in mortifying the one, and in difap-
pointing the other. In this situation, and without
.uch a protector, it became necessary for Mary to
contrach her views, and to proceed with caution;
and whatever profpet of advantage might allure
ker, he could venture upon no dangerous or
doubtful measure.

THE second circumfrance, which weighed with Thevicw,
Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England. ofElza-
The marriage of the Scottish Queen interested Eli-
ubeth more deeply than any other Prince; and
..e observed all her deliberations concerning it
·irh the most anxious attention. She herfelfteems
early to have formed a resolution of living unmar-
ried, and {he discovered no small inclination to im-
pFfe the fame law on the Queen of Scots. She had
already experienced what use might be made of
Mary's power and pretensions, to invade her domi-

R3 ion,

BooK III. nions, and to disturb her possession of the Crown,
v--~ The death of Francis II. had happily delivered her
163 3 from this danger, which she determined to guard

against for the future, with the utmost care. As
the reflefs arrbition of the Austrian Princes, the
avowed and bigotted patrons of the Catholic fu-
perfrition, made her, in a particular manner, dread
their neighbourhood, she inftruEted Randolph, to
remonstrate, in the strongest terms, against any
alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, that
as she herself would confider such a match to be a
breach of the personal friendship, in which they
were so happily united; so the English nation
would regard it, as the dissolution of that confede-
racy which now subsisted between the two king-
doms: That, in order to preserve their own reli-
gion and liberties, they would, in all probability
take tome ftep prejudicial to her right of fuccefon,
vhich, as she well knew, they neither wanted
power nor pretences to invalidate, and set aside.
This threatning was accompanied with a promise,
but expressed in very ambiguous terms, that
Mary's choice of a husband should prove agreeable
to the English Nation, Elizabeth would appoint
proper persons to examine her title to the succession,
and, if well founded, command it to be publickly
recognized. She observed, however, a mysterious
silence concerning the person on whom she wilhcd
the choice of the Scottish Queen to fall. The re-
vealing of this secret was reserved for tome futur
negotiation. Mean while she threw out some ob-
fcure hints, that a native of Britain, or one not
princely rank, would be her safest and most inot-

Keith, fenfive choice'. An advice offered with such a
42, 24;. air of superiority and conmmrand, mortified, no

doubt, the pride of the Scottish Queen. But, un
der her present circumtances, she was obliged to
bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign affl-l
are. and irnenrr upon rt e Enli:n ifh ucli-onL,

arcat object of her wishes and ambition, it became BOOK 11I.
nccefilry to court a rival, whom, without manifest
imprudence, he could not venture to offend.

The inclination of her own fubjeds was another, The feli-
ncl not the least considerable circumstance, which Le'1ts of

her own

called for Mary's attention at this conjun&ure. tjer.
They had been taught, by the fatal experiment of
her former marriage, to dread an union with any
Treat Prince, whose power might be employed to
oppress their religion and liberties. They trembled
at the thoughts of a match with a foreigner and
ir the Crown should be ftrengthcned by new domi-
nions or alliances, they foresaw that the royal pre-
rogative would oon be ft-etched beyond its ancient
and legal limits. Their eagerness to prevent this
could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford
them her aid, towards obftru&ing a measure so dif-
agreeable to herself. 'Twas easy for them to seize
the person of the Sovereign. By the assistance of
the English fleet, they could render it difficult for
any foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The Ro-
man Catholics, now an inconsiderable party in the
kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of
Huntly, could give no obstruction to their designs.
T'o what violent extremes, the national abhorrence
it a foreign yoke might have been carried, is ma-
,ifeft from the tranfacions both previous, and sub-
iequent to the present period.

FOR these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time,
all thoughts of foreign alliance~ and seemed wil-
ling to sacrifice her own ambitioj.ain order to re-
move the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own subjects.

THE Parliament met this year, for the first time, A parlia-
since the Queen's return into Scotland. Mary's ad- mant held

*·~ *.n ~ * -1~ ~i

-i * ^ -M y 26.

miftration had hitherto been extremely popular.
Her Ministers possessed the confidence of the na-

R 4 tion,

Boo III. tion ; and, by consequence, the proceedings of
---- that assembly were conducted with perfect unani
' 6' mity. The grant of the earldom of Murray to the

Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the Earl of
Huntly, and several of his vassals and dependants,
were attainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of
Grange, and ome of his accomplices in the mur-

Knox, der of Cardinal Beatoun, was reversed * : the ad
53c- of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh,

received the royal fanclion. But Mary, who had
determined never to ratify that treaty, took care
that this sanction -tould not be deemed any ac-
knowledgmnent of its validity; he granted her con.
lent merely in condescension to the Lords in Parlia-
ment, who, on their knees, besought her to allay
the jealousies and apprehensions of herfubjec&, by

t Spct,- such a gracious law t,
w-ooclS No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to
Nothing procure the Queen's assent to the laws establishing
deeimin- ' "

l

ed ith the Protefiant religion. Her Ministers, though
regard to zealous Protestants themselves, were aware that
reiig:cn. this could not be urged without manifest danger

and imprudence. She had consented, through
their influence, to tolerate and protec the reformed
doctrine. They had even prevailed on her to im-
prison and prosecute the Archbilhop of St. An-
drew's, and Prior of Whithorn, for celebrating

t Keith, mas contrary to her proclamation 3. Mary, how-
239. ever, was frill passionately devoted to the Romish

fuperffition; and though, from political motives,
she had granted a temporary protection to opinions,
which he difappoved, there were no grounds to
hope that she -would agree to eftabliih them for
perpetuity. The moderation of those who
prorefed it, was the best method for reconci-
ling the Queen to the Protestant religion. Time
,might abate her bigotry. Her preudices rnmighf
wear off gradually, and at laf1ft i migrht i'.!d

to the wishes of her people, what their impor- Booc 111.
tunity or their violence could never have extorted. --v-
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in 563.
Parliament; and to defeat all these, by such a fruit-
less and ill-timed application to the Queen, would
!hve been equally injurious to individuals, and de-
rimental to the public.
T'HE zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all Which of-

fends the

thele considerations of policy. Eager and impa- lergys
tint, it brooked no delay: Severe and inflexible, it
would condescend to no compliances. The lead-
ing men of that order insisted, that this opportunity
ns establishing religion by law, was not to be ne-
glcated. They pronounced the moderation of the
courtiers apoftacy; and their endeavours to gain
the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile.
Knox solemnly renounced the friendship of the Earl
i,,' Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so
blindly zealous for her service, as to become re-
gardlefs of those objects which he had hitherto es-
teemed most sacred. This rupture, which is a
itrong proof of Murray's sincere attachment to the
Qlcen at that period, continued above a year and
an half *.Knox,

THi- preachers being disappointed by the men3
in whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. These
choed more loudly than ever, with declarations
igainft idolatry; with difinal presages concerning
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with
bitter reproaches against those, who, from intereit-
cd motives, had deserted that cause, which they
(n!ce reckoned it their honour to support. The And'orca-
r'ple, inflamed by such vehement declamations, ao"ns a tu-
cilich were dictated by a zeal more sincere than :.g ahe
prudent, proceeded to rafn and unjustifiable ats people.
'r violence. During the Queen's absence, on a
progress into the weft, mass continued to be ceie- A\gufli
:t'd in her chapel at Holy-rood houli. Th:

iunititui,

Boor I. multitude of those who openly retorted thither,

gave great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh,
1563. who, being free from the restraint which the royal

pretence ipofed, assembled in a riotous manner,
internrpted the ;:rvice, and filled such as were pre-
lent, with the utmost consternation. Two of the
ringleaders in this tumult were seizcd, and a day

o
33i appointed for their trial .

Knox tried KNOX, who eemed the zeal of these persons
on thatac- laudable, and their conduct meritorious, confider.
conn;, but ed them as uffcrers in a good cause; and in order
Ocqobe d. to screen them from danger, he issued circular let-

rers, requiring all who professed the true religion,
or were concerned for the preservation of it, to a-
iemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial, that, by
their presence, they might comfort and assist their
+tbid26. distressed brethren +. One of there letters fell into

the Queen's hands. To assemble the fubjeds
without the authority of the Sovereign, was con-
ftrued to be treason, and a resolution was taken to

Decab. prosecute Knox for that crime, before the Privy
5'. Council. Happily for him, his judges were not

only zealous Protestants, but the very men, who,
during the late commotions, had openly refified,
and let at defiance the Queen's authority. It was
under precedents, drawn from their own condud,
that Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor
would it have been an eafv matter for these Coun-
fellors to have found out a dillinf&ion, by which
they could censure him, without condemning them-
Jclves. After a long hearing, he was unanimoufli
acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and President
cf the Court of Sefflon, a zealous Papist, heartily
concurred with the other Counsellors in this deci-

' no, sion ; a remarkable sac, which hews the unset-
343. tied !tate of government in that age; the low con-

dition to which regal authority was then funk; and
th'e impunir- with which fubjets might invade

those

those rights of the Crown, which are now held Boo II.
lacred. t

THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued Nv564.

still to be the object of attention and intrigue. ons wirh
I1hough Elizabeth, even while she wished to dirc regard
Mary, treated her with a difguitful reserve; though t the
the kept her, without necelfity, in a state of sus- iQ, ere
penle; and hinted often at the person, whom she
icftined to be her hulband, without directly men-
tioning his name ; yet Mary framed all her ations
to exprels such a prudent refpet for the English
Queen, that foreign princes began to imagine he
had given herself up implicitly to her direction *. + Keith,
The profped of this union alarmed Catherine of 248.
Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure,
all along, in doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots;
though soon after the Duke of Guise's death, she
had put upon her a most mortifying indignity, by
topping the payment of her dowry, by depriving
her lubject the Duke of Chatelherault of his pension,
and by bestowing the command of the Scottilh
Guards on a Frenchman t ; she resolved, however, t Id. 244.
to prevent this dangerous conjunEion of the Britilh
Qleens. For this purpole, ihe now employed all
her art to appease Mary $, to whom ihe had given See Ap-
lb many caues o of ofence. The arrears of her pendix.
dowry were instantly paid; more puncual remit- No.VIIT.
tances were promised for the future; and offers
made, not oly to restore, but to extend the pri-
vileges of the Scottish nation in France. It was
ealy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of this
sudden change; she well knew the character of her
mother-in-law, and laid little flrefs upon professions
of f-iendfhip, which came from a Princeis of such
a false and unfeeling heart.

THE negotiation with England, relative to the

marriage, suffered no interruption, from this ap-
plication of the French Qeuen, As Mary, in com-

pliance

Boor ll. pliance to her subjects, and pressed by the ftrorngft

motives of interest, determined speedily to marry,

~'l4' Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable
Eliz:be:h silence, which she had hitherto affected. The fe-
reco.n- crer was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert
mzndsLei-Dudiey, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared
cefte-o:- to be the happy man, whom she had chosen to bh
hota.-.d the hulband of a Queen courted by so many
*Keirh, Princes .
Z5'- ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-

markable in the choice of her Ministers; in diftin-
guifhing her favourites, those great qualities were
lets conspicuous. She was influenced in two cales
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their
capacity for bufineis, their knowledge, their pru-
dence, were the talents to which alone he attended,
in choofing her Ministers; whereas beauty and
gracefulness of person, polished manners, and
courtly address, were the accompliihments on which
flhe bestowed her favour. She acted in the one cafe
with the wisdom of a Queen, in the other he dif-
covered the weakness of a woman. To this Lei-
cefter owed his grandeur. Though remarkable
neither for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of
abilities, the Queen's partiality difinguifhed him
on every occasion. She railed him to the highest
honours, she bestowed on him the most important
employments, and manifested an affeEtion so dif-
proportionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of
that age, it could be accounted for only by the

_ ca;.- power or planetary influence +.
den, ;49. THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not
Mary -c.- well bear the first overture of a match with a sub-
ies at je&. Her own rank, the splendor of her former

marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of lo
many powerful Princes, crowded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dii
refpe&ful Elizabeth's proposal was. She diffem-
bled, however, with the English Resident; and

though

though she declared in strong terms, what a de- BooKr IIL
gradation she would deem this alliance, which '-
brought along with it no advantage, that could L564.
uftify such neglect of her own dignity, she men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in
terms full of refpe . Keith,

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wish that Ltibeth'

the proposal should be received in any other man- views in
ner. After the extraordinary marks he had given recoi:-
of her own attachment to Leicester, and while he mending
was still in the very height of favour, it is not pro- l
bable he could think seriously of bestowing him
upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade,
but only to amuse Mary t. Almost three years + Mclvil,
were elapsed since her return into Scotland; and 104, Os.
though solicited by her fubjeEts, and courted by
the greatest Princes in Europe, she had hitherto
been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the arti-
sices of Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the Eng-
lifh Queen could have engaged Mary to liften to
her proposal in favour of Leicester, her power over
this creature of her own would have enabled her to
protract the negotiation at pleasure; and by keep-
ing her rival unmarried, she would have rendered
the profpea of her fucceflion less acceptable to the
English.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely deli-
cate, and embarrassing. To gain possession of the
most amiable woman of the age, to carry away
this prize from so many contending Princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might
have flattered the ambition of a subjec, much more
considerable than he. 1-e saw all there advanta-
ges, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their
ftll impression on him. But, without'offending
Elizabeth, he durst not venture on the most distant
discovery of his sentiments, or take any ftep to-
wards facilitating his acquisition of obje&ts so wor-
thy of desire,

ON

BoOK I1f. ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards
t-~--1 him, which he was at no pains to conceal", might

564.

inspire him with hopes of attaining the supreme rank
93, 94. in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scotland. Eli-

zabeth had often declared, that nothing but her re-
solution to lead a single life, and his being born her
own subjet, would have hindered her from choofing
the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such confi-
derations of prudence are, however, often fur-
mounted by love; and Leicester might flatter him-
self, that the violence of her affection would at
length triumph both over the maxims of policy
and the cruples of pride. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the propoial of his
marriage with the Scottish Queen to be a proje&
for his defiruction; and he imputed it to the malice
of Cecil, who, under the pecious pretence of do-
ing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good
- Ibid. opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

1o. A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen,

who dreaded its success; listened to by another,
who was secretly determined against it; and scarce
desired by the man himself, whole interest and re-
putation it was calculated, in appearance, to pro-
mote; could not, under so many unfavourable cir-
cumftances, be brought to a fortunate issue. Both
Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to at
with equal dissimulation. The former, notwith-
ltanding her fears of losing Leicester, solicited
warmly in his behalf. The latter, though she be-
gan about this time to cast her eyes upon another
subject of England, did not, at once, venture si-
nally to reject Elizabeth's favourite.

ariy. e- THE person towards whom Mary began to turn

rrtains 1
teughts her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,
o marry- eldest son of the Earl of Lenox. That nobleman,
ing Lord having been driven out of Scotland under the re-
WD-i7. gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in

banishment for twenty years. His wife, Lady

Margaret

Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous ri- BoK III.
val in her claim upon the English succession. She
was the daughter of Margaret, the eldest filter of 1564
Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
Queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of
succession was not fettled with the fame accuracy,
as at present. Time, and the decision of almost
every cafe that can possibly happen, have at last in-
troduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
is subjet to all the variety, arising from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imagina-
ry analogies. Lady Lenox, though born of a e-
cond marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daugh-
ter, Mary only the grandaughter of Margaret.
This was not the only advantage over Mary which
Lady Lenox enjoyed. She was born in England,
and by a maxim of law in that country, with re-
gard to private inheritances, " whoever is not born
in England, or at least of parents, who, at the
time of his birth, were in the obedience of the
King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in
the Kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an English * Carte,
lawyer, produced in a treatise, which he publifled Hil.t of
at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the ng4 v.
right of fucceflion to the Crown. In a private
cause, there pretexts might have given rile to a
long and doubtful litigation; where a Crown was
at itake, such nice disputes and subtleties were to
be avoided with the utmost care. If Darnly should
happen to contract an alliance with any of the pow-
erful families in England, or should publickly pro-
fess the Protestant religion, there plausible and po-
pular topics might be so urged, as to prove fatal to
the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to
prevent any danger from that quarter, had early

endeavoured

Boon I. endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correfpondenc
<"-''with the family of Lenox. In the year 1562*
, 564. both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taker
389. into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on account o

their holding a secret correspondence with the Scot.
tif Queen.

Elizabeth FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the
peaetly difficulties, which would attend her marrying a so-
wirh this. reign Prince, she entered into a still closer connexi.
t Id. 396. on with the Earl of Lenox t, and invited him to

return into Scotland. This she endeavoured to
conceal from Elizabeth; but a tranfaftion of so
much importance did not escape the notice of that
discerning Princess. She observed, but did not in-
terrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfetly
with her views, concerning Scottish affairs. She
was pleated to fee the pride of the Scottish Queen
stoop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a subjed
to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite
her jealousy, or her fears. His father's estate lay
in England, and by means of this pledge, she hoped
to keep the negotiation entirely in her own hands,
to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which
she had planned out, if her recommendation of
Leicester had been more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no sub-

ject of one kingdom could pass into the other with-
out the permission of both Sovereigns; no sooner
did Lenox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the Earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her license to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, she gave him
letters, warmly recommending his person and cause

i Keith, to Mary's friendship and protection t. But, at the
255, 268. fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her

tranfacions with regard to Scotland, in some de-
gree of perplexity and contradicion; she warned
Mary, that this indulgence to Lenox might prove

fatal

fatal to herself, as his return could not fail of re- BOOK IM'
-iving the ancient animosity between him and the r
'ilc of Hamilton. 2564.
Tr!!'is admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and
,'r:sY from her an angry reply, which occasioned,
:.:: iome time, a total interruption of all correfpon-
c,:nce between the two Queens . Mary was not » Keih
a iittl alarmed at this; she both dreaded the es- 253.
,:.; of Elizabeth's refenrment, and felt sensibly Mclv- S.

Ji: diadvantage of bing excluded from a free in-
i;'courfc with England, where her Ambassadors

':d, ial along, carried on, with some fuccels, secret
-o;oi;ations, which increaedl the number of her
arltizans, and paved her way towards the throne.
In order to remove the causes of the present dif-
ctulrty, Melvil was sent express to the court of
inlland. He found it no difficult matter to bring'
..bout a reconcilement; and soon re-established the
ppeariance, but not the confidence of friendflipi
w.'hich was all that had subsisted, for some time,
between the two Queens.
DURING this negotiation, Elizabeth's professions
of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in the name of
Lis Mistress, were made in the language of the
'arimeft and most cordial friendship. But what
IMlvil truly obierves, with refpeE to Elizabeth, may
!b extended without injustice to both Queens.
'; The-e was neither plain dealing, nor upright mean-
:ng, but great dissimulation, envy and fear t." t1 Melv.

LExox, however, in consequence of the license °4
"ich lie had obtained, set out for Scotland, and Lex in
as received by the Queen, not only with the re- Scotland.
.'cr due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
-y)al family, but treated with a diftinguifned f4mi-
i:a'ity, which could not fail of inspiring him with
rT.re elevated hopes. The rumour of his son's
:.rriage to the Queen began to spread over the
;:!ngdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turn-
vOL. I. S ed

Boon III. ed upon him, as the father of their future Master
"'-'" The Duke of Chatelherault was the firif to take the

6 alarm. He confidered Lenox, as the ancient here-

ditary enemy of the houie of Hamilton; and, in
his grandeur, saw the ruin of himfelfand his friends,
But the Queen interposed her authority to prevent
any violent rupture, and employed all her influence
to bring about an accommodation of their diffe-

Keh, rences .
-29. THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread.

ed Lenox's return, from an apprehension, that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lenox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop -.

+ Id. 263. AFTER thee preliminary steps, Mary ventured
Not. (O) to call a meeting of Parliament. The at of for-
Decemb. feiture, passed against Lenox in the year 545,

was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the

t See AD- honours and estate of his ancestors t.
-nldiT, THE ecclesiastical tranfaaions of this year were
N lx. not considerable. In the assemblies of the church,
Tune ;.
DucC 2' the ame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the

fame representations concerning the poverty of the
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen
made to these, and her promises of redress, were

; :;c - -- more faisfying to the Protestants, than any they
: ' i'ci-ii- had hitherto obtained *. But, notwithstanding her
o.:; o, :e declarations in their favour, they could not help
Qtceen harbouring many fuipicions concerning Mary's
2eal for
Popery. deiigns againfct their religion. She had never

X ti:h once conitnced to hear any preacher of the reform-
513, 539 ed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigot-

ted attachment to the Romish faith. The genius
of that superstition, averse, at all times, fromni

toleration,

tolneration, was i that age, fierce and unrelenr- BoOK'II
'. Mary had given her friends on the Continent "
, r':ted aifurances of her relolution to re-eftablii '64
.; [ l Cholic church . She had industriously a- * Carte,

.*::,. every opportunity of ratifying the as of vol. ii
/.:liarment of 156o, in favour of the Rrformation. 4'5.
;,.a.he protection, which, evei since her return,
.-, had afbrded the Protestant religion, was mere-
: tit-uilporary, and declared by her own proclama-
:;,., to be of force, only " till she should take
;;i.e final order in the matter of religion t-."t Keith,
'i:c vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive 50'f, 510
Ic r:one of these circumstances. The cldnefs of
'l-ir principal leaders who were, a this time, en-
]ri!:o devoted to the court, added to their jealou-
sis and fears. These they uttered to the people,
in language which they esteemed suitable to the
necLiity of the times, which the Queen reckoned
.;ipech'tful, and insolent. In a meeting of the
Gcenolal Aemlbly, Maitland publickly accused
nox of teaching seditious doctrine, concerning
tih right of subjects to resist those Sovereigns, who
;rlpais against the duty which they owe to the
pooplc, iKnox was not backward to justify what
: had! taught. And upon this general dotrine
r,;.rfiftanc, so just in its own nature, but so de-
i.: in its application to particular cafes, there
rc:":.d a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
!:;;: and ciaractcr of both the disputants; the
ri;x fs of the former, embellished with learning,
tit prone ro flbtlety, the vigorous understanding

t;': ]a.:ter, delighting in bold sentiments. and fu- t Knoi
,erio;- o all fear '. 349.

i wo years had already been consumed, in fruit- t569

ins negotrations concerning the marriage of the ;tii' th

':tolfn Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- of Eiza-
i.ity to dilcern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- beth and
:i's proceedings, with refpec to that afi:i. But, ' ry
'.- der to ser the real intentions of the English ,,irtobo

S Quee -:ar ;.agS.

Boo. III. ed upon him, as the father of their future Master
'-^~ The Duke of Chatelherault was the first to take the

64. alarm. He confidered Lenox, as the ancient here-

ditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in
his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends.
But the Queen interposed her authority to prevent
any violent rupture, and employed all her influence
to bring about an accommodation of their diffe-

' Kei;h, rences *
29. THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread-

ed Lenox's return, from an apprehension, that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lenox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

+ Id. 263. AFTER there preliminary steps, Mary ventured
Not. () to call a meeting of Parliament. The a of for-
Deemb. feiture, passed against Lenox in the year 1545,

was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the

t See Ao- honours and estate of his ancestors j.
=cndiT, THE ecclesiastical tranfaaions of this year were
N° IX. not considerable. In the assemblies of the church,
Tune z;.
JDe. 2 the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the

fame representations concerning the poverty of the
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen
made to these, and her promises of redress, were

-1 - C'.-- more satisfying to the Protestants, than any they
: fo'ici- had hitherto obtained *. But, notwithstanding her
os o t'he declarations in their favour, they could not help
Qlenor harbouring many suspicions concerning Mary's
Popery. designs againit their religion. She had never
° Keih. once contented to hear any preacher of the reform-
;33, 539 ed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigot-

ted attachment to the Romish faith. The genius
of that superstition, averse, at all times, from

toleration,

toleration, was; in that age, fierce and unrelent- Bodr'IlI
;na, Mary had given her friends on the Continent /
,e eated assurances of her resolution to re-establish 1564.
:C. Catholic church *. She had industriously a- * Carte,
:'.!'i',: every opportunity of ratifying the ats of vol. ii,
j;.!liament of 56o, in favour of the Reformation. +'5.
.,-;.h -prote(tion, which, evel since her return,
.:- had afbrded the Protestant religior, was mere-
:; ieniporary, and declared by her own proclama-
:.on to be of force, only " till she should take
;i,.e final order in the matter of religion t."t Keith:
I'?c vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive 504 510.
ic none of there circumstances. The cldnefs of
riir principal leaders, who were, at this time, en-
ri!ly devoted to the court, added to their jealou-
fies and fears. These they uttered to the people,
in language which they esteemed suitable to the
neccflity of the times, which the Queerl reckoned
di.:rt'lpecful, and insolent. In a meeting of the
General Assembly, Maitland publickly accused
Knox of teaching seditious dodrine, corlceriing
r[h right of subjects to resist those Sovereigns, who
redpafs againit the duty which they owe to the
pop!e, Knox was not backward to justify what
he had tasight. And upon this general dotrine
r ;resistance, fojuft in its own nature, but so de-
i;:.,e in its application to particular cafess there
c,.;;:ld a debate, which admirably displays the ta;
k:.; and characer of both the disputants; the
i;rencis of the former, embellifed with learning,
bLit prone to hiibtlety, the vigorous understanding
Oth rt later, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu- i Knob
perior o all fear [; 349.

Two years had already been consumed in fruit- z565.
les negotiations concerning the marriage of the Dilimt',l'.

tion both

h.or;mn Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- of Eliza-

i;..ity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- beth aal
e.th's proceedings, with refpet to that affair. But, lary,
* order to set the real intentions of the. Englilh ardtoh r

S 2 Qu,ee rarriag.

Boon III. Queen in a clear light, and to bring her to ome
L- ~ explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at
F565 last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition

her right of succession to the Crown of England
was publickly acknowledged, she was ready to
yield to the solicitations of his Mistress in behalf

i Keit-, of Leicester t. Nothing could be farther than this
z69. from the mind and intention of Elizabeth. The

right of succession was a mystery, which, during
her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched,
and unexplained. She had promised, however,
when she first began to interest herself in the mar-
riage of the Scottish Queen, all that was now de-
manded, How to retreat with decency, howto
elude her former offer, was, on that account, not
a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained

permission to visit the court of Scotland, was ow-
ing, in all probability, to that embarrassment.
From the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lenox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Eli-
zabeth was no stranger to the ambitious hopes,
with which that young nobleman flattered himself.
She had received repeated advices from her Mini-
fters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to en-

Keith, terrain in his favour *. It was entirely in her pow-
259, 26J, er, to prevent his firring out of London. In the

p-efent conjuncture, however, nothing could be of
more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey in-
to Scotland. She had already brought one aor
upon the stage, who, under her management, had,
for a long time, amused the Scottish Queen. She
hoped, no leis abfolurely, to direc the motions of
Da-nl-, who was likewise her subjea; and again
~o i,-voie Mary in all the tedious intricacies of ne-
_oiation. These motives determined Elizabeth
ind her Ministers to yield to the solicitations of
I .?,' Lenox

Bur

BUT this deep laid fchemc was in a moment dif- BooK III.

c)ncel-red. Such unexpeted events, as the fancy '"_
,f poets ascribes to love, are, at ome times, really Darnly r-
produced by that paflion. An affair, which hadrives in
bin the objea of o many political intrigues, and Scotland,
h!td moved and interested o many Princes, was
at last decided by the sudden liking of two young
persons. Lord Darnly, was, at this time, in the
first bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and
cracefulnefs of person, he surpassed all his cotem-
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts as
.dd cafe and elegance to external form, and which
enabled it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary Gains the
v as of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full Queen's
power of there accomplihments. The impreffionhcart
v.'hich Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
from the time of their firit interview. The whole
business of the court was to arufe, and entertain
this illuitrious guest ; and in all those scenes of ,
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-369.
ther superficial and howy, appeared to great ad-
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
icane compleat; and inclination now prompted her
:0 conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which
!ad been flggefted by considerations merely po-
irical.

ELIZAETH, contributed, and perhaps not with-
'cot design, to increase the violence of this passion.
soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, flie, in re-
lorn to that message, whereby Mary had signified

'er willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an an-

:'ver in such terms, as plainly unravelled her ori-
ginal intention in that intrigue . She promised, if Keith,
:he Scottifi Queen's marriage with Leicester should 270.
:ake place, to advance him to great honours; but 5Pse
with regard to her title to the English fucceflion,
ie would neither susser any legal enquiry to be
:ade concerning it, nor permit it to be publicly

S 3 recognized,

BooK I:i. recognized, till she herself should declare her refo.
,---- lution never to marry. Notwithfianding Elizabeth's

former promiles, Mary had reason to expect every
thing contained in this reply; her high spirit, how-
ever, could not bear, with patience, such a crul;
dicov-erv of the contempt, the artifice, and mock-
ery, with which, under the veil of r-iendfhip, si:
had been so long abused. She burst into tears of
indignation, and exprefiTd, with the Lut!T1it bitter-
ness, her sense of that ditilnenuous cra-f, whlic

Keit-, had been employed to deceive her *.
Append. THE natural effect of this indignation was to ad
:59' to the impetuofiry with i:ich she pursued her own

fcherre. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love,
she observed no defecs in the man, whom he had
chosen; and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplifingr her design, with all the impa-
tience natural to those paifions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen,

the canon law made it necessary to obtain the Pope's
dispensation, before the celebration of the marriage.
For this purpose, Ihe early let on foot a negotiati-

T Carnd. on with the court of Rome .
396. SHE was busy at the fame time, in procuring
French the content of the French King and his mother.
court ap- Having communicated her design, and the motives
prove of which determined her choice, to Caftelnaul the
e n.arch. French Ambassador, he employed him, as the most

proper person, to bring his court to fall in with her
views. Among other argurments to this purpose,
Caftelnau -entioned Marv's attachment to Darnly,
which he repreienred to e so violent and deep-

; Cafe!-. rooted, that it was no longer in her own power to
461. break off the m:tch . Nor were the French Mi-

nifrers bac -.va.rd in encouraging Mary's paflon.
Her pride would never iloop to an alliance with a
subjec of France. By this chni-e, they were deli-
vered f :. 'i-; r rehenficp ,' r. tch. with an

o0

tf tie Austrian Princes, as well as the danger of BooK 11I.
i: dole an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly -v
protleled the Roman Catholic religion, this suited S6;
,he bigotted schemes which that court had adopted. Dartly
WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile so- difguits
i;lgn courts to a measure which fle had so much Ieveral of
at heart; Darnly, and his father, by their beha-tthenob!e.
;iour, were raising up enemies at home, to ob-
iRrut it. Lenox had, during the former part of
his life, discovered no great compass of abilities,
c; political wisdom and appears to have been a
:ran of a weak underifanding, and violent passions.
Darnly was not superior to his father in under-
landing, and all his passions were ill more impe-
ntous *. To these, he added that insolence, which * Keith,
the advantage of external form, when accompanied 272, 23,
with no quality more valuable, is apt to inspire.
Intoxicated with the Queen's favour, he began al-
ready to assume the haughtiness of a King, and to
put on that imperious air, which majesty itself can
Icarce render tolerable.

IT was by the advice, or at least with the content Partiru-
of Murray, and his party, that Lenox had beenlarly Mur-
invited into Scotland -; and yet, no sooner did he aKnox
acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he367.
began to enter into ecret cabals with those noble- Keith,
men, who were known to be avowed enemies to274'
Murray, and with regard to religion, to be either
neutrals, or favourers of Popery . Darnly still Keith,
miore imprudent, allowed ome rash expressions con- 272.
cerning those favours, which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him §. Id. 274

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which
Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust of
the nobles.

THE low birth, and indigent condition of this
man, placed him in a fiation, in which he ought

S 4 naturally

B o III. naturally to have remained unknown to pofteritv.
`-' But what fortune called him to ac, and to fuffr
I5;' in Scotland, obliges hiltory to descend from its

dignity, and to record his adventures. He was the
son oi a musician in Turin, and having accompa.
nied the Piedmontefe Ambassador into Scotland,
gained admission into the Queen's family, by his
skill in music. His fcrvile condition had taught
him suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.
He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her
French Secretary happening to return at that time
into his own country, was preferred by her to that
ofice. He now began to make a figure in court,
and to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
The whole train of suitors and expectants, who
have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead most directly to success, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over the Queen, and he grew to be con-
fidered, not only as a favourite, but as a Minister,
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which
always attends such an extraordinary and rapid
change of fortune. He studied, on the contrary,
to display the whole extent of his favour. He as-
sected to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen
in public. He equalled the greatest and most opu-
lent subjects, in richness of dress, and in the num-
ber of. his attendants. He discovered, in all his
behaviour, that assuming i nfolence, with which un-
merited prosperity infpircs an ignoble mind. t
was with the umoft indignation that the noble;
beheld the power; it was with the urmoft difficul-
tv, that they tolerated the arrogance of this un-
.vorthiv minion. Even in the Qeecn's prcfence
they could not forbear treating hini with marks ot
concempt. Nor was, it his exoi itant power alone,
w-hich cxafpcrated the cts. 1 hey confidered liinm,
and :;t wvithout reaib n, a a dangerout cneiny to

t!:c

the Protestant religion, and fufpeted that he held Boo IT
ibr this purpose, a secret correspondence with the '"

1565.
court of Rome *. Buch.

I1r was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the ma- 340.
.,!(emenct of this man, who, by flattery and affidu- 'ielv.lo7.
i sv, cafily gained on his vanity, and inexperience. Dnlys

conlecior,

Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was employ- with lin.
cd in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt,
tow.rds cftablifling him more firmly in her assec-
tions t-. But whatever benefit he might reap from Mel.
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con- ,.
tempt, and even the infamy, to which he was ex-
poled, on account of his familiarity with such an
LDoftart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the
Quecn's affections, she conducted herielf; however,
with such prudent reserve, as to impose on Ran-
dolph the Englifl Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at
this period, that he entertained not the least sus-
picion of the intrigue which was carrying on; and
gave his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish
(ueen had no design of marrying Darnly $. In Keith,
the midst of his security, Mary difpatclled Maitland 273, and
to signify her intention to Elizabeth, and to solicit Append.
her conient to the marriage with Darnly. This
cmbaify was the firit thing, which opened the eyes
of Randolph.

ELIZABETH affected the grcateft frprize at this April iS.
llIlen resolution of the Scottish Queen, but with- Eliz.,beth
out reIafon. The train was laid by herl-ilf, and he ddcciaresa-
h.id no cause to wonder when it took ffect. She gi':iti the
cxpreffed, at the fame time, her diiapprobation ofi,,ari,ige
ile match, in the fironget terms ; and pretended with
t) i-rt:ie many dangers and inconveniencies arising Darnly
inml it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was
ncre afcCt-ation. Mary had often and plainly de-
ci.cdl her resolution to marry. It was impossible
f.. could make any choice more inoffensive. The

danger

BooK 11. danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain,

- which Elizabeth had o justly dreaded, was entire.
56' . ly avoided. Darnly though allied to both Crowns,

and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be
formidable to neither. It is evident from all thee
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of
danger could not poffiblv be serious; and that, in
all her violent declarations againfr Darnly, there
was much more of grimace than of reality --.

THERE were not wanting, however, political

motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great difpleaiure.
Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrucd
with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her
mind, and the elevation of her character. Beides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great
object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her
difadtsfation with Mary's conduct, she hoped to
alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached
to the English interest, and to encourage such of
the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match open-
ly to oppose it. The feeds of diicord would, by
this means, be scattered through that kingdom.
Intestine commotions might arise. Amidt these,
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes,
to which the union of herpeople might have prompt-
ed her. Elizabeth would become the um.pire be-
tween the Scottilh Queen, and her contending
fubjecis. And England milght look on, with fe-

* EV-.: tle Hi;1 oria.: of that age acknow.ledge, th ththe mar-

ri-ge of the Scott!if Q_.en w. ith a ubject was far fromi being di;-
agreeable to Elizabeth, Knox, 369, 373. Buchan. 339. C-
telnau, ato. at ratine, v.,a; :til acquainted with the intrigues
of both the B;itifh courts, alTerts, upon grounds of great proba-
bility, that the match was wholly Elizabeth'sown work; Calleln.
462. and that fie rejoiced at the accomplilfiment of it, appears
:'rOm the !et;-s of her own A!nbasTador., Keith, 280, z88.

curity,

..:rity, while a storm, which she had raised, waft- BOOK III:
:d the only kingdom, which could possibly disturb
.:s peace. i 56

I. prosecution of this scheme, she laid before her May .
?rivv Council the message from the Scottish Queen,
.:Id consulted them with regard to the answer she
l0ould return. Their determination, it is easy to
conceive, was perfetly conformable to her secret
liews. They drew up a remonstrance against the
i:tended match, full of the imaginary dangers,
with which that event threatened the kingdom *. * Keith,
Nor did she think it enough, to signify her dif- 74,
approbation of the measure, either by Maitland, pendix
Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph, her own Re- N" X.
fdent in Scotland; in order to add more dignity Sends
ro the farce which she chose to at, she appointed Throg-
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambassador Ex- obsrtuot
traordinary. She commanded him to declare in
the frongeft terms, her diffatisfation with the ftep
which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame
;'ne, to produce the determination of the Privy
Council, as an evidence that the fcntiments of the
nation were not different from her own. Not long
atter, she confined Lady Lenox as a prisoner first
in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower --. t Keith,

INTELLIGENCE Cf all this reached Scotland, be- Append,
ore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In the
.rIt tranlports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
no longer to keep any nm;eaures with Elizabeth;
.nd sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return instantly to the English
court, and, in her name to declare to Elizabeth,
:iat after having been amused o long to to little
.:rpofe; after having been fooled, and imposed
n;i o rofsly by her artifices; fne was now refolvedto
;ratify her own inclination, and to ask no other con-
cn:.* but that of her own fubjets, in the choice of an
".ii.Ti. Maitland,,with his uual sagacity, foresaw

! :: :si':s ofch '.a
t ..c and aniocrv message, and

ventured

.-: i.-ventured rather ro incur the displeasure of his

' iMLfrrefs, by disobeying her commands, than to be
' made the instrument or t-aring asunder, so vio-

lenl:v, the -Iev remaining ties, which still linked
- ' -* . togetihe r the two Qupeens .

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error.

She received the Engi;f Ambassador with respect:
iulifiied her own conduct with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, fine affecded a wonder.
ful foliciiudc to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;
and even pretended, out of complaisance towards
her, to put off the coniummation of the marrilae

+ '.ti, for some months +. It is probable, however, that
r'enc the want or the Pope's dispensation, and the prof-

pect of gaining the consent of her own fubje6ts,
were the real motives of this delay.

2velfiunro THIS conient Mary laboured with the utmoftin-
Darnly. duftry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the

person in the kingdom, whoe concurrence was of
the greaieft importance ; but she had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme diffi-
cult. From the time of Lenox's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Qleen's assec-
tions began gradually to be etranged from him.
Darnlv, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites.
combined against him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom

,' he was unable to contend $. The return of the

A4:;:c. Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had bee:
-9- accused of a dcfign upon his life, and who had refid-

ed for some time in foreign countries, obliged him
to attend to his own safety. No intreaty or the
Q:een culd persuade him to a reconcilement with
that nobleman. He insisted on having him brought
to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not ap-
pear in opposition to a man, who came to the place

of

ci trial attended by 5000 of his followers on horse- BOORK !I
ark. H-e was once more constrained to leave the -'"J
klindom ; but, by the Queen's command, the fell- '-6;
t:nce of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear-
nce, was not pronounced against him *. " K;:.:,
MARY, sensible at the fame time, of how much i',i'' -'-.

importance it was, to gain a fubjeEt so powerful ay '
;n. ib popular-as the Earl of Murray, invited him
b:lck to court, and received him with many demon-
itations of refpeca and confidence. At last she dc-
i-cd hiin to set an example to her other subjects
by fiubfcribinga paper, containing a formal approba-
tion of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
mnany reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his
afTent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion,
. rooted aversion to his person. By consenting to
his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an accession of dignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly bestows on an enemy. The unhappy confe-
quences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confe-
deracy with England, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his means chiefly, this change in
hle system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been eftablifia.
ed; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rafil
and youthful passion, an alliance of lb much utility
to the Kingdom; and which he and other nobles
were bound, by every obligation, to maintain--. 1--
Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this ''
occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protefiant
Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerous
correspondence with foreign Catholics. She had
even courted the Pope's protection, who had ent
her a subsidy of 8oo0 crowns 4. Thou.gh Murray i.. .--,;
tad hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the -:'- '-

rc-ormned

Boos III. reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's condut in

ó* * the most favourable light, yet her obstinate adhe-
i 56 rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm.

ing him, and by her resolution to marry a papist,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,
was for ever cut off. Each of these considerations
had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-
mined him to decline complying, at that time, with
the Queen's request.

May 1I4 THE convention of nobles, which was assembled
A Con-
vention of a few days after, discovered a greater disposition to
the nobles gratify the Queen. Many of them, withour hefita-
approves tion, expressed their approbation of the intended
mrrisage. match; but as others were startled at the fame dan-

gers which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced
by his example, to refute their consent, another
Convention was appointed at Perth, in order to de-

2Kelth, liberate more fully concerning this matter .
Knox, MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of
373. her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly

titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The
opposition Ihe had hitherto met with, and the many
contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her
inclination, produced their usual effect on her heart,
they confirmed her passion, and increased its vio-
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an assec-

- Ke;th, tion, o excessive, to the influence of witchcraft .
283. It was owing, however, to no other charm, than

the irrefif'ible power of youth and beauty, over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
and the applause of many among her fubjeEts, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
able, and he could no longer bear advice, far lets
contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
the firt person who informed him that Mary, in
order to ooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for ome

time,

time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a BOOK II.
fenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to '-"
!bab him*. It required all Mary's attention, to pre- K6eit
,vnt his falling under that contempt, to which such Appen.
behaviour deservedly exposed him. 16o.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- Mary's
dress more remarkably displayed. Love sharpened address in
!hr invention, and made her tudy every method of g"aiin
raining her subjes. Many of the nobles he won jees.
by her address, and more by her promises. On
lfme he bestowed lands, to others she gave new
titles of honour -[. She even condescended to court Ibid.
the Protestant clergy; and having invited three of 283.
their fuperintendants to Stirling, Ihe declared, in
rong terms, her resolution to protect their religion,
expressed her willingness to be present at a confe-
rence upon the points in doctrine which were dif-
puted between the Protestants and Papists, andwent
lb far as to shew ome desire to hear such of their
preachers, as were most remarkable for modera-
tion . By these arts, the Queen gained wonder- t Knox,
fully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy be 373-
railed by repeated injuries, are always ready to view
the actions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates
were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
talked in so high a strain, of her displeasure at the
intended match; fihe treated Lady Lenox with so
much rigour; fle wrote to the Scottish Queen in
uilch strong terms ; she recalled the Earl of Lenox
and his son, in such a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if they
ilould presume to disobey§; that all these expref- , Xeith,
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her fin- 2a5' 286
cerity, This belief fortified their scruples with re-
'pc& to the match, and encouraged them to oppose

it.

Boo I it. They began with forming among theinfelves

ó" bonds of confederacy and mutual defence ; they en-
1565' tered into a secret correspondence with the Engliy'

Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's aliftance,

' Keith, when it hould become needful ; they endeavourr
289, 292, to fill the nation with such apprehienfions of dai-
29&. ger, as might counterbalance the influence of thoi

arts, which the Queen had employed.

BESIDES these intrigues, there were fcretly car-

ned on, by both parties, dark designs of a more
criminal nature, and more suitable to the spirit of

Scheme the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,
of Darnly which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving
and Mlur- at any rate to get rid of such a powerful enemy,
rayagaint formed a plot to assassinate him, during the meeting
each 0 a
other. of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on his part,

despairing of preventing the marriage by any other
means had, together with the Duke of Chatel-
herault, and the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures
for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into
England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effed,

this convention might have been attended with con-
sequences extremely tragical; but both were ren-
dered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune ol
thole against whom they were formed. Murray,
being warned of his danger by ome retainers to
the court, who still favoured his interest, avoided
the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving
intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with
the utmost expedition, alono with Darnly, to the
other fide of Forth. Conscious, on both fides, of
guilt, and inflamed with resentment, it was im-
possible they could either forget the violence,
which thernfelves had meditated, or forgive the
injuries, intended againit them. From that
morent, all he of reconcilement was at an

end,

end, and their mutual enmity burst out with every BooK 111.
symptom of implacable hatred*.

ON

TH E reality of there two opposite conspiracies has giveri oc-

cdfion to many disputes and much contradition. Some deny that
rny design was formed againlt the life of Murray ; others call in
c:eflion the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly. There feemi
however, to be good reasons for believing both; though the zeal
and credulity of party-writers have added to each, many exag-
gerated circumstances. The following arguments render it pro-
babie, that some violence was intended against Murray.

,1 This is positively aferted by Buchanan, 341. 2. The Eng-

iilh Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was alfuredly informed
ihat a defgn was laid to murder him at Perth, and delcribes the
rn-nner in which this plot was to have been execured. Keith,
287. 3. Murray himfelfconftantly and publickly affirmed, that
filch adefign was formed against his life. Keith, App. io8. And
though he was called upon by the Queen to bring legal evidence
ct his assertion, and a safe condut offered him, while he came to
:ourt for that purpose; Ibid. yet whoever confiders Murray's
.!uation, and the spirit ofthofe who ruled in court at that times
:iiil Icarce deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not choose
r rii; his person on such ecurity. 4. The furious passions of
Drnly, the fierceness of his refentmnent, which scrupled at no
irlence, and the manners of the age, render the imputation of
!ich a crime lets improbable.

11. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize Darn-
!i'; person ppcars wirh frill greater certainty ; . From the ex-
pr.,; refi ony of Mlvil, i Iz. although Buchanan, p. 341, and
ro, p. 377; affeCt, ithour any realbn, to represent this as an
. ir rumlour. 2. ' l'e qutftion w as put to Randolph, whether
:r Governor of Bs;wlck would receive Lenox and his ion, if they
:t-e carried priloners to that place. This plainly shews, that
o:l;e such design was in hand, and Randolph did not dilcourage
ily the answer which he gave, K ith, 290 3. The precipita-
ti;n, with which the Queen retired, and the reaton he gave for
;itis fulden flighrt are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291.

great part of the Scottish nobles, and amonicg thef e Earls

si A;gyll and Rothes, who were thenifelves privy to the design,
ilFert the reality of he conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All these circunftances leave little room to doubt of the truth
to both conspiracics. But we may observe how far this proof,
tboilgh drawn from public records, fall short, on both fides, of
IniWl and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
trcouns of the conlpiracy against Murray, differ widely in almoff
,' . T every

BooK I!. ON Mary's retnrn to Edinburgh, he summoned
,u-.. -' her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by
..larytun-her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
rmons her tecion of her person against her foreign and do-
ii'lfiS to meftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the
~.take rjs promptness and alacrity, with which fubje s run
Murra.y to defend a mild and popular administration. This

Keith, popularity, however, ihe owed in a great measure
.98. to Murray, who had direEted her administration

with great prudence. But the crime of opposing
her marriage, obliterated the memory of his for.
mer services; and Mary, impatient of contradic-
tion, and apt to confider those who disputed her
will, as enemies to her person, determined to let
him feel the whole weight of her vengeance. For
this purpose she fommoned him to appear before
her upon a short warning, to answer to such things

every circumnfance. The accounts of the attempts upon Darnly,
are not more confidlent. Melvil alledges, that the design of the
conspirators was to carry Darnly a prifbner into England the
proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fays,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and
Darnly to (attle Campbell. The Lords, in their declaration, as
firm the design of the cornfirators to ha:e been to murder Darn-
ly and his father, to coCfine the Queen in Lochleven duringlife,
2.r.n ;o utuip the guvemineent. 1'o beieve implicitly, whatever
they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are
extremely prone. Ancient papers, however, often contain no.
thing n:ore than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the day.
The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it i
plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of facion. Many
things irerted in it, are evidently sa!fe, or exaggerated. Lert
?.urray and his confederates be a. ambitious as we can suppose,.
they inum: have had otome pretences, and plausible ones too, before
they could venture to imprison their Sovereign for life, and tog
lri/ the reins of government; but at that time, the Queen'si
conjuct had afforded no colourable excufefor proceeding tofuch.
extremities. It is, likewise, remarkable, that in all the procla-
mations againllt Murray,of which so many are publifled in Keith
Appendix oS, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly
nor that which he is alledged to have formed against the Qeen
-.!t'. are ever once mentioned.

a.

as should be laid to his charge*. At this very BOOK IIr.
ti:-:e, Murray, and the Lordswho adhered to him, ~
-were anembled at Stirling, to deliberate what course 5it5,
:hey should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. Append.
But the current of popular favour ran o rtrongly loS.
.aainft them; and, notwithft;:nding some fears
;inJ jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a
general disposition to gratify the Quee, in a mat-
ter which Io nearly concerned her, that, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore
ihe Queen of England's proteion, they put an
nl to their ineffectual consultations, and returned
every man to his own house.

'IOGETHER with this difccverv of theweakncfs

of her enemies, the confluence of hcr ilbjic's from
all corners of the kingdom, auorded Mary an a-
greeable proof of her own ft-cngti. While the
Queen was in this proiferous situation, fle deter-
mined to bring to a period, an affair, which had
lb long engroiTed her heart, and occupied her at-
tention. On the 29th of July, she married Lord Clebratc3
Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the er mar-

.rite witi

Queen's chapel, according to the rights of the Romilhl D,,!iy
church; the Pope's bull, difpenling with their

anrriage, having been previously obtained j-. She - Kei;ij
iitiied, at the fame time, proclamations, conferring 0°7.
the title of King of Scots upon her hilfbani, and
commanding that henceforth all writs at law fnould
run in the joint names of King and QOecen t. No- .'k\ner-
thing can be a itrongcr proof of the violence of f""n'1 3

1 . , $Sce .\

Mar's love, or the weakneis of her councils, than Se' \io
this last flep. MWhether she had any right to chooe xi.
ahufband, without content of P'arliament, was, in
ihat age, a matter of some dilpute S ; that f ihe hd Buician.
no right to confer upon him, by her private au- 341
tlority, the title and dignity of Kin.g; or by a
firTp!c proclamric, to raise her hilband to be the
M -ftr of .er o- ple, seems to be beyond all doubt.

.ncis b1 re, thde

bor re
tfae tie. It was not,

7' however,

BooK 1II. however, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation;

,565 and the consent of Parliament was obtained, before
'565' he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as

a subject, rendered it still more necessary to have
the concurrence of the supreme Council in his fa-
vour. Such a violent and unprecedented stretch
of prerogative, as the substituting a proclamation
in place of an at of Parliament, might have justly
alarmed the nation. But the Queen possessed so
entirely the confidence of her fubjeas, that, not-
withstanding all the clamours of the malecontents,
no symptoms of general discontent appeared on -hat
account.

EVEN amidst that scene of joy, which always ac-

companies successful love, Mary did not susser
the course of her vengeance against the malecon-
tent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the marriage, Murray was again summoned to
court, under the severest penalties, and, upon his
non-appearance, the rigour of justice took place,

:ei;h, and he was declared an out-law *. At the fame
:-9', 5 . time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon. Who

ever since his father's infirreEtion in the year 1562,
had been detained a prisoner; he recalled the Earl
of SCnderland, who, on account of his concern in
that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and she per-
mitted Buth.el to return again into Scotland. The
frft, and lait of these, were among the most pow-
erful ubjects in the kingdom, and all of them ani-
mated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom
they esteemed the enemy of their families, and the
author of their own lufierings. This common ha-
tred became the foundation of the ftri&eft union
with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant
over all her councils. Murray himself confidered
this confederacy with his avowed enemies, as a
more certain indication than any measure he had
yet taken. of her inexorable resentment.

Tru E

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up BooK III.
.rms . But the Queen having ordered her sub- -- -
jedts to march against them, they were driven to ,^lar's
the last extremity. They found themelves unable. ainti
to make head against the numerous forces, which Murray
Mary had assembled; and fled into Argylefhire, in all hi:
expectation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they
had ecretly dispatched a messenger, in order to
implore her immediate assistance -. t Keith,

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embaibr-312.
rafs Mary, by a new declaration of difgufl at her Kn0ox38°0

Lord izab-rh

oncluc. She blamed both her choice of Lorldie l'
I)arnly, and the precipitation with which fllt had i tieir
concluded the marriage. She required Lenox and favour.
Darnly, whom she fcil called her ifbjets, to re-
turn into England; and at the fame time, he warm-
ly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
lhe represented to be not only innocent, but lau-
dable. This meifage, so mortifying to the pride of
the Queen, and so full of contempt for her husband,
was rendered still more insupportable, by the petu-
lant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
son who delivered it ?. Mary vindicated her own t Cintri.
condut with warmth, but with great strength of 39.
reason; and rejected the interceftion in behalf of
Murray, not without signs of refcntment at Eliza-
beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal go-
vernment of her kingdom §. § Keitli,

SHE did not, on that account, intermit, in Append
the least, the ardour, with which the pursued Mur-99'

a After their fruitless confulttion in Stirling, the Lords re-
!'red to their own ouses. Keith 304. Murray was ftiil at St.
Andlew's on July zz, Keith, 306. By the places of ren!ez-
'ou, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
Agut 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to march in-
to ie, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and
other chiefs of tihe nalecontents resided. Keith, 310. Their
flight into the well, Keith, 312, prevented this expedition, and
to.: former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 30o.

T 3 ray

BooK I;!. ray and his adherents . They now appeared
^~rv ' openly in arms; and having received a fiall sup-

'55' phlv in mroney from Elizabeth , were endeavour.
;c. ing to raise their followers in the western coun-

ties. But Mary's vigilance hindered them from
aIrembling in any considerable body. All her mi-
litary operations, at that time, were concerted
with wiledom, executed with vigour, and attended
with uccefs. In order to encourage her troops,
she herel mrcrhed along with them, rode with
e:;h- loaded piftolsl, and endured all the fatigues of

war wkh admirable fortitude. Her alacrity inipir-
ed her forces withi an invincible resolution, which,
together with their superiority in number, deter-
red the malecontents from facing them in the
field ; but having artfully passed the Queen's army,
they marched with great rapidity to Edinburgh,
and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of that
Aug. 31. city to arms. The Queen did not susser them to

remain long unmolested; and, on her approach,
they were forced to abandon that place, and retire
i' 3. in confusion towards the wetiern borders i1.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in
proviinr for the security of the counties in the
-'-art of the kingdom. She fcized the places of
ifrcnngh which belonged to the rebels; and oblig-
ed ti'- cor.fderabie Barons in those fiires, which
rne rt fufpeEed, to jo'n in afociations for her

[.v ,-. defence

! . Having thus left all the country be-

Aperei. hind her in tranquillity, flie, with an army iS,ooo
i;3. strong, marched towards Dumfries, where the

The loitl c.-.rfirabie persons .,o ioir:ed 'Murrav, v'

the De of Cha:lherauk, the Earls or Argyle, Gl'rc;', -
R'tlhesi ; L:d B:' J nd Ochil'ree; the l.ci,ds ot Gra!ge,
Cu.n::ihan ::l- ordied , Carlilie, Canr.lie, Lae Bar, Dreghori,
": -:-*-. C.. .*r'.'"-,. an23 :- Tu;or c-f Pi-cur. Knox, 3,8

. . 2:'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,? . . . . ;.-...-.

rebels then were. During their retreat, they OOK IIll.
had ent letters to the Queen, from almost every _--
place where they halted, full of submission, and 156
containing various overtures towards an accom-
modation. But Mary who determined not to flip
ihch a favourable opportunity of crushing the mu-They are
tinous spirit of her fubjeas, rejeted them with obliged to
disdain. As she advanced, the malecontents re-retire into
tired; and, having received no effectual aid from England
Flizabetht, they despaired of any other means ofE SdeAP
ifety, fled into England, and put themselves un- N° XII.
der the protection of the Earl of Bedford, Warden XlI.
of the marches. zo-

NOTHING, which Bedford's personal fi-iendfhip
for Murray could supply, was wanting to render
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- Theymeet
ed them with extreme neglect. She had fully gain- withun-

11 i i 0

1 1 *' '

i~r expected

ed her end, and, by their means, had excited such illtreat-
discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would, ment from
in all probability, long diftrat and weaken Mary's Elizabeth.
councils. Her business now, was to save appear-
ances, and to justify herself to the Ministers of
France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting
the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The
expedient he contrived for her vindication, itrong-
ly displays her own character, and the wretched
condition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on
a foreign Prince. Murray, and Hamilton, Ab-
bot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other
fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, inflead of meeting
with that welcome reception which was due to
men, who, ot of confidence in her promifses,
had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not
even obtain the favour of an audience, until they
had meanly consented to acknowledge, in the
pretence of the French and Spanish Ambassadors,
that Elizabeth had given them no encourage-
ment to take arms. No sooner did they make this

T 4 declaration,

EOOK III. declaration, than he astonished them with this r-
' ' ply, "-You have declared the truth; I am far

s6 .' from seting an example of rebellion to my own

subjects, by countenancing those who rebel against
their lawful Prince. The treason, of which you
have been guilty, is detestable; and as traitors I

Melv. banish you from my presence " Notwithftand-
I12. ing this scene of farce and of falihood, so difo-

nourable to all the persons who aced a part in it,
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to
reside in her dominions, supplied them fecredy with
money, and renewed her interceflion with the Scot-

+ Kno, tith Queen in their favour -.
389' THE advantage she had gained over them did

not satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the blow,
and to prevent a party, which he dreaded, from
ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, she called a meeting of Parliament;
and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might

Decerb. be legally pronounced againif the banilhed Lords,
1. ihe summoned them, by public proclamation, to
§ KSith, appear before it §.
320Z THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as the King violently opposed it.
He was obliged, however, to leave the kingdom,

: Knox, and to reside for ome time in France :.
259· THE numerous forces which Mary brought into

the field, the vigour with which she acted, and the
lengthof time she kept them in arms, resemble the
efforts of a Prince with revenues much more con-
fiderable than those which she possessed. But ar-
mies were the-;. levied and maintained by Princes
at -mall charge. The valsal followed his ji;cr!ur,
and the superior attended the Monarch, at :;s -cv:
expence. Six hundred horsemen, however, n;d
three companies of foot, betides her guards, rcciv-
:d regular pa- rom :he Qeern. This exrao:'J

:Iary charge, togetherwith the disbursements occa- BooK III.
iioned by her marriage, exhausted a treasury, which --1
was far from being rich. In this exigency, many 1565.
:evices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines
were levied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth,
ind Dundee, which were suspected of favouring the
malecontents. An unusual tax .was imposed on the
boroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great
fum was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh,
by way of loan. This unprecedented exaftion a-
larmed the citizens, They had recourse to delays,
and started difficulties, in order to evade it. These
Mary construed to be ats of avowed disobedience,
nd instantly committed several of them to prison.
But this severity did not subdue the undaunted spirit
of liberty, which prevailed among the inhabitants.
The Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city, the
fiiperiority of the town of Leith, by which she ob-
tained a considerable fum of money *. The thirds * Knox,
of ecclesiastical benefices proved another source, 383, 386.
whence the Queen derived tbme supply. About this
time, we find the Protestant clergy complaining
rmore bitterly than ever of their poverty. The ar-
my, it is probable, exhausted a great part of that
fund, which was appropriated for r their mainte
nance . t Mait).

THE aemblies of the church were not uncon- Hil of
cPrned fpeRators of the commotions of this turbu- Edi
lent year. In the meeting,June 24 several of the male- Church
content nobles were present, and teem to have had affairs,
great influence on their decisions. The high strain
an which the aflembly addressed the Queen, can be
imputed only to those fears andjealoufies, with re-
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
:o the nation. The afltmbly complained, with
!nme bitterness, of the stop which had been put to
tie progreis of the Reformation by the Queen's ar-
r:va in Scotland ; they rquired not only the total

sup,

BOOK III. suppression of the Popish worship throughout the
L.- kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and
'565' besides the legal establishment of the Protestant re-

ligion, they demanded that Mary herself should
publickly embrace it. The Queen, after ome de.
liberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a ftep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a
change, which proceeded from no inward convic-
tion; the latter would susser by the offence, which
her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and

Knox, her other allies on the continent *
374, 376 IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation

of the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to
work ome change in favour of her religion. The
Earls of Lenox, Athol, and Caffils, openly attend.
ed mass; she herself afforded the Catholics a more
avowed protecion than formerly; and, by her
permission, ome of the ancient Monks venturer

Id. 389, to preach publickly to the people t.
390.

TH

# BOOK IV.

T H E
THE
H S TORY

OF
SCO T L AN DO

BO O K IV.

S the day appointed for the meeting of Par-BooK IV.
A liament approached, Mary and her Ministers

I566.

were employed in deliberating concerning the course Mary'sde-
which it was most proper to hold with regard to the liberations
exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set concern-
no bounds to the rigour ofjufticc. The malecon- in theo
Cents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which herbles,
interest conspired with her passions in rendering dear
to her; they were the leaders of a party, whose
fiiendffip fhc had been obliged to court, while she
held their principles in abhorrence; and they were
,rmly attached to a rival, whom she had good rea-
Ion both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi-
derations might be urged. The noblemen, whose
:ae was in suspense, were among the most powerful
u;abiets in the kingdom ; their wealth great, their
connetions extensive; and their adherents nume-
rois. They were now at mercy, the objects of
cc.pafion, and suing for pardon with the most
humble fubmifion.

IN those circumstances, an a of clemency
would exalt the Queen's character, and appear no
leis fpiendid among foreigners, than acceptable to
her own fubjests. Mary herself, though highly
incenl-e, was not inexorable; but the King's rage

was

BooK IV. was implacable and unrelenting. They were soli.

'-'- cited in behalf of the fugitives, from various quar.
356 6 ters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who

had been members of the Congregation, were nor
forgetful of their ancient union with Murray, and
his fellow-fufferers; nor neglecful of their safer,
which they esteemed of great importance to the
kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poiffifed the
Queen's confidence, seconded their solicitations.
And Murray, having frooped so low as to court
Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fecurinn
his protection against the King, whose difplcafure
he had lately incurred, seconded the intercefions
of his other friends, with the whole of. his infu.

* Melv. ence*. The interposition of Sir Nicholas Throg.
1zS5 morton, who had lately been Elizabeth's ambaf.

fador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of
more weight than all there, and attended with
more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had embarked deeply in all the intrigues
which were carried on at the English court, in
order to undermine the power and credit of that
Minister. He espoused, for this reason, the cause
of the Scottish Queen, towards whose title and
pretensions the other was known to bear little
favour; and ventured, in the present critical junc
ture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the mos
salutary advices with regard to her condut. e
recommended the pardoning of the Earl of Mur
ray and his affoeiates, as a measure no less prudnt
than popular. An ation of this nature, fays he
the pure eiecl of your Majesty's generosity, il
spread the fame of your nity and moderation, an
engage the English to look towards your acceffio
ra their throne, not only without prejudice, bu
with desire. By the fame means, a perfect har
mony will be restored among your own fubjeat
who, if any rupture should happen with England

WN!1

v1il serve you with that grateful zeal, which your BooK IV.
clemency cannot fail of inspiring *. v

THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, * Mely.
to which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- g9.
tachment to the Queen, added great authority, She re-
made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour- solves to
icers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed with tle-
on her, notwithstanding the King's inflexible tern- nency.
per, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
intercefflon of her fubjeas, and the withes of her
friends t. With this view, the Parliament, which t Id. 125.
had been called to meet on the 4th of February,
was prorogued to the 7th of April ; and in the t Good.
rmean time, he was busy in confidering the manner vol.i. 224.
2nd form in which he mhould extend her favour to
the Lords who were under disgrace.

THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a Is diverted
mind naturally prone to humanity, and capablefrom this
of forgiving, she wanted firmness, however, to refiftc reolution
the influence, which was fatally employed to difap- citationsof
point the effects of this amiable disposition. About France,
;his time, and at no great distance from each other, and her
nvo envoys arrived from the French King. The zea for

Popery.

tormer was intrusted with matters of mere ceremony Feb. 3.
alone; he congratulated the Queen on her mar-
riage, and invested the King with the ensigns of the
order of St. Michael. The instructions of the lat-
ter related to matters of more importance, and pro-
duced greater effe&s §. § Keith,

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter 32z Ap-
the Queen of Spain had been often proposed; and pcnd. 167.
ttcr many obstacles aifing from the opposition of
political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonne.
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the
Duke of Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the
;cenes of public pomp and pleasure, which seemed
:o be the Ible occupation of both courts, a scheme
nas formed, and measures concerted, for extermi-
lating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in

the

BooK 1V. the low countries, and for fupprefino the Reforma

C^~^ tion throughout all Europe . The active policy
Ylhan. of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of
lib. 37. Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, bs

suitable to the genius of the Romish religion, and
so beneficial to their own order.

IT was an account of this holy league which the

second French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring
her, at the fame time, in the name of the King of
France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore
the leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to
power and favour, at the very time when the: Ca-
tholic Princes were combined to destroy that feet,

t Mely. in all the countries of Europe t.
126. POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable

for the strong possession it takes of the heart. Con-
trived by men of deep infight into the human cha-
raater, and improved by the experience and obler-
vation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to
a degree of perfecion, which no former system or
superstition had ever attained. There is no power
in the understanding, and no passion in the heai,
to which it does not prelcnt objects, adapted to
route, and to interest them. Neither the love oi
pleasure, which, at that time, prevailed in the
court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition
which occupied the court of Spain, had secured
them firo;n the dominin of bigotry. Laymen,
and courtiers, were agitated with that furious and
unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered a;
peculiar to ecclesiastics; and Kings and Minister
thought themselves bound, in conscience, to extir-
pate the Protestant doctrine. Mary herself wasj
deeply tinctured with all the prejudices of Poperyv;
a pafionate attachment to that superstition is vifibl:
in every part of her character, and runs through all
the scenes of her life: sho was devoted, too, swith
the utmost submission to the Princes of Lorrainl
her uncles and had been a- 'sorned, from her

infancy,|

ifancy, to liften to all their advices, with a filial BooK IV,
relpet. The profpet of restoring the public ex- 'l
ercife of her own religion, the pleasure of com-
plying with her uncles, and the hopes of grati-
tying the French Monarch, whom the present
fimtation of her affairs in England made it necessary
to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confi-
derations which had formerly weighed with her.
She instantly joined the confederacy, which had
been formed for the deftrution of the Proreftants,
and altered the whole plan of her conduct, with re-
gard to Murray and his adherents *. * See Ap-

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the pendx,
fibfequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great
height, it had, however, suffered no considerable
interruption. A thick and fettled cloud of adver-
fity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real
enjoyment, covers the remainder of her days.

THE effects of the new system, which Mary had
adopted, were soon visible. The time of the pro-
rogation of Parliament was hortened; and by a
new proclamation, the 12th of March was fixed
for its meeting t. Mary resolved, without any fur- K Keith,
ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel 326.
Lords, and, at the fame time, determined to take
fime ftep toward the re-efrabliihmenr of the Ro-
mifh religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the
Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufi-

ness

t, ; i not on the authoiry ofKnox alone, that we charge the

% een with the design of re-ell:iblilhing the Romlan C i:holic
.':;ion. He, in'eed, alferts that the alra.s, which hould have
!en ItrccledI in the church ,f St. Giles, ocre .aready provided,
':4. I. Marv herself, in a cetter to the Archibfhop ot G!afgow
!' A!ltibilfador in France, acknowledges," that in that ar-
-:nent, 11.. interded to hve lone fomne good, Mwih retpect to

'ori; : (hid rc: iet'." Keith, 331. z. 'II.e , Spiritual

Lards,

Boor Iv. ness which was to come before the Parliament;
.---J They were all persons in whom the Queen could
x566 confide, and bent to promote her designs. The

ruin of Murray and his party seemed now inevi-
table, and the danger of the Reformed Church im-
minent, when an event unexpectedly happened,

And pre- which saved both. If we regard either the barba-
vented by rity of that age, when such acs of violence were
thecon- common, or the mean condition of the unhappy
fpirac a- person who suffered, the event is little remarkable;
gaNt Rizio. but if we refec upon the circumstances with which

it was attended, or upon the consequences which
followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and
the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with
great care.

Darnly DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited
loses the that sudden and violent passion which raised him to
Queen's the throne. But the qualities of his mind corref-
afeaion. ponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a

weak understanding, and without experience, con-
ceited at the fame time of his own abilities, and
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dif-
tinguilhed merit. All the Queen's favour matde no
impreflon on such a temper. All her gentleness
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable
spirit. All her attention to place about him per-
sons capable of directing his condut, could not

Good. preserve him from rash and imprudent actions *.
ol.i 122. Fond of all the amusements, and even prone to all

Lords, i. e the Popish eccleliaftics, had, by her authority, re-
fumed their ancient place in that affemb!y, ibid. 3. She had
joined the conlederacy at Bayonne, Keith, AppenJ. 167.
She allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of the king-
dom, ibid. and declared that he would have mass free tbr all men
who would hear it, Good. vol. i. 274. . Blackwood, who was
furnifled by the ArchbiLhopof G!af-ow with materials for writ-
ing his Alalr:Fre e lMarie, affirms that the Queen intended to
have procued, in this Parliament, if not the re-eftablifliient of
the Catholic religion, at east something for the ease of Catho-
iics, Jebb. vol. ii. 204.

the

ihe vices of youth, he became, by degrees; BooK IV.
carelkfs of er person, and a stranger to her " ^
company. To a woman, arid a Queen, fJich be- 1566
I:,ijiour as intolerable. The lower he had
tooped in order to raise him, his behaviour ap-
peared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of her first affection,
was the violence ith which her disappointed pas-
sion now operated.. A few months after the mar-
riage, their domestic quarrels began to be obferv-
ed. The etiavagance of Darrily's ambition gave
rile to these. Instead of being satisfied with a ffiare
in the adrmiriitration of governiment, or with the
tirle of King; hich Mary, by an unprecedented
Itretch of power, had conferred on him, he de-
manded the Crown Matrimonial with mroft info-
lent inportunity*. And though Mary alledged that * Keitt;
this gift was beyond her powers and that the au- 329.
thority of Parliament miuft be iriterpofed to bestow Knox'
it, he wanted either understanding to comprehend,
or temper to admit so just a defence; and often re-
newed and urged his requef. .

Rizio, whom the King had at first taken into Surpeds
great confidence, did not humour him in these fol- Rizio to
hcs. By this, he incurred Henry's displeasure useds it
and as it was impossible for Mary to behatve to-
wards her hufbaiid with the fame affection, which
distinguished thefirft and happy days of their union,
h imputed this cdldnefs, not to his own behaviour,
which had so well merited it, but to the insinuations
of Rizio. Mary's own conduct confirmed and
strengthened these suspicions. She treated this
Rtranger with a familiarity, and admitted him to a
lhare in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office she had lately bestowed
upon him, gave him any title. He was perpetually
in her pretence, intermeddled in every business,
and, together with a few favourites, was the com-
panion of all her private amusements. The haugh-
VOL. I. U ty

BooK IV. ty spirit of Darnly could not bear the 'ntrufion of
C~^i~ such an upstart; and impatient of any delay, and

unrestrained by any scruple, he instantly resolved
to get rid of him by violence.

Ri7io ha- AT the fame time, another design, which took
ted by the its rife from very different motives, was carrying on
friends of
the exiled against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind.
nobles. fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In all

former commotions they had been ftritly united
with Murray, though in the late insurrection they
had deserted him, for various reasons. Morton was
nearly allied to the family of Angus, and during
the minority of the present Earl, aed as Chief of
the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the
King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood.
All these had warmly concurred with the Queen in
promoting a marriage, which did so much honour
to the house of Douglas, and naturally expeced,
that under a king of their own blood, the chief
management of affairs would be committed to them.
Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw that
Murray's opposition to the match would prove dan-
gerous and ineffe&tual; but whoever ruled at court,
he hoped, by his dexterity and talents to render
himfclf necefary and of importance. They were
all equally disappointed in their expectations. The
King's headstrong temper rendered him incapable
of advice. The Qleen could not help diftruffing
men who had been so long and so intimately con-'
nectcd with Murray, and gave herself up intirely
to such Counsellors as complied with all her incli-
nations. The return of that nobleman and his fol-
lowers was therefore the only event which could
restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates to
their former ascendant over the Queen's councils.
For this reaobn, nothing could be more mortifying{
to them, than the resolution which Mary had taken|
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed!
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray

with

.wirh all his interest, was now the most active inftru-BooK IV,
;,icnt in promoting the measures which were con- 566
ccrted for the ruin of that nobleman. This offici-
otl zeal compleated the disgust which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to justice,
to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILrE they were ruminating upon their scheme, They
the King communicated his resolution to be avenged combine
or Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his affft- in order

,or~~~~~~ ,1~~

-,.-. 'to murder

nce, and that of his friends, towards the execution him.
of this design, Nothing could be more acceptable
to them than this overture. They saw at once all
the advantages they would reap, by the concurrence
of uch an afociate. Their own private revenge
upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an at of
obedience to the King; and they did not despair
of obtaining the restoration of their banished friends,
and iccurity for the Protestant religion, as the price
of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than rash, they
icfirated for some time, and determined to advance
;".Jirther, without taking every possible precaution
:>)r thhir own safety. They did not, in the mean
i.:n, Juser the King's resentment to abate. Mor-
:iin, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing
!C, in all the arts of insinuation and address, took
'c young Prince under his management. He
'rtought upon his ruling passion, ambition to ob-
:in the Matrimnonial Crown. He represented Rizio's
credit with t- Queen to be the chief and only ob-
tacle to !is fucceis in that demand. This minion,
:ine, he iaid, posseed her confidence; and out of
;omplaifance to him, her fubje&ts, her nobility, and
teen her husband, were excluded from any partici-
pation of her secret councils. Under the appear-
ace of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity

U of

BooK IV. of quite a different and of a very criminal nature
' --*- might be concealed'. Such various and compli-

566. cared passions raged in the King's bosom, with the

utmost fury. He became more impatient than ever
of any delays and even threatened to strike the in.
tended blow with his own hand. At last, pre-
liminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for
their mutual security agreed upon. The King en-
gaged to prevent the attainder of the banished
Lords, to content to their return into Scotland, to
obtain for them an ample remission of all their
crimes, and to support to the utmost of his power,
the religion which was now established in the king-
dom. On their parts, they undertook to procure
the Crown Martimonial for Henry, to secure his

* Of all our Historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accure

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio. 340, 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that such a suspicion was entertained, 391. Meivil,in
a conversation with the Queen, intimates that he was afraid
her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifconftrucion,

io. The King himfelffeems, both by Melvil's account, and
by his expostulation with the Queen, which Ruthven menti-
ons, to have given credit to these suspicions, Melv. 127. Keith.
Appendix, 2z3, 124. That the King's suspicions were itrong is
likewise evident from the paper published, Append. N XV.
But, in opposition to these suspicions, and they are nothing
more, we may observe that Raulet the Queen's French Secre.
tary was dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to
that office in December 1564. Keith z68. It was in confe-
quence of this preferment, that he acquired his great credit
with the Queen, Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about
.wo months after, Keith, 269. The Queen immediately con-
eeived for him a pafilon, which had all the fymptomsofgenu-
ine and violent love. Rizio aided this passion, and promoted
the marriage with all his interest, Melv. iii. During some
rror.ths after the marriage, the Queen's fondnes for Darny
continued. She oon proved with child. From this enumer3
rion of circumfances, it appears almost impossible that te
Queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterl
abandoned, could carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio.
But the flence of Randolph the English resident, a ma
abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's fault'
and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizti
concealed any thing criminal, is in itself a sufficient vindic-
:ion of her innocence.

right

right of fuccefflon, if the Queen should die before BooK IV.
him, and to defend that right to the uttermost, a-
gainft whatever person should presume to dispute
it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, should
happen to be killed in prosecuting of the design,
the King promised to acknowledge himself to be
the author of the enterprize, and to protect those G
who were embarked in it *. ol.i 2.

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan Perpetrate

of operation, to choose the actors, and to assign them that criime
their parts in perpetrating this detestable crime, i te
Every crcumftance here paints and chara&terizes Qaeen'
the marners and men of that age, and fills us with
horror at both. The place chosen for commit-
ting such a deed, was the Queen's bedchamber.
Though Mary was now in the sixth month of her
pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been
Icized elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King
pitched upon this place, that he might enjoy the
malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio with his
crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of Mor-
ton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom,
undertook to diret an enterprize, carried on in
defiance of all the laws of which he was bound
to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who
had been confined to his bed for three months, by
a very dangerous distemper, and who was frill so
feeble that he could scarce walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, was entrusted with the execu-
tive part; and while he himself needed to be sup-
ported by two men, he came abroad to commit a
murder in the pretence of his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court
of the palace with an hundred and sixty men;
and without noise, or meeting with any resistance,
seized all the gates. While the Qeen was at sup-
per with the countes of Argyle, Rizio, and a few
domestics, the King suddenly entered the apart-

U 3 ment,

EccK V. ment, by a private paflage. At his back, was

·~6. Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that

hait!v and horrid look which long sickness had
given h:im. Three or four of his most trusty ac-
complices followed him. Such an unusual appear-
ance alarmed those who were present. Rizio in-
Ifantly apprehended that he was the victim at whom
the blow was aimed; and in the utmost coniterna.
tion retired behind the Queen, of whom he laid
hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person
might prove some protection to him. The confpi-
rators had proceeded too far to be restrained by any
consideration of that kind. Numbers of armed
men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his
dagger, and with a furious mien and voice, com-
manded Rizio to leave a place of which he was un-
worthy, and which he had occupied too long.
Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threaten-
ings, to save her favourite. But, notwithstanding
1ll these, he was torn from her by violence, and
before he could be dragged through the next apart-
ment, the rage of his enemies put an end to hi

' See Ap- life, piercing his body with fifty fix wounds *.
penflx, ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidants

X. of the Queen who lodged in the palace, were

alarmed at the uproar, and filled with the utmost
terror on their own account but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durst
not ihed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the
fame illegal manner with which they hd ventured
to take the life of a stranger. Some of them were t
dismissed, and others made their escape.

Tey cor.- THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof-
fne te e ffion of the palace, and guarded the Queen with
Q.een rxfelf. the utmot care. A proclamation was published by

theKing, prohibiting the parliament to meet on
the day appointed; and measures were taken by

hilni

r.

himi for preventing any tumult in the city *. Mur- BOOK IV.
raY, Rothes, and their followers being informed of'-'-'
cvery ftep taken against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh K 566
next evening. Murray was graciously received both A,,pend2.
by the King and Qeen. By the former, on ac, z6.
count of the Articles which had been agreed upon
between them ; by the latter, becauie fie hoped to
prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take
part with the murderers of Rizio. Their power
Ihe still felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they
had offered to her authority, and even to her per-
uon, so far exceeded any crime fle could impute to
Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance
on them, she became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which
Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded their
lives on his account, engaged him to labour for
their safety. The Queen, who scarce had the li-
berty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Mor-
ton and Ruthven into her presence, and to grant
them the promise of pardon in whatever terms they
hould deem necessary for their own security.
THE King, mean while, stood astonished at the But she
holdnefs and success of his own enterprize, and un- gains the
certain what course to hold. The Queen observed makes hes
his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She em- ecap.e.
ployed all her art to disengage him from his new
afTociates. His consciousness of the infultwhich he
had offered to so illustrious a benefatrefs, inspired
him with uncommon facility and complaisance. In
ipite of all the warnings he received to distrust the
Queen's artifices, she prevailed on him to dismiss
the guards which the conspirators had placed on hei
person; and that fame night he made his escape
along with her, attended by three persons only, and
retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had March iX.
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and

U 4 they

BooK IV. they were quickly joined by them, and several other
'-- '--- of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-

566. ner of the kingdom, and his followers crowded to

their Chief, in such numbers, as oon enabled the
Queen to set the power of the conspirators at de-
fiance.

Is recon-
ciledto the THIs sudden flight filled them with inexpressible
exiled no- confernation. They had obtained a promise of par-
b!es. don; and it now appeared from the Queen's con-

duct, that nothing riore was intended by this pro-
mise, than to amufethem, and to gain time. They
ventured, however, to demand the accomplifhmenr
of it; but their messenger was detained a prisoner,
and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at
the head of oo8000 men, talked in the highest strain
of resentment and revenge. She had the address,
at the fame time, to separate Murray and his affo-
ciates from the conspirators' aainft Rizio. Senfi-
ble that the union of these parties would form a
confederacy, which might prove formidable to the
crown, she expressed great willingness toreceive the
former into favour ;towards the latter, 'she declared
herself inexorable. Murray and his followers were
no less willing to accept of pardon, on her terms.

March 19 The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of every
The con- resource, and incapable of refiftance,'fled precipi-
fpirators
againit tately to Newcastle, having thus changed situations
Rizio fly with'Murray and his party, who left that place, a
into Eng- few days before.
.wd.

and. Nd mnan so remarkable for wisdom, and even

for cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged
in a more unfortunate enterprize. Deserted base-
ly by the King, who now denied his knowledge
of the conspiracy, by public proclamations;
and abandoned 'ungenerously by Murray and

Melv. his party*, he was obliged to fly from his
130. native country, to resign the highest office, and to

part

part with one of the most opulent fortunes in the BooK IV.
kingdom. -

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to 566.
proceed against those concerned in the murder of
Rizio with the utmost rigour of law. But, in praise
of her clemency, it must be observed, that only
two persons, and these of no considerable rank,
suffered for this crime *. * Keith

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance, Append

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not to 130, 3 4
be forgotten. In the confederacy between the King
and the conspirators the real intention of which
was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed
Church is, nevertheless, one of the most confidera-
ble articles; and the fame men who were prepar-
ing to violate one of the first duties of morality,
affected the highest regard for religion. History
relates there extravagancies of the human mind,
without pretending to justify, or even to account
for them, and regulating her own opinions by the
eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue,
points out fugh inconsistencies, as features of the
age which he describes, and records them for the
inftrution of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate affaf- An ac-

fination which has occurred, and as we hall hee- count of
after meet with many other instances of the fame the fre-
crime, the causes which gave rife to a practice so afratif
shocking to humanity, deserve our particular at- onsin that
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea- age.
sons, one of the strongest passions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that
the person who feels the injury should himself in-
flit the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftrucive
to society; and punishment would have known-no
bounds, either in severity or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social state, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and com-

mitted

BOOK IV. mitted to the Magistrate. But, at first, while laws

óó~' Taimed at restraining, they really strengthened the
566' principle of revenge. The earliest and most fim-

ple punilhment for crimes was retaliation; the of-
fender forfeited limb for lb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infti-
tution. In both these, the gratification of private
revenge was the object of law and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to
purlue, to exact, or to remit the puniflment.
While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of
one party, the interests of the other were not ne-
glefted. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount
to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself to be un-
juflly accued, the person to whom a crime was im-
puted had a right to challenge his adversary to ingle
combat, and on obtaining the.victory, vindicated
his own honour. In almost every considerable cause,
whether civil or criminal, arms were appealed to,
in defence, either of the innocence, or the property
of the parties. Justice had seldom occasion to ife
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest.
The pafilon of revenge was nourished by all there
means, and grew, by daily indulgence to be in-
credibly strong. Mankind became habituated to
blood, not only in times of war, but of peace; and
from this, as well as other causes, contracted an
amazing ferocity of temper, and of manners. This
ferocity, however, made it necessary to discourage
the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of com-
penfations in criminal cafes; and to think of
some milder method of terminating disputes
concerning civil rights. The punishments for
crimes became more severe, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed ; but the Princes,
whose province it was to inflict the one, and to
enforce the other, ponffefed little power. Great of-
ienders despised their authority smaller ones fhel-

tered

rered themselves under the jurifdition of those BooK IV.
from whose protection they expected impunity. '~~
The administration of justice was extremely feeble I 66
and dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of
a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often excited
rebellions and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and
independent, among whom the causes of discord
vwere many and unavoidable, who were quick in
diicerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it;
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy,
and cowardly to forgive him; who confidd:ed the.
right of punishing thole who had injured them as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of 'ndepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extre- -r ,., un-
fatisfacory. The blood of their adverial,- -,..-. in
:heir opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not sied, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became iufpeced,
and a sLain was left on their honour. That yen-.
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate
could not inflict, their own could easily execute;
under governments so feeble, men assumed, as in
a state of nature, the right of judging, and redref-
ting their own wrongs. And thus aaflination, a
crime of all others the most deftruEtive to society,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed
honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the 4th and
i5th centuries, abounds with detestable instances
of this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the
French and Scots, between whom there was a close
intercourse at that time, and a surprising refem-
bl:nce in their national characters. In 1407, the
only brother of the King of France was murdered
publickly in the streets of Paris; and so far was
tiis horible aion from meeting with proper pu-
nifhment, that an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the Peers of France,
a:.d avowedly to maintain the lawfulness of affafi-

nation.

BooK IV. nation. In 417, it required all the eloquence and

- authority of the famous Gerfon to prevail on the
1566. Council of Constance to condemn this propoftion,

"That there are some cafes in which assassination
is a virtue more meritorious in a Knight than in a
Squire, and more rmeritorious in a King than in a

L'En- . Knight -." The number of eminent persons who
Conc. de were murdered in France and Scotland, on account
Conft. either of private, or political or religious quarrels,

during the th and 6th centuries, is almoli in-
credible. Even after those causes, which first gave
rife to this barbarous practice, were removed after
the jurifdicion of Magistrates, and the authority
of laws were better eftabliffed, and become more
universal; after the progress of learning and philo-
sophy had polished the manners, and humanized
the minds of men, this crime continued in some
degree. It was towards the close of the 7th cen-
tury before it disappeared in France. The addi-
tional vigour, which the royal authority acquired
by the accellion of James VI. to the throne of
England, seems to have put a flop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national custom,

both on the understanding and on the heart, and
how far it may go towards perverting or extinguilh-
ing moral principles of the greatest importance, is
remarkable. The authors of those ages have per-
fetly imbibed the entiments of their cotempora-
ries, with regard to aaffination; and they, who
had leilure to refect, and to judge, appear to be
no more shocked at this crime, than the persons,
who committed it during the heat and impetuosity
of pafflon. Buchanan relates the murder of Car-
dinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without expressing
those feelings which are natural to a man, or that

fBuchan. indignation which became an historian t. Knox,
295, 345. whose mind was fiercer and more unpolifhed, talks

of the death of Beatoun and of the Duke of Guile,
not only without censure, but with the utmost ex-

ultation.

iltation *. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross BooK: IV.
mentions the affafination of the Earl of Murray,
with some degree of applause t. Blackwood dwells Kn66
upon it, with the most indecent triumph, and as- 334.
cribes it diretly to the hand of God s. Lord Ruth- t Anders.
yen, the principal actor in the conspiracy against 3 84.
Rizio, wrote an account of it ome hort time be- 63b.
fore his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expreflion of regret, or one fymp-
tom of compuntion for a crime no less difhonoura-
able than barbarous §. Morton, equally guilty of§ Keith,
the fame crime, entertained the fame sentiments Append.
concerning it; and in his lalf moments, neither he 19'
himself, nor the Ministers who attended him, seem
to have confidered it as an ation which called for
repentance; even then he talks of David's lct.ghter
as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able deed 11. The vices of another age astonish II Crawf.
and shock us; the vices of our own become fami- Men.
liar, and excite little horror. I return fro this Append.
digression to the course of the history.

THE charm, which had at first attached the The

Queen to Darnly, and held them for ome time in Queen's
an happy union, was now entirely dissolved; and hatred to

Darnly in-

love no longer covering his follies and vices with its creales.
friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full
dimension and deformity ¶. Though Henry pub- q See Ap-
lifhed a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge pend. N°
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was ful- XVl.
ly convinced, that he was not only accessory to the
contrivance, but to the commiflion of that odious
crime *. That very power, which with liberal* Keith,
and unfufpicious fondness, he had conferred upon 350S
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person.
Such an outrage, it was impossible any woman
could bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret distrust,
frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former tranf-

ports

BooK 1V. ports of affection and confidence. The Queen's
'"6 favours were no longer conve5 ed through his hands.

The crowd of expetants ceased to court his patro-
nage, which they found to avail so little. Among
the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others
complained of his perfidioulnefs; and all of them
despised the weakness of his understanding, and
the inconstancy of his heart. The people them-
selves observed some parts of his conduct, which
little suited the dignity of a King. Addied to
drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that age
could bear, and indulging irregular passions, which
even the licentiousness of youth could not excuse,
he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen
to the utmost; and the passions which it occasion-
ed, often forced tears from her eyes, both in pub-

Keitb, lic and in private *. Her aversion for him increased
329 every day, and could be no longer concealed. He

was often absent from court, appeared there with
little splendor, and was truited with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to
please the Queen, who favoured Morton and his
associates, or who adhered to the house of Hamil-
ton, he was left almost alone in a neglected and

t Me>-.,. unpitied solitude +.
i31' 'i - ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great
The rife of . .

.

Bo:hwell's credit with the Queen, and soon gained an afcen-
favour. dant over her heart, which encouraged his enter-

prifing genius to form designs that proved fatal to
himself, and the occasion of all Mary's fubfequenr
misfortunes. This was James Hepburn Earl of
Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and by
his extensive possessions and numerous vassals, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom.
Even in that turbulent age, when so many vast pro-
jets were laid open to an aspiring mind, and in-
vited it to ation, no man's ambition was more dar-
ing than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or

more

more singular expedients for obtaining power. BooK IV.
When almost every person of diftintion in the t
kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant, had joined 566.
the Congregation in opposing the dangerous en-
croachments of the French upon the liberties of
the nation, he, though an avowed Protestant, ad-
hered to the Queen Regent, and ated with vigour
on her fide. The fucceis which attended the arms
of the Congregation having obliged him to retire
into France, he was taken into the Queen's service,
and continued with her till the time of her return
into Scotland *. From that period, every ftep of Anders.
his conduct towards Mary was remarkably dutiful; 1. 90.
and amidst all the shiftings of faction, we scarcely
ever find him holding any course which could be
offensive to her. When Murray's proceedings with
regard to her marriage gave umbrage to the Queen,
ffle recalled Bothwell from that baniflhment into
which she had with reluctance driven him, and
confidered his zeal and abilities as the most power-
ful supports of her authority. When the confpira-
tors against Rizio seized her person, he became
the chief instrument of recovering her liberty, and
served her, on that occasion, with so much fidelity
and success, as made the deepest imprenton on her
mind, and greatly increased the confidence which
he had hitherto placed in him +. Her gratitudet Ib. r.
loaded him with marks of her bounty; she raild9z, 93.
him to offices of profit and of trust, and tranfadCtd
no matter of importance without his advice :. By t Melv.
complaisance, and aiduity, he confirmed and for- 133.
tifed there dispositions of the Queen in his favour,Knox,396,
and insensibly paved the way towards that vast pro-
icC, which his immoderate ambition had perhaps
already conceived, and which, in spite of many
difficulties, and at the expence of many crimes,
he at last accomplished.

THE

Boos IV. THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approach-
---- ' ed. As her palace was defended only by a slender
'566 guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person;

at this time, to the insults he might uffer in a king-
dom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny. So:
this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen
to fix her residence in the castle of Edinburgh, the
strongest fortress in the kingdom, and the moR!

* Keith, proper place for the security of her peroin . In
335 order to render this security more perfect, Mary

laboured to extinguish the domestic feuds which
divided ome of the principal nobles. Murray and
Argyll were exasperated against Huntly and Both-
well, by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The
Queen, by her authority and intreaties, effcCtcd d
reconcilement among them, and drew from them
a promise to bury their difeords in everlasting obli-
vion. This reconcilement Mary had so much at

t lbiJ. heart, that she made it the condition on which she
336. Ap- again received Murray into favour t.
pend. I 9. ON the 9th of June, Mary was delivered of her
Birth of
a2hes^'L only son James, a Prince whose birth was happyfor

the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His accession to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and established the power of Great Britain on a firm
foundation. While she, torn early from her son
by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge those tender passions, nor to taste those joys
which fill the heart of a mother;

ME LVIL was instantly dispatched to London with

an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, a:
nrft, in a sensible manner; and the advantage and
superiority which her rival had acquired by the birth
of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, she had so far re- i
covered the command of herself, as to receive him

not

,.i,; and willingly accepted the invitation which "
iary gave her, to Itand godrlotier to her ftn * 1 566
As Mary loved fpleridor and magnificence, she 138.
:!oiv'ed to ceecbrate the baptifin of'the young Prince
.i,l great pmp; and for that plurpofe fert invi-
;.:oris of the ltame kind t the F:ench King, and
,o the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
rlJiband,

TIHE Quecin, 6oi her recovery, difcdko red no The Qu
rangce in her ientiinents with refpet to the King t. continues
The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had to treat

Darnly

oi'en to an action fo'iifolerit and unjudftifiable, were with indif-

ill fresh in her mcrniory. She was frequertly peri- ferenceand
i;e and dejected A. Arid though Henry sometimes neglea.
;iended at coutii, and accompanied her in her pro- t Seen '

.ecTcsthrough different parts of the kingdbm, he xvI.

inert with little reverece from the riobles, while lb. 148;
.lary) treated him with the greatest ieferve, and did
,ot uffer him to posess any authority 11. The Keith
brLch between them became every day more ap- 350.
pzrent §. Attempts were made toward a reconcile- Melv.i3iz
pint, particularly by Caftelhau the French Ambaf- § Keth,
ulir; but after such a Violent rupture, it was found 169.

eCfl' rniatter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and
I',oiuh he prevailed on the King and Queen to pass
!."0 nights tgethcr ¶, we riay, with great proba- e Ibid.
'i.';i-, pronounce this appearance of union, to
;.ia:i Cafetlnau trusted, not to have been sincere
n'knovw with c-rrainty that it was not lasting.
BOTHWFLL, ail this while, was the Queen's Her at-
7inc confidant. Without his participation no bu- tachment
endc was concluded, ard no favour bestowed. To- to Both-
ether with this ascendant over her councils, Both- crelafes
well, if we may believe the cotemporary historians,
.cquired no less sway over her heart. But at what
precise time, this ambitious Lord first allowed the
riliments of a lover to occupy the place of that
:'.iy and rele3t which a subjet owes his Sove-
VOL. I. X reign

Boos IV. reign; or when Mary, instead of gratitude for hi-

~'~ faithful services, felt a passion of another nature ri-
; ' sing in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.

Such delicate transitions of passion can be discerned
only by those, who are admitted near the persons .of
the parties, and who can view the secret workings
of the heart with calm and acute observation. Nei-
ther Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages.
Their humble fiation allowed them only a diftan
access to the Queen and her favourite. And the ar-
dour of their zeal, and the violence of their preju-
dices, render their opinions rash, precipitate, and
inaccurate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal
paflion, rather than by their accounts of it, that sub-
sequent historians can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's projec to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary was
voung, gay, and affable. She possessed great fen-
libiliry of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tenderness of affection. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy object, who requited it with in-
gratitude, and treated her with neglect, with info-
folence, and with brutality. All these she felt, and
resented. In this situation, the attention and com-
plaifance of a man, who had vindicated her autbo-
rity, and protected her person who entered into
all her views, who oothed all her passions, who
watched and improved every opportunity of infinu-

' AnJ.Fr. ating his design, and recommending his passion ,
-'93 9 could scarce fail of making an impression on a

heart of such a frame as Mary's.

The K;ng THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-
resolves to tery, and accustomed to command, could not bear
leave the contempt under which he had now fallen, and"
Scotlan. the ate of insignificance to which he saw himfiel

reduced. But in a country, where he was univer-
flly hated or despised, he could never hope to form:

a party,

a party, which would second any attempt he might BooK IV.
make to recover power. I-e addressed himself, --
therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France 566
and Spain, with many professions of his own zeal
for the Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints
against the Queen, for negleting to promote that
interest ': And soon after, he took a resolution, Knox,
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board 399.
a ship, which he provided, and of flying into so-
reign parts. It is almost impossible to form any
satisfactory conjecture concerning the motives
which influence a capricious and irregular mind.
He hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the
Catholic Princes on the continent, by his zeal for
religion, and that they would employ their interest
towards reinflating him in the poffeflion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps, he expected
nothing more than the comfort of hiding the dif-
grace under which he was now fallen, among ftran-
gers, who had never been witnefes of his former
prosperity.

He comimunicated the design to the French Hs capri-
Ambassador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl ofcius be-
Lenox. They both endeavoured to dissuade him haviour.
from it, but without success Lenox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's con-
fidence, and who, about this time, was feldoin at
court, instantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accom-
pany the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
hkewife absent from court. He arrived there,
however, on the fame day she received the ao-
count of his intended flight. But he was more than
usually wayward and peevish; and scrupling to
enter the palace, unless certain Lords who attend-
ed the Queen were dismissed, Mary was obliged to
meet him without the gates. At last he suffered
her to conduct him into her own apartment. She
endeavoured to draw from him the reasons of the

X 2 strange

Boor IV. strange resolution which he had taken, and to divert
<<L> him from it. In spire, however, of all her argu-
' 6. ments and intreaties, he remained silent and inflexi,

ble. Next day the Privy Council, by her direc-
tion, expoftulated with him on the fame head.
He persisted, notwithstanding, in his sullenness and
obstinacy; and neither deigned to explain the mo-
tives of his conducEt nor signified any intention of
altering it. As he left the apartment, he turned
towards the Queen, and told her, that she hould
not fee his face again, for a long time. A few days
after, he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things
as grounds of his disgust. She herself, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had
deprived him of all power; and the nobles, after
her example, treated him with open neglet, so that
he appeared in every place without the dignity and
splendor of a King.

Mary en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary,
deavours than this intended Right of the King's, which would
it rendt have spread the infamy of their domestic quarrel all
d flight. over Europe. Compafnion for a Monarch who

would then appear to be forced into exile by her
negle& and ill usage, might have disposed mankind
to entertain sentiments concerning the causes of their
discord, little to her advantage. In order, there-
fore, to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to
creen her reputation from any censure with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the Privy Coun-
cil transmitted a narrative of this whole tranfaion,
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of
France. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's

Ke;h, conduSt in the moit favourable point of light *.
345, j7. ACUT this time, the license of the borderers

called for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a
court ofjuftice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of fe-
veral adjacent counties were furnmoned to attend

T b. 353-their Sovereign in arms, according to cufto:n t.
5.~O*v,'' Bothwell
~ - -

Bothwell was, at that time, Lieutenant or War-BooK IV.
den of all the marches, an office among the most 1-

'n x

'So- 1566

important in the kingdom; and though usually
divided into three distinct governments, bestowed
by the Queen's favour upon him alone. In order
to display his own valour and activity in the dif-
charge of this trust, he attempted to seize a gang
of banditti, who, lurking among the marshes of
Liddefdale, infested the reft of the country. But
while he was laying hold of one of thole defpe- O. 6,
rado's, he was wounded by him in several places,
ob that his followers were obliged to carry him to
Hermitage castle. Mary instantly flew' thither,
with an impatience which strongly marks the anxi-
ety of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a
Queen *. Finding that Bothwell was threatened
with no dangerous symptom, he returned that
fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a
journey, added to the anguish of mind she had
ilffered on Bothwell's account, threw her next
morning into a violent fever t. Her life was de- t Keith,
fpaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her 35', 352
constitution, resifted the malignity of her disease.
During the continuance of the Queen's illness, the
King, who resided at Stirling, never came near
Jedburgh t; and when he afterwards thought fit Ibid,

Append,
133.

The distance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is 18 Scot-

tilh miles, through a country almolt impassable. The season of
the vear was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been wound-
ed in a cuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man, rather
than any open infurreftion of the borderers. It does not appear
that the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train.
Had any military operation been necessary, as is supposed,
Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been extremely improper to
rifque the Queen's person in an expedition againlt thieves. So
ioon as the Qkeen found Bothwell to be in no danger, she in.
;!antly returned ; and after this we hear no more of the infur-
reClion, nor have we any proof that the rioters took refuge in
England. No other reason but that which we have produced,
:cms sufficient to account for the Queen's conduR.

X 3 to

Boos IV. to make his appearance there, he met with such a

cold reception, as did not encourage him to make

o Knox, any long tay *. Mary soon recovered strength
400. 'enough to return along the eastern borders to

Dunbar.

WHILE he resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith-
standing her promite, and even proclamations to
the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged

t Cai. Morton and his associates to remain in England +.
vol. ii.; IIary, on the other hand, afforded her protection

to several Englilh fugitives. Each Queen watch-
ed the motions of the other with a jealous attention,
and secretly countenanced the practices, which
were carrying on, to disturb the admrinifration of
her rival,

For this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, Robert

Melvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely

The Eng- active and successful. We may impute, in a good
lihi Paria- degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which appear-
nrent ia- ed in the Parliament of England, and which raif-
yrs e- ed a storm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic
teni]ons to tranquillity, more than any other event of her
the fuc;ef- reign, and required all her art and dexterity to al-
':'- lay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, with-

out discovering the least intention to marry. A
violent ditemper, with which she had lately been
seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the prospect of all these calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious
succession; a motion was made, and eagerly liften-
ed to in both houses, for addrefing the Queen, to
provide against any such danger in times to come,
either by signifying her own resolution to marnr,
or by consenting to an act establishing the order or

; D'Ewe's fuccefion to the Crown t. Her love to her sub-
JoUl I jects, her duty to the public, her concern for pofte-

riry, it was pretended, not only called upon, bt

obliged

obliged her to take one of there steps. The infu- BOOK IV.
pcrable aversion which the had all along discovered ,v'
tor marriage, made it improbable that mle would 156
choose the former; and if she complied with the
latter request, no title to the Crown could, with
any colour ofjuftice be set in oppofirion to that of
the Scottilh Queen. Elizabeth was sagacious enough
to fee the remoterf consequences of this motion,
,and observed them with the greatest anxiety. Mary,
iv rufing so often to ratify the treaty of Edin-
l[lrgh, had plainly intimated a design of embrac-
ing the firfl promising opportunity for prosecuting
I:l right to the English Crown; and by her secret
negotiations, she had gained many to favour her
itle '. All the Roman Catholics ardently wished Melv.
for her succession. Her gentleness and humanity had '36.
removed many of thole apprehensions which the
Protestants entertained on account of her religion.
The court faction, which envied the power of Ce-
cil, and endeavoured to wrest the administration
out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the
Scottif OQueen in opposition to him. The union
of the wo kingdoms was a desirable object to all
wife men in both nations; and the birth of the
young Prince was a security for the continuance of
this blefling, and gave hopes of its perpetuity,

UNDER these circumstances, and while the na-Eliza-
tion was in such a temper, a parliamentary decla- beth'sper-
ration of Mary's title would have been highly de- pleity n
trimental to Elizabeth. The. present unsettled Chatac
fate of the succession left much in her power.
lier relentment alone might have gone far towards
excluding any of the competitors from the Crown;
and the dread of this had hitherto refrained, and
overawed the ambition of the Scottiflh Queen. But
if this check fiould be removed, by the legal ac-
knowledgment of her title, Mary would be at full
liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to at

X 4 without

Boor 1V. without fear or reserve. Her partizans were al-
-'-" ready meditating schemes for insurrections in dif.
* Melv. ferent parts of the kingdom *; and an a of Pai-
147 liament, recognizing the rights of that Princes,

whose pretensions they favoured, would have been
nothing less than a signal to arms; and, notwith-
sanding Elizabeth's jut title to the affections of
her subjects, might have shaken and endangered her
throne.

Mary en- WHILE this matter remained in ffpenfe in
deavours both houses, an account of it was transmitted
thoisppor- Mary. by Melvil her AmbalTador. As she did not
tuniry. want advocates for her right, even among those

who were near Elizabeth's person, she endeavour-
ed to cultivate the diipofition which appeared to-
wards fettling the right of fuccefion in her favour,
by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. |
She expressed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's a
friendship, which she ascribes chiefly to their good |
offices, with their Sovereign, in her behalf. She j
declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity
with England, without urging or pursuing her
claim upon the Crown, any farther than should be
agreeable to the Queen. But, at the fame time, |
as her right of succession was undoubted, he hoped
it would be examined with candour, and judged
of w.ith impartiality. The nobles who attended
her wrote to the English Privy Council in the fame

j Keith, strain -t. Mary artfully gave these letters the air
534. of being nothing more than a declaration of her
Append. own, and of her subjects gratitude towards Eliza-
'33 beth. But as he could not be ignorant of the

jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth obiervcd;
the proceedings of Parliament, a itep so uncom-
mon as this, of cne Prince's entering into public
correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of ano-
ther, could not be otherwif' construcd than as
-.ken with an inention :o encourage the fpir:,

sp~;

which had already been raised among the English. BOOK IV.
In this light it seems to have appeared to Eliza- '-v

i 566.

beth herself *. But the disposition of her people Keish6
rendering it necessary to treat Mary's person with 357.
reat decency, and her title with much regard,
ihe mentioned it to her only in the softest language.

NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor- Elizabeth

tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's character, than sooths the
the temper which both houses of Parliament disco- Padiallen[
vered on this occasion. She bent all her policy to
defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing the
rft heat of their zeal to evaporate, she called into
her pretence a certain number of each house. She
ioothed and caressed them; she threatened and pro-
mifed; she remitted fublidies which were due; and
refused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off
for that session, Happily for her, the conduc of
the Scottiih Queen, and the misfortunes which be-
fel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in
any future Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation
of impartiality, and that she might not drive Mary
into any desperate measure, she committed to the
Tower one Thornton, who had published ome-
thing derogatory to the right of the Scottish line :; t Camd.
and signified her displeasure againt a member of 4o0.
the house of Commons, who seemed by some words
in a speech, to glance at Mary §. § Haynes,

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever so- 449.

An extra-

licitous to promote the interest of that religion ordinary
which she professed. The re-efl-ablilhment of the fep of
Romih doctrine seems to have been her favourite Mary's in
patfon; and though the design was concealed with pfa0urof
care, and conducted with caution, she pursued it
with a persevering zeal. At this time, he ven-

t D'Ewe's Journ. lo.-30o. Calnd, 3q9. Melv 19. Haynes,
4;6.

tured

13oor iV. tured to lay aide fomewhatofherufualreferve; and
~'-- the aid which she expeaed from the Popish Prin-

''j ces, who had engaged in the league o Bayonne,

encouraged her to take a tep, which, if we confi-
der the temper f the nation, appears to be ex-
rremely bold. Having formerly held a secret cor-
refpondence with the court of Rome, she now re-
solved to allow a Nuncio from the Pope public-
iv to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at
that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the person on
whom Pius V. conferred this office, and along with
him he lent the Queen a prefentof 20,0o0 crowns*.
It is not the character of'the Papal court, to openi
its treasury upon distant or imaginary hopes, The
business of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no
other, than to attempt a reconciliation of the king-
dom to the Romish fee. Thus Mary herself un-
derftood it; and in her answer to a letter which
she received from the Pope, after expressing her
grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality,
she promises that she would bend her whole
strength towards the re-eftablilhment and propaga-
tion of the Catholic faith; that she would receive
the Nuncio with every poTble demonstration of
respect, and concur, with the utmost vigour, in all
his designs towards promoting the honour of God,
and restoring peace to the kingdom; that she would
celebrate the baptism of the Prince, according to
the ceremonies which the Romnifh ritual prescribes,
hoping that her fubjeas would be taught, by this
example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with con-
tempt; and that she would be careful to instill
early into her on the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith t. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
sent over one of his attendants with part of the mo-

* Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. 325. i Conzi Vita
'Mariz ap. ebb. vol. ii. 51.

ney,

ney, the Queen did not think the juneture proper BOOK IV.
for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend L
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against the 566'
time of the Prince's baptism; and as it would have
been improper to offend her, she wifely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris *. The convulsions into which the kingdom Keith,
was thrown oon after, made it impossible for him Append,
to pursue his journey any farther. '3 5

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carry-

ing on these negotiations for subverting the Re-
formredChurch, she did not scruple publickly to em-
ploy her authority towards obtaining for its Mini-
fters a more certain and comfortable subsistence -. + Keith,
During this year, she iued several proclamations 5662.
and as of council for that purpose, and readily Knox,
approved of every scheme which was proposed
for the more effectual payment of their itipends.
This part of her condu& does little honour to
Mary's integrity; and though justified by the ex,
ample of Princes, who often reckon falfhood and
deceit among the necessary arts of government,
and even authorised by the pernicious casuistry of
the Roman Church, which transfers breach of faith
to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of du-
ties, such dissimulation, however, mutl be num-
bered among those blemishes which never stain a
truly great and generous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambaf- Dccemb.

fadors were yet arrived, the baptism of the Prince ier o er
was put off from time to time. Mean while Mary the King
ixed her residence at Craigmillar J. Such a retire- exceflive.
ment, perhaps, suited the present temper of her1Keith,
mind, and induced her to prefer it before her own 3
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. -Ier aversion for the
King grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
come altogether incurable. A deep melancholy
succeeded to that gaiety of spirit, which was natu-
ral to her. The rhnefs and levity of her own

choice,

Bs IV. choice, and the King's ingratitude and obstinacy,
L.. ' filled her with hame and with despair. A varie

5. ty of passions preyed at once on a mind, all whose

sensations were exquisite, and all its emotions strong,
and often extorted from her, the aft wish of the un-

* Keith, forrunate, that life itf-lf would come to an end*.
Pref. vl. MURR AY and Mairland observed all those work-
bAet ee ins of pafons in the breait of the Queen, and
them po- conceived hop.s of turning them to the advantage
p6sed. of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other

conspirators against Rizio. They were still in ba-
nifiiment, and the Queen's reli-ntment against them
continued unabated. Murray and the Secretary
flattered themselves, however, that her inclination
to be separated from Darnly would surmount this
deep-rooted aversion, and that the hopes of an e-
vent so desirable might induce her to be reconciled
to the conspirators. It was easy to find reasons,
in the King's behaviour, on which to found a fen-
tence of divorce. This sentence they had interest
enough to obtain, and to procure the ratification
of it in Parliament. In return for this service,
they proposed to stipulate with the Queen to grant
a pardon to Morton and his followers. The de-
sign was firit of all communicated to Argyle, who,
as well as Murray, owed his return to Scotland to
the conspiracy against Rizio. Huntly and Both-
well, who at that time direced all Mary's councils,
were likewise admitted into the concert. They
joined together in making the overture to the
Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo-

+ Aderf. quence -. But Mary, however desirous of obtain-
voL iv. ing that deliverance from Darnly's caprices, with
art which they endeavoured to allure her, had never-

thelefs good reasons for rejecting the method, by
which they proposed to accomplish it. The birth
of her ion had greatly strengthened her claim up-
ci the Englilh fucceflion, and encouraged the abet-
tors of it to app- r with greater boldness, and to

aft

aft with more vigour. She could scarce hope toBooK IV.
be divorced from her husband, without throwing 'v
some imputation on her son. This might open a 1566
newdifpute with regard to the fucceffibn, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to
call in question the Prince's legitimacy, or at least
to subject it to all the delays and cavils of a judicial
inquiry. The fear of these inconveniencies weigh-
ed with Mary, and determined her rather to en-
dure her hard fate, than to seek relief, by ventur-
ing on such a dangerous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,

English and French Ambassadors, being ar-
rived, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the
baptism of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought presents
from Elizabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and
the refpeft with which file asseted, at that time,
to treat the Queen of Scots. Great preparations
had been made by Mary, and the magnificence
displayed by her on this occasion, exceeded what-
ever had been formerly known in Scotland. TheDec. 17.
ceremony itself was performed according to the
rites of the Romish Church. But neither Bedford,
nor any of the Scottifl nobles who professed the
Protestant religion, entered within the gates of the
chapel*. The spirit of that age, firm and un-' Keith,
complying, would not, upon any inducement, con-36o.
descend to witness an acion, which is esteemed ido-
latrous.

HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncture, perfetlyTheKing's

discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of his capricious
folly. He chore to reside at Stirling, but confined Tha ur
himself to his own apartment; and as the Queen tifmofthe
distrusted every nobleman who ventured to con-Prince.
verie with him, he was left in absolute solitude.
Nothing could be more singular, or was less ex-
peced, than his choofing to appear in a manner,

chat

Boox IV. that both publifled the contempt under which he
t-*v-- had fallen, and by exposing the Queen's domestic
1 56. unhappiness to the observation of so many foreign-

ers, looked like a ftep taken on purpose to mor-
tify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult fen-
sibly; and notwithfianding all her efforts to as-
fume the gaiety which suited the occasion, and
which was necessary for the polite reception of her
guests, she was sometimes obliged to retire, in or-
der to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow, and give

Keith, vent to her tears *. The king still persisted in his
Pref. V. design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily

threatened to put it in execution -.

THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's bap-
tifm was not the sole business of Bedford's embassy.

- Camden affirms, 401. that Bedford was commanded by

El:zabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this was an
indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her hufaand.it hath
been afierted to be the cause of the King's absence from thecere-
mony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, . No
such thing is to be found among Bedford's infiructions, the origi-
nal of which still remains. Keith, 56. z. Bedford's advice to the
Queen by Melvil is utterly inconfiflent with Camden's assertion.
Melv. ;. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's iftruc-
tions to Sir Henry Norris, where fIheaffrms that she commanded
Bedford to employ his best offices towards reconciling Mary to her
husband, wiich he had attempted to no purpose. Diggess
Compl. Ambafl. p. 13. A paper published, Appen,!. N' XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident men-
tions the King's ablence, but without giving that reaoln sori',
which has been founded on Camden's wv-rds, though, if rhat
had been the real one, he would Icarce have failed to mention
it. His account of this matter is that vlich I have followed,
Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He intrrlns his court, that on account of
the difference betwixt the King and the Queen, he had refufd
to hold any further correfpcn-iere witn the former, though he
appears, in many inttances, to have been his great confidant. ibid.
5. As the king wasnor prelent at the bapfifm, he eems to have
been excluded from any share in the odinarv adminillration ot
business. Two as of Privy Council, one on the o2th, and the
other on the 21(1 of December, are found in Keith, 562. They
both run in the Queen's name alone. The King seems nt :
have been prefenr. This could no: be owing to Elizabeth's in-
ftruetions to Bedford.

His

His instructions contained an overture, which BooKIV.
ought to have gone far towards extinguishing those --`

r566.

jealousies which had so long subsisted between the Eliaiheth
two Queens. The treaty of Edinburgh, which endea-
has been so often mentioned, was the principal oc- vours to
cation of there. The spirit, 'however, which had acconmo-
risen to such an height in the late Parliament, the daret 'Te-
power of the party which favoured the Scottish withMary.
Qieen's title, the number and ativity of her a-
gcnts in the different parts of the kingdom, alarmed
Elizabeth, and induced her to forego any advan-
tage, which the ambiguous and artful expreflions
in that treaty might afford her. Nothing was now
demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title to
the Crown of England during Elizabeth's life,
and the lives of her posterity; who, on the other
hand, engaged to take no ftep, which might
prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the fuc-
ceflion *. KCl:,

MARY could not, with decency, reject a propofi- 35'.

tion so equitable; she insisted, however, that Eliza-
beth should order the right upon which she claim-
ed to be legally examined, and publickly recog-
nized, and particularly that the testament of Hen-
ry VIII. whereby he had excluded the defcen-
dants of his eldest sifter the Queen of Scotland,
from the place due to them in the order of fuc-
cefiron, might be produced, and confidered by the
English nobility. Mary's Ministers had credulous-
ly embraced an opinion, that this testament which
they so justly conceived to be injurious to their
Mistress, was a mere forgery; and on different
occasions had urged Elizabeth to produce it. Ma-
ry would have suffered considerably by gaining
this point. The original testament is still extant..
and not the least doubt can be entertained of i:;
gcnuinenefs and authenticity. But it was nor
Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aiide te
title of the house of Stewart. She aim-d at no-

thing

BooK IV. thing more, than to keep the question concerning
-'" the succession perplexed and undecidedi and by

5. industriously eluding this request, she did real ser-

vice to Mary's cause*.

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince,

Morton and all the other conspirators against Rizio
obtained their pardoni and leave to feeurn into
Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued in-
exorable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded
at last to the solicitations of Bothwell . He could
hope for no success in those bold designs on which
his ambition resolved to venture, without drawing
aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for
Morton and his associates, of which they had good
reason to despair, he expeced to secure a band of
faithful and determined adherents.

The King still remained at Stirling in folituide,

and under contempt Hlis impatience in this fitua-
tion, together with the alarm given him, by the ru-
mour of a design to seize his person, and confine
him to prison i, was the occasion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his
father at Glasgow.

Lccen. . Two assemblies of the Church were held during
Church this year. New complaints were made, and upon
ari'?!j good grounds, of the poverty and contempt undet

which the ProtefRant clergy were suffered to lan-

uifli. Penurious as the allotment for their sub-
liftence was, they had not received the least part of

§ Kei h, what was due for the preceding year §. Nothing
5 6 .less than a zeal, ready to endure and to susser every

thing for a good caule, could have persuaded men
to adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected.
The extraordinary expences, occasioned by the
Prince's baptism, had exhausted the Queen's trea-
fury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence
of the clergy were diverted into other channels.

' Keith, 361, 38. Note (c) Murdin. 368.
t-Good. vol. i. 14,0 M.lv I.4. : KehPref viii.

The

The Queen was therefore obliged to prevent the BooK IV.
jutt remonstrances of the assembly, by falling on 66
bome hew method for the relief of the church.
omne symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards
iunificence might have been expected in an assign-
mient which was miade with an intention of soothing
?nd silencing the clergy. But both the Queen and
:he nobles held fast the riches of the church which
they had seized: A fum, which, at the highest
computation, can scarce be reckoned equal to
Q0oo/. fterlirig*, was deemed sufficient for the main- - Keith*
;enance of a whole national church, by men who 562.
had lately seen ingle monasteries possessed of reve-
hues far superior in value;

THE ecclefiafticks in that age bore the grievafies

which asseted thenmllves alone with atonifhing
patience, but wherever the reformed religion was
threatened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed,
and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their ap-
prehensions of danger. A js occasion of this kind
was given them, a hort time before the meeting
of the assembly. The urped and oppressive ju-
rifdition of the spiritual courts had been abolished
by the Parliament 1560, and Commiffaries were
appointed to hear and determine the causes which
formerly came under their cognizance t. Among s Id. j5.
the few acts of that Parliament, to which Mary had
paid any regard, this was one; She had confirm-
ed the authority of the Commiffaries3 arid had
given them iftru&ioris for directing their proceed-'
ings t, which are still of great authority i that keithB
court. From that time these judges had continued 5 .
in the unintetrupted eercife of their function,
when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclamations
restoring the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's to his
ancient jurifdiion, and depriving the Commiffaries
of all authority §. § nx,

A MOTIVt which cannot be justified, rendered4Q"
the Qeen n; unwilling to ventur uar thisralh

Vol. r tY adien.

Boo: 1V.. ation. She had been contriving, for ome timn,
,'"-- how to re-eftablifn the Popilh religion; and the re-

166. itoring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former ju-

rifdiction, seemed to be a considerable ftep towards
that end. The motive which prompted Bothweli,
to whose influence over the Queen this aion must
" nx, be chieflv imputed , was still more criminal. His

enterprising ambition had already formed that bold
dcfign, which he loon after put in execution, and
the use which we hall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics
regained, discovers the reasons of his present coi-
ducr in contributing to revive their power. The
Proteftanr clergy were not unconcerned fpec&ators
of an event, which threatened their religion with
unavoidable destruction; but as they delpaired of
obtaining the proper remedy from the queen her-
self, they addressed a remonstrance to the whole
body of the Protestant nobility, full of that ardent
zeal for religion, which the danger to which it was
- Keith, exposed at that time, seemed to require t. What

effe&ts this vehement exhortation might have pro-
duced, we have no opportunity of judging, the at-
tention of the nation being quickly turned towards
events cf another, and more tragical nature.

The K-;-n I.MMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling.
rl'i Icka: and before he could reach Glafgowv he was seized
Giafgow. with a dangerous distemper. The yi ptoms which

'.. attendd it were violent and unusual, 3rnd in that

age it v.-as commonly imputed to the effets of poi-

- s.ue' Ion . It is impolElble, amidst the contradic&tons of
-.Kr.cx. hiftirians, to decide with certainty concerning its

nature, or its cause §. His life was in the utmost

danger;

t I'.;chr.:n r.d' Knox re positive that the Kig had ben yoi-

forcd. T'hevcr.lon hse back ar.d puitlJ puflules which bruk
ut ali o - his b.J-y. Buchanan acid, that A-bernethy the King's
.!)iic:a. p.airy :l eclared tat poison wa. the cause of thee fynip-
tci;i., a;. .ar rtie Qucen ;cfufed to aliiv her on hyfican to
ci:er hir., Buch. :ti; Knox, 401. 2. Blackwoad, Cauin..&c;

Jlr,,

danger; but after languishing for folne weeks, theBooK 1V

,igour of his constitution surmounted the malignity '"v-'°
us the disease. 1567

MARY'S negle of the King, on this occasion, Negleled

vas equal to that with which he had treated her by Mar'.
diuring her i!lnefs at Jcdburgh; She no Ichger felt
that warmth of conj ugal affecion which prompts to
vimpathy5 and delights in all hole tender offices
which lootl and aleviate licknefs and pain. At
this junctln re, site did not even put on the appear-
anco of this pafiion. Notwithlitanding the King's
danger, she amuid herelrf with excursions to dif-
ftrent parts of the country, and lllffCr.ed near a
month to lapse before. she visited him at Glasgow.
By that time, the violence of the diftcmper was over,
::iul the King, though weak and languishing, was
out of all danger.

THE breacll between Mary nd her husband was The

not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts, which hreach be-
interrupt the domestic union, without diffolvingr it the
altogether. Almost all the passions, which operate parable.
with greatest violence on a fcmale mind, and drive
ii to the most dngerois extremes, concurred in
rising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. In-
gratitude for the favours she had bestowed; contempt
us her person, violations of the marriage-vow, en-

.',bh, vol. ii. 24, 59. aferr; that the firlall pox was the dieafe
itih wlich the King was leizcd. He i called a Pockfh mrnn
ili the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. I;. The reafbn given by
ir;l:h /'ais for lodig the King at the Kirk if Field, viz. leii
ir young Piilce I1souid catch t:ie ifection it he staid in rhe p-
i.cr, lecens to favour this opirion, Ander. vol. ii. 193. Carte
s liions it as a prot of Mary's tendernel's to her huband, that
tnough he never had the finall pox herielf, fle ventured toattend

m11, vol. iii. 446. ' his, if it had been true, would have as-
iodcd a good pretence for not viiiting hin sooner; but Mary
rd the tirall pox in her inlancy, Saller's Letters. 3. Bihnp
L-1y ;ff,;ms, that the King's disease wab the French pox, Keirh,
i4.. Note (). In :hat age, thisditeale was eieeiicl lo conta-
l'ou, that perlons inlsened with it were removed without the

, .ia2

,.raf
cchet

¥ 2 irbachments

Boos IV. croachments on her power, conspiracies against her

-ó favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy, were
367 the injuries of which Mary had great reason to

complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility;
and added to the anguish of disappointed love, they
produced those iymptoms of despair which we
have already described. Her resentment against the
King seems not to have abated from the time of his
leaving Stirling. In a letter written with her own
hand, to her ambaTfador in France, just before she
let out for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcile-
. mrent appear. On the contrary, she mentiors,

with some bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the
}ealoufy with which he observed her ations, and
the inclination he discovered to disturb her govern"
ment, and at the fame time talks of all his attempts

Keith. with the utmost scorn*.
re.' AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it

Kmg at was scarce to be expeced that she would visit the
Gtlasow. Kmig, or that any thing but marks of jealousy and

distrust should appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; she nor
only viited Henry, but, by all her words and ac-
tions, endeavoured to express an uncommon assec-
tion for himn: And though this made impression on
the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible,
on lome occasions, than obltinate on others; yet,
to those who are acquainted with the human heart,
and who know how seldom and how slowly such
-ounds in domeitic happiness are healed, this fud-
den transition will appear with a very suspicious
air, and will be confidered by them as the effect of
artifice.

-i:- io- BUT it is noi on suspicion alone, that Mary is
·:.:.ion. charged with difimulation in this part of her con-

duEc. Two of her famous letters to Bothwell
were written during her stay at Glasgow, and fully
lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far

fucceecd

fScceeded in his ambitious and criminal design, as BooK IV.
to gain an absolute ascendant over the Queen; and
in a situation, such as Mary's, merit not so confpi- 567
cuous, services of far inferior importance, and ad-
dress much leis insinuating than Bothwell's, may
be fippofed to feal imperceptibly on a female
heart, and entirely to overcome it. Among those
in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor
llrong: Nor did the manners of that court, in
which Mary had been educated, contribute to in-
crease or to fortify them. The amorous turn of
Francis I. and Henry II. the wildness of the mili-
tary characEer in that age, and the liberty of ap-
pearing in all companies, which began to be allow-
ed to women, who had not yet acquired that deli-
cacy of sentiment, and thote polilhed manners,
which alone can render this liberty innocent, had
introduced, among the French, a licentiousness of
morals that rofe.to an astonishing height. Such ex-
amples, which were familiar to Mary from her in-
fancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that horror
of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind. The
King's behaviour would render the first approach
of forbidden sentiments less hocking; resentment,
and disappointed love, would be apt to represent
whatever soothed her revenge, as justifiable on that
account; and so many concurring causes might,
almost imperceptibly, kindle a new passion in her
heart.

BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard The me

to the rife and progress of this pafion, the letters tives of it.
themselves breathe all the ardour and tenderness of
love. The affe&ion which Mary there expresses
for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent
part of her conduet; which, without admitting this
circumstance, appears altogether mysterious, in-
consistent and inexplicable. That reconcilement
with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be

Y 3 genuine,

Eoce iV genuine, it is impoible to give any plausible ac-

count, is discovered, by the Queen's own confflifion,
57. to have been mere artifice and deceit. As her -

version for her hufoand, and the suspicious atten-
tion with which she observed his conduct, became
univerillly known, her ears were officiously filled,
as is usual in such cafes, with groundlcss or aggra-
ated accounts of his actions. By iome, fle was
:old, that the King intended to flize the person of
the Prince his son, and in his name to uurp the
government; by others she was afiured, that he
resolved inftanty to leave the kingdom; that a
?efil was hired ror this purpQfe, and lay in the n-

' Ki:-, yver Clyde readv to receive him *. The last was
-:te: 'i. what Mary chiciy dreaded. Henry's retiring into

a foreign country mufi have been highly dishonour-
able to the Queen, and w-ould have entirely difcon-
certed Bothwell's measures. While he resided at
Glalow, at a distance from her, and in that part
of the kingdom where the interest of his family was
greatefr, he might, with more facility, accompiifh
his designs. In order, therefore, to prevent his
executing any such wild clleme, ir was neceiiarv
to bring him to fame place where he would be more

'eval:iscn immediately under her own eye. 'For this purpose,
o!me to she firi employed all lher art to regain his conli-
E.;,- ; dence, and then propoied to remove him to the
burgh. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that

there he would have easier access to the advice of
physicians, and that she heriblf could at'tend him

t C;ou without being absent f-om her ton . 'The Kiing
--. ii S was weak enough to fuler himelif ro be per uacd;

and being itill eebie and incapab.e of baring fa-
tigue, was carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a houir,

belonging to the iProvol of a collegiate church, call-
ed Kirk of Field. It stood alinoft upon the fame spot
-where the house belonging to the Principal of the

University

UJniverfity now stands. Such a situation, on a ri- Boom IV.
iing ground, and at that time in an open field, had '- --
all the advantages of healthful air to recommend it; z56 .
blut, on the other hand, the solitude of the place
rnderied it extremely proper for the commiiffon of
t!;at crime, with a view to which, it seems mani-
teltly to have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the He is nlur-

most afliduous care.. She seldom was absent from icred
him through the day; the slept Ifveral nights in there.
the chamber under his apartment. She heaped on
him so many marks of tndernefs and confidence,
as, in a great mcafure, quieted those suspicions
whlich had bo long disturbed him. But while he
was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
olrmer happiness, he flood on the very brink of
ietlruction. On Sunday the th of February,
about eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of
Field, in order to be present at a marque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which
the King lay was blown up with gunpowder. The
noile and hock, which this sudden explosion oc-
cafioned, alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants
ran to the place whence it came. The dead. body
of the King, with that of a servant who slept in the
lame room, were found lying in an adjacent garden,
without the city wall, untouched by fire, and with
no bruise or mark of violence.

SuCCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart His cha-

Lord Darnly, in the twenty first year of his age. raaer0
i'he indulgence of fortune, and his own external
ccomplifliments, without any other merit, had
railed him to an height and dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingra-
titude, he loft the heart of a woman who doated on
!nm to distraction. His insolence and inconfancy
i!;l.nated fiom him such of the nobles as had con-

Y 4 tributed

BooK IV. tributed most zealously towards his elevation. Hi.
'"'" ~' levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the

!567' people, who once revered him as the defeendant

of their ancient-Kings and heroes. Had he died a
natural death, his end would have been unlamen-
ed, and his memory have been soon forgotten;
but the cruel circumstances of his murder, and the
remifnefs with which it was afterwards avenged,
have made his name to be remembered with regre,
and have rendered him the obje&t of pity to which
he had otherwise no title.

Bothweli EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess
and the who had contrived and executed this execrable deed.
Queen sus-
pe~ed of The suspicion fell, with almost a general conent,
the mur- on Bothwell a; and ome reflec&ions were thrown.
der. out, as if the Queen herself were no stranger to the

Melv. crirpe. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullef
. i. , 56. evidence, that the nature of the aion will admit.

The Queen's known sentiments with regard to her
husband, gave a great appearance of probability
to the imputation with which she was loaded t.

Two days after the murder,. a proclamation was

issued by the Queen, offering a considerable re-
ward to any person who should discover those who
had been guilty of such a horrid and detestable

! Anders. crime +; and though Bothwell was now one o0,
o!. i. 36. the greatest subjects in the kingdom, formidable on

account of his own power, nd proteEted by the
Qsueen's favour, it was impossible to fuppreis t!:e
sentiments and indignation or the people. Papers
were affixed to the most public places of the ci:',
accusing him of the murder, and naming his az-
complices; pictures appeared to the ame purpo:i',l
and voices were heard in the middle or the igl;,
charging himwith that barbarous action. Brt r'.e a]?
rhors of these rumours did no: corfine heir accu

t Se rD;:-ttsion co c:n;r. :he r!-
e - 1;' *i;! ' D

a-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. n{:

iations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that the BOOK IV
Queen herself was accessory to the crime *. This T
bold accusation, which so direcly attacked Mary's A6nders.
reputation, drew the attention of the council; and vol. ii.
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of 156.
these libels, diverted them from searching for the
mrurderers of the King . It could scarce be ex- Id. vol.
pected that Mary herself would be extremely folici-' 38
tous to discover those who had rid her of an hus-
band, whom she had so violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme diretion
of this, as well as of all other affairs, to stifle and
suppress whatever evidence should be'offered, and
to cover, if possible the whole tranfation under
the veil of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry,
however, was made, and ome persons called be-
fore the council; but the examination was conduct-
ed with the most indecent remissness, and in such
a manner, as to let in no light upon the scene of
guilt ·. t Id. vol.

Do~~~~~~~~~

T ~iv 1i67,

IT was not her own subje&s alone who fufpeRed .

67.

Mary of having been accessory to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, so dishonourable to her
character, owe its rile and progress to the jealousy
and malice of her factious nobles. The report of
the manner and circumstances of the King's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in
that age, which was accustomed to deeds of vio-
lence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy
breach with her husband had long been matter of
public discourse, the first conjectures which were
formed with regard to his death, were extremely to
her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offer for her condut, called on her to pro-
lecute the murderers with the utnmot diligence,
and expected that the rigour of her proceedings
would prove the best and flleft vindication of her
innocence §. Keith,

TLtElqox Pref. ix.
LENOX,

Boos IV. LENOX, at the ifame time, incited Mary to ve,-
"- -' eance with inceiTant importunity. This nobleman
Leo -; ilad sharcd in his ion's ditgrace, and being treated
LenOx aC-'
cufes by Mary with neglect, ufiall resided at a diftanc:-
Bothiei: from court. Rouzed, however, by an event no
Kofthe lels fiockin to the heart of a father, than fatal to
murer. all his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write
Feb. 21. to the Queen, and to offer his advice with refpet

to the most cffctual rnrthod for dicaovering and
convicting thole wio had lb cruelly deprived him
of a son, and her of a huflhand. He urged her to
prosecute thol wo vere guilty, with vigour, and
to bring them to a pecdy trial; he declared his
own luipicion of Bothwell, and of those who were
named as his acco.nplices; he required'that, out
of regard to decency, and in order to encourage
evidence to appear against them, the pel-bns ac-
cufed of such an atrocious crime should be com-
mitted to custody, or a: least excluded from her
Pre. ix. court and pretence *

MARY w.as then at Seaton, whither she had re-

tired after the burial of the King, whose body was
deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a

t Ancel. private, but decent manner . The former part or
vol. i 23. the Earl's demand, could rot, C;l any pretence, be

eluded; and i was resolved to bring Bothwell im-

May c,,n- mediately to rial. But, instead of confining him
tinues to t any prilbn, Mary admitted him into all her
favour councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed
him. the murderer of her hufbard, to enjoy all the fecu-
t Id. ibi rity, the dignity, and the power of a favourite J.
40, &c The offices which Bothweil already possessed, gave

him the command of all the south of Scotland.
The caltle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much consequence, not to wilh it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the
Martch 19.person of the young Prince in his hands, and im-

mediately bestowed the government of that impor-

tant

rant fortress upon Bothwell *. So many iteps in BOOK IV.
her condut, inconfillent with all the rules of pru- --,-
(once, and of decency, mtft be imputed to an ex- . 'A56er
ceis either of folly or of love. Mary's known vol. i. 3.
character fully vindicates her from the former; of tPef. 6+.
'the latter, many and striking proofs oon appeared, Keitl,
No direct evidence had yet appeared against 9.^

Eothwell; but as time might bring to light the on Ilis
circumstances of a crime, in which so many ac- trial.
complices were concerned, it was of great import-
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than general suspicions, and uncertain flrmc-,
could be produced by his accufcrs. For this rea-
iin in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th
of March, the 12th of April was appointed for the
day of trial. And tho' the law allowed, and the
manner in which criminal causes were carried on in
that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
iiom several circumstances, that this short space
was considerably contraated, and that Lenox had
only eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a
person, so far superior to himself, both in power
and in favour -. No man could be less in a con-

t The a of Privy Council, appointing the day of Both-
,ell's trial, bears date March the 2z'h, which happened on a
Thursday. Anders. vol. o. The Queen's warrant to the mejn-
gers, impowering them to fuilrmon Lenox to be present, is dat-
ed on the z9th.-bid. vol. ii. 97 He was ummoned by public
proclamation at the crols of Edinburgh on the ame day. Ibid.
ico. He was summoned at his dwelling houses in Glasgow
and Dumbarton the 3orh of March, the ift and 2d days of
April. Ibid. 1o. He was fumrnoned at P'erth, April llt. Ibid.
to2. Though Lenox iefided at that time 40 miles from Edin-
burgh, the citation might have been given him sooner.
S.ch an unneceffry delay affords some cufe for suspicion.
' is true, Mary in her letter, March z4th, invited Lenox to
cone to Edinburgh the ensuing week; this gave him warning
<',me days sooner, that she intended to bring on .the trial with-
rut delay But the precise time could not be legally or cer
tainly known to Lenox fooncr than ii or Iz days, before the
day on which he was required to appear. By the law and
practice of Scotland, at that time, parties were summoned in
cafes cftreafon o5 days previous to the trial.

dition

BoOK IV. dikio to contend with an antagonist who was thus

ó-' - supported. Though Lenox's paternal estate had
,567.

been restored to him, when he was recalled into
Scotland, it seems to have been considerably in-
paired during his banishment. His vassals, while
he resided in England, had been accutomed to
some degree of independance, and he had not re-
covered that absolute ascendant over them, which
a feudal chief ufuallv possessed. He had no reason
to expec the concurrence of any of those factions
iNto which the nobles were divided. During the
hort period of his son's prosperity, he had taken
such steps as gave rife to an open breach with Mur-
ray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
house of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal
enemies, Huntlv was linked in the closest confe-
deracy with Bothwell; and thus, to the disgrace of
the nation, Lenox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his
countrymen to second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy Council, which gave direcions with regard
to the time and manner of his trial and he still
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into
the Queen's presence with the fame diftinguiihed

' Anders. familiarity as formerly *
vol i. 50, NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment
52., to the wishes and resentment of a father, than luch
craes a a premature trial; every frep towards which seemed
delay. to be taken bv directions from the person who was

himrelf accused of the crime, and calculated on
purpose to conceal rather than to detect his guilt.
Lenox foresaw what would be the if oth of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himself,
or success to his cause, he could venture to appear
on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though
under exDreflions the most refDectful, some fymp-

tornm

tows of his distrusting the Queen may be discovered, ROOK IV.
he spoke out now in a plain language. He corn- "
plained of the injury dbne him, by hurrying on the 57
trial with such illegal precipitation. He reprelent-
el once more, the indecency of allowing Both-
well, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to re-
tain his former influence over her councils. He
again required her, as she regarded her own honour,
to give tome evidence of her sincerity in profecut-
ing the murder, by confining the person who was,
on good grounds, fufpeted to be the author of it;
and, till that were done, he signified his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumstances of which were so irregular, and un-
fatisfaacory *. Anders.

HE seems, however, to have expected little fuc- vol. i. 52.

cess from this application to Mary; and therefore, Appliesfor
at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to intcrpofe, pfe to E-
in order to obtain iuch a delay as he demanded -f. lizabeth.
Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he t Good.
fufpeEted the one Queen, and his submitting tov0 "
implore the aid of the other, who had treated his 3
son with the utmost contempt, and himself and fa-
mily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scot-
land, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for Iome time, and urged, in such strong
terms, the fame arguments which Lenox had uied,
.s might have convinced her to what an unfavour-
able construction her conduct would be liable, if Ihe
persisted in her present method of proceeding 4. I Anders.

NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor thole of'ef. 60.

Lnox, could prevail to have the trial put off. On endi p
th.- day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with lNo XX.
such a formidable retinue, that it would have been The trial
dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish proceeds.
him. Besides a numerous body of his fiiends and
vassals assembled, according to custom, from diffe-

ren

BooK IV. rent parts of the kingdoms he was attended by a

ó~~ band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying

Anders. colours along the streets of Edinburgh . A court
7vo i. 135. of justice was held, with the accuftomred formali-

ties. An indictment was presented against Both-
well, and Lenox was called upon to make good his
accusation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning-
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his Malf
ter s absence, on account of the fhorni-fs of the
time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vassals, without whole afiftance he could not, with
safety, venture to et himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired
the court to stop proceeding, ard protesting that
any sentence which should be palTed at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothweli,
on the other hand, insisted, that the court should
instantly proceed to trial. One of Lenox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prose-
cute the murderers without delay, was produced.
Cunningham's objections were over-ruled; and the
jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the first
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

Eo;r.wel!is No person appeared as an accuer, not a tingle
acqui:ted. witnels was examined, nor any evidence produced

against him. The ury, under there circumtances,
could do nothing eife but acquit him. Their ver-
dict, however, was far from gratifying the wishes,
or silencing the murmurs of the people. Every
circumstance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation; and the judgment pro-
nounced, instead of being a proof of Bothweli's
innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt.
Pasquinades and libels were affixed to different
places, expressing the sentiments of the public, with
the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of
the censure, to which their proceedings would be

exoofed;

exposed; and, at the fame time, that they returfi-BooK 1V.
ed their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of '"
Caithness protested, in their name, that no crime
Ihould be imputed to them on that account, be-
cause no accuser had appeared, and no proof was
brought of the indicitment. He took notice, like-
v.ile, that the ninth instead of the tenth of Febru-
ary was mentioned in the inditment, as the day
on which the murder had been committed. A
circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccu-
racy of thoe who prepared the indiEtment; and
at a time when men were disposed and not with-
out reason, to be suspicious of every thing, this linall
matter contributed to confirm and to increase theirc
ulpicions *.

LVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judg- Bothw-

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full derf vol. i.
vindication of his innocence. Immediately after97, &c.
his acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in
which he offered to fight, in ingle combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who should presume to
accuse him of being accessory to the murder of tlh
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if
he had been cleared by the molt unexceptionable
and fatisfa&ory evidence. The aceendant lie had
gained over her heart, as well as over her councils,
was nmore visible than ever; and Lenox, w',v
could not expect that his own person woul be li.!-
in a country where the murderer of his son had been
ablolved, without regard to juflice, and loaded
with honours, in contempt of decency, fled with
precipitation towards England -. 1- Keith,

Two days after the trial a Parliament was held, ;8.

at the opening of whiich the Queen diftinguiflecd 'cte (d.
Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the Icepcre I,:cntheld
before hr . Mot of the ats passed in this AIL t Il. ibid.
f:inbiy, were calculated on purpose to ftrengtlhca

jl;

Btc. IV. his party, and to promote his designs. He obtain-

~~' ed the ratification of all the pofefilons and honours
'567 whic the partiality of the Queen had conferred

upc-n him; and the act to that effct contained the
ftrongeit declarations of his aithful ervices to the
Crown, in all times past. The surrender of the
castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The
law of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and
he, and his adherents, were restored to the estates
and honours of their ancestors. Several of those
who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained ratifications of the grants made in their
favour; and as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law
pagfed, whereby those, into whole hands any pa.
per of that kind fell, were commanded intantly to
destroy it; and if, through their neglect, it hould
be allowed to spread, they were fubjeted to a capi-
tal punishment, in the fame manner as if they had

Keith, been the original authors .
28C. BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clear-
eft manner, by an a in favourof the Protestant
religion, to which, at this time, she gave her assent.
Mary's attachment to the Romish faith was uni-
form and superstitious she had never laid aside
the design, nor loft the hopes of restoring it. She
had, of late, come under new engagements to that
purpose, and in coniequence of these, had ven-
tured upon ome steps more public and vigorous
than any she had formerly taken. But Bothwell
was prompted, by powerful motives, to promote
this law. He had been guilty of crimes, which
rendered him the object of just and universal detef-
tation. He was meditating others, which he easily
foresaw would heighten the public indignation a-
gainft him. By this popular law he might hope
to divert, or to delay the resentment of the nation,

and

and flattered himself that the obtaining this unex- BOOK IV.
pe&ed and legal security for the Proreftant religion, ' s'
would atone for much guilt, filerice the clamours 1567.
of the clergy, and induce the people to connive at,
or to tolerate his crimes. The at itself was o fa-
vourable to the doctrine of the Reformers, that
the Parliament, which met next year, under very
different leaders, could substitute nothing fironger
or more explicit in its place; and thought it fuffici-
ent to ratify it word for word *. To pass such an * Parl. I.
a&, was utterly inconsistent with all the maxims Jac. VI.
which Mary followed in every other period of her c. 31.
life; but what could never be extorted from her by
the fblicitations of the assemblies of the church, or
by the intreaties of her people, the more powerful
influence of Bothwell now obtained t.

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been Bothwell
attended with all the success which his most fan-Prevailson
guine withes could expect. He had entirely gained to recoms
the Queen's heart; the murder of the King had mend him
excited no public commotion; he had been acquit- as an hus-
ted by his peers of any share in that crime; and bandto the
their decision had been, in some bort, ratified in Queen.
Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the legal
authority was so extremely limited, and the power
of the nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on
the last action, towards which all his ambitious
projects tended, without their approbation. In

t Buchanan, Hilt. 355, not only omits taking any notice of
i.is law, but asSerts, that the Queen, though he had given pro-
ifes in favour of the reformed religion, refuled to permit any
at to pass in support of it, and even difiniffed the deputies of the
church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Calderwood, vol.
iii. 41 both affirm the famne thing. It would not have been ne-
ceffary to observe this instance of Buchanan's inaccuracy; but
:hat an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood, and one
!b industrious as Calderwood, ihould commit such an error, when
not only the original statute was extant in the records of Mary's
Parliament, but even when the printed a of Murray's Parlia-..
s:ent was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even Buchanan him-
elf has taken notice of this at. Detecio, p. 8.

VOL. I. Z order

BooK IV. order to secure this, he, immediately after the dif-
'- -' solution of Parliament, invited all the nobles who
'567' were present to an entertainment. Having filled
Apri' 19. the iloufe with his friends and dependants, and
* Goo. surrounded it with armed men , he opened to the
ol. ii'.'. company his intention of marrying the Queen,

whose content, he told them, he had already obtain-
ed; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which he said, was no less acceptable to their Sove-
reign, than honourable to himself .t. Huntly
t* A: ;r and Searon, who were privy to all Bothwell's

schemes, and promoted them with. the. utmost
zeal; the Popilh ecclesiastics, who were absolute-
ly devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth all
her pafions, instantly declared their fadisfafion
with what he had proposed. The refi, who dread-
ed the exorbitant power which Bothwell, had ac-
quired, and observed the Queen's growing affection
towards him in all her ations, were willing to
make a merit of yielding to a measure, which they
could neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were
confounded and inraged. But, in the end, Both-
well, partly by promises and flattery, partly by
terror and force, prevailed on all who were present
:o i:bfcrib a paper, which leaves a deeper tain
than ny occurrence in that age, on the honour
and character of the nation.

fTHis paper contained the firongeft declarations

ors Eothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac-
knowiedgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future accusation hould be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub-
:.ribers promised to stand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen, as the
most proper person she could choose for a husband;
and if she should condescend to bestow on him that
mark of her regard, they undertook to promote
the marriage, and to join him witl all their forces,

in

:c poifng any person wh.o endeavoured to ob- BooK IV.
. ,it *. Anong the subscribers of this paper, "
' find sone who were the Qieen's chief confi- ^de;.
,ir:ts, others who were strangers to her counels, vol. i. 177.
;d obnoxious to her displeasure; some who faith-
. ditl adhlred to her, through all the vicissitudes
.r iher fortune, and others who became the prin-
,Fal authors of her sufferings; some passionately
:tc.hed to the Romifi superstition, and others
:-.,!uv's advocates for the Protestant faith t. No t Keith,
ommon interest can be supposed to have united 382
men of inch opposite principles and parties, in re-
comrmending to their Sovereign a ftep so injurious
;o her honour, and so fatal to her peace. This
firange coalition was the effet of much artifice,
and Inuft be confidered as the boldest and most
masterly stroke of Bothwell's address. It is obfer-
vable, that amidst all the altercations and mutual
reproaches of the two parties which arose in the
kingdom, this unworthy tranfation is seldom men-
tioned. Conscious on both fides, that in this parti-
cular, their conduct could ill bear examination,
and would redound little to their fame, they always
trnich upon it unwillingly, and seem desirous that
:; hould remain in darkness, or be buried in obli-
vion. But as so many persons, who, both at that
tine, and ever after poffeied the Queen's` favour,
iubicribed this paper, the suspicion becomes strong,
.hat Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither un-
known to Mary, nor disapproved by her ~.

Z 2 THESE

{ Of all the diff:rent ryItems with regard to this tranfalion,
tit; of Camden seems to be the least accurate, and the worst
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
.iorton, &c. who had been his afrociates in the murder of the
K'ig, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at
the lame time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained
y them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in hishopes, and
betray the whole bloody ecret, 404. But besides the absurdity
If supposing, that any mnan'j enemies would contribute towards ,

ralifing

BOOr IV. THESE suspicions are confirmed by the mos
'' -' direc proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a
I567' considerable share in her favour. He, as well as

his brother, kept a secret correspondence in Eng.
land, with those who favoured her pretensions to
that Crown. The rumour of her intended mar-
riage with Bothwell having spread early in tha:
kingdom, excited universal indignation and Mel-
vil received a letter from thence, which repre-
sented in the strongest terrms, what would be
the fatal effets of such an imprudent ftep. He put
this letter into the Queen's hands, and inforced
it with the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded these remonrtrances, but communicated
the matter to Bothwell; and Melvil, in order to
save his life, was obliged to fly from court, whi-
ther he durt not return, till the Earl's rage be-
gan to abate *. At the fame time, Elizabeth

warned

raiing him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of after-
wards depriving him of it; besides the impossibility of accom-
plifhing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to the
Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this sup-
position is destroyed by the direa teltimony of the Queen herself,
who acribes the content of the nobles to Bothwell's artificer,
rtvbso prckafed i by giving them to underfanl that *we were cot
tent tl';4-witl,. Ancef. vol. i. 94. It would have been no fma!i
advanrtae to Mary, if he could have represented the consent of
the nobles to have been theirown voluntary deed. It is still more
fu prifing to find Leflv ascribing this paper to Murray and hi.
ticion. Ander. vol. i. 26. The Bishop himfclfwasoneof th
pFrons who ubfcribedit. Keith, 383; The King's commi
fioners, at the confernce held at York, 1568, pretended tha;
none of the nobles, except the Ear! of lunrly, would fubficibe
this paper till a warr.nt from the Queen was produced, by
which they were aiioved to do ob; this warrant they had in
their coftody, and exhibited. Anders. vol. iv. Part ii 59. This
difers from Buchanan's account, who supposes that all he noble;
present subscribed the paper on the g9th, and that, next day,
they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way
or' ecurity to theimlelves, 355.

4 Melv 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis likewise
-eir.oattrated againil the marriage, and conjured the Queen, on

,arned Mary of the danger and infamy to which BoOK Iv1'
;he would expose herself, by such an indecent '-67
choice; but an advice from her met with still less And7erl.
regard *. vol i. o106.

THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary Bothwell

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to vifitc""aie the
the Prince her son. Bothwell had now brought his re o by
schemes to full maturity, and every precaution be- Dunbar.
ing taken, which could render it safe to venture on
the last and decisive tep, the natural impetuosity of
his spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer.
Under pretence of an expedition against the free-
booters on the borders, he afflembled his fol-
lowers, and marching out of Edinburgh with a April 24.
thousand horse, turned suddenly towards Linlith-
gow, met the Queen on her return near that place,
dispersed her slender train without resistance, seized
on her person, and conducted her, together with a
few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his castle
of Dunbar. She expressed neither furprize, nor
terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage com-
mitted on her person, and such an insult offered to
her authority, but seemed to yield without struggle
or regret 4-. Melvil was, at that time, one of her t Keith,

Z 3 attendants; 33·

his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dinflonourahle al-
liance, 156. But it has been observed, tat Herreis is c.ne of
the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19 Keith, 383. 2.
That he is one of the witneffcs to the marriage articles between
the Qeen and Bothwell, May 14. Good ol ii. 61. 3. That
le at in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386. But
triis remonstrance of Lord He reis againlt the marriage hap-
pened before these, in'.de by Melvil hiniflt', 157. Melvil's
renionltrance mulH have happened some time before the meeting
of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, ire retired fro:i
court; he allowed his rage time to ubfide, and had again joined
the Qeen, when he was seized, April 24. 158. The time
.hich imuf have elapsed, by this account of the matter, was
perhaps sufficient to have gained Herreis, from being an oppo-
!er, to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil
n.ay have committed some niftake with regard to this fast, so
iar as relates to Lord Herreis. He could not well be mirtaken
with regard to what himfelfdid.

P.ook iV. attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized
'-" informed him, that nothing was done without the

I. Qeen's own consent *. If we may rely on the
I;s. letters published in Mary's name, the scheme had

been communicated to her, and every ftep towards
-4 Goc . i was taken with her participation and advice t.

' Both the Queen and Bothwell thought it of ad-
vantage to employ this appearance of violence. I;
afforded her a decent excuse for her condu't; an.
while she could plead that it was owing to fo;c
rather than choice, he hoped that her reputation.
among foreigners at least, would escape withQur
censure, or be exposed to less reproach. Bothwell
could not help dillrufting all the methods which
had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from,
any concern in the murder of the King. Something
was fill wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty rears. This was a pardon under th:
Great Seal. By the las of Scotland, the molt hei-
nous crime must be mentioned by name in a par-
don, and then all lesser offences are deemed to be
included under the general clause, and all otber

Parl.6. critmei w'atfoever t. To seize the person of the
ac. . c. Prince, is high treason; and Bothwell hoped, that

a pardon obtained for this, would extend to every

11 Ander. thing of which he had been accused 11,

Ivol. ;- BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's person
I -o!ce. into his hands, it would have been unbecoming
s:rm his either a politician or a man of gallantry to have de-
c;.. uwi:e. laved consummating his schemes. For this pur-

pose, he inftantlv commenced a ir, in order:
obtain a sentence of divorce from his w;is I.'d;. Jr,
Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's fi.ler. This pi;'ods
was carried on, at the fame time, before Prtei-llai
A;p:;: :9. and Popith judges; before the ormer, in th cour'

of Commiffaries ; and befoe the r, i the pl-
ri'ial crt " rh :- Arc'''ibifhoi or :t Andrcl'

Y/- .:,

whose jurifdi&tion the Queen had lately restored. BOOK IV.
The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or'--
scandalous. But his authority had greater weight 167.
than the juftie of his cause; and in both courts,
sentence of divorce was pronounced, with the fame
indecent and suspicious precipitancy * Ander

WHILE this infamous tranfa&ion was carrying vol i. T2.

on, the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as a 'artii.6i.
prisoner, but treated with the greatest refpe&.
Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his
dependants, conducted her to Edingburgh; but in-
stead of lodging her in the palace of Holy-rood-
house, he conveyed her to the castle, of which he
was governor. The discontent of the nation ren-
dered this precaution neceffaly. In an house un-
fortified, and ofeafy access, the Queen might have
been rescued without difficulty out of his hands.
In a place of strength, (he was secured from all the
attempts of his enemies.

ONE small difficulty still remained to be fur-

mounted, As the Queen was kept in a fort of
captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that
condition might be imputed to force, and be held
invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared May,
in the court of session, and in pretence of the Chan-
cellor, the other judges, and several of the nobility,
declared that he was now at full liberty; and
though Bothwell's violence in seizing her person
had, at first excited her indignation, yet his respect-
ful behaviour since that time had not only appeased
her resentment, but determined her to raise him to
higher honours -t. Anderr.

WHAT these were oon became public. The title ji' 7ried

of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell; to the
and on the 5th of May his marriage with the Queen.
Queen, which had so long been the object of his
withes, and the motive of his crimes, was folem-
nized. The ceremony was performed, in public,

Z 4 according

Boos IV. according to the rites of the Protestant Church, by
'-. Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one of the few

567. prelates who had embraced the Rteformation, and

on the fame day, was celebrated in private, accord-

Anders. ing to the forms prescribed by the Popish religion .
136. z. The boldness with which Craig, the Minister who

was commanded to publish the banns, testified a-
gainft the design; the frnall number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage; and the fullen
and difrefpecful silence of the people, when the
Queen appeared in public; were manifest fymp-
toms of the violent and general diffadsfaction of
her own subjects. The refusal of Du Croc, the
French ambassador, to be present at the nuptial ce-
remony or entertainment, discovers the sentiments
of her allies, with regard to this part of her con-
du&; and although every other ation of Mary's
life could be justified by the rules of prudence, or
reconciled to the principles of virtue, this fatal
marriage would remain an inconteftible proof of
her rashness, if not of her guilt.

MARY'S sirs care was to offer some apology for

her condut, to the courts of France and England.
The inftrutions to her ambassadors still remain,
and are drawn by a masterly hand. But under all
the artificial- and false colouring he employs, it is
easy to discover not only that many of the steps he
had taken were unjustifiable, but that she herself

- Anders was conscious that they could not be julified t.
. 89. THE title of King, was the only thing, which was

not bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her
attachment to him, Mary remembered the incon-
veniencies which had arisen from the rash advance-
ment of her former husband to that honour. She
agreed, however, that he should sign, in token of

Good. z content, all the public writs issued in her name .
60. This was nothing more than mere form, but, to-

geth:r

,ether with it, he possessed all the reality of power. BOOK IV.
TIhe Queen's person was in his hands; ihe was ---'
surrounded more clofly than ever by his creatures 1567.
none of her fubjeas could obtain audience without
his permission; and, unless in his own presence,
none but his confidants were permitted to converse
with her *. The Scottish Monarchs were accuf- AnderS
tomed to live among their subjects as fathers or as
equals, without distrust, and with little state; arm-
ed guards standing at the doors of the royal apart-
ment, difficulty of access, distance and retirement,
were things unknown, and unpopular.

THESE precautions were necessary for securing Endca-
to Bothwell the power, which he had acquired. Vours to

become

But, without being master of the person of the ,naler of
young Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained tiePrince's
to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had petfon.
committed her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were too
well known to expe& that he would be willing to
put the prince into the hands of the man, who was
so violently suspected of having murdered his father.
Bothwell, however, laboured to get the Prince into
his power, with an anxiety, which gave rife to the
blackest suspicions. All his addrels as well as au-
thority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar,
into a compliance with his demands . And it is t Melv.
no flight proof both of the firmness and dexterity 60.
of that nobleman, that he preserved a life of so Buch.36j.
much importance to the nation, from lying at the
mercy of a man, whom fear or ambition might
have prompted to violent attempts against it.

'IHE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at General

that time, upon the greatevents, which had happened indignati-
in Scotland, during three months. A King mur- whch
dered, with the utmost cruelty, in the prime of Queen's
his days, and in his capital city; the person sus- conduct

pe&ed excited.

Boo IV. pected of that odious crime suffered not only to

- appear publickly in every place, but admitted into
1567. the prelence of the Queen, distinguished by her

favour, and entrusted with the chief direction of
her affairs; fubjeced to a trial, which was carried
on with molt shameless partiality, and acquitted by
a Sentence, which ierved only to confirm -the sus-
picions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on
pretences frivolous, or indecent; and, after all this,
instead of meeting with the ignominy due to his
actions, or the punishment merited by his crimes,
permitted openly, and without opposition, to mar-
ry a Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had
affafilnated, and the guardian of those laws which
he had been guilty of violating. Such a quick
lucceffion of incidents, so singular and so detefta-
ble, is not to be found in any other history.
They left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of
infamy on the character of the nation. The Scots
were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they
durst scarce appear any where in public ;' and after
suffering o many atrocious deeds to pass with im-
punity, they were universally reproached as men
void of courage, or of humanity, as equally re-
gardlefs of the reputation of their Queen, and the

* nderf honour of their country *.
34.'Mdv. TESE reproaches routed the nobles, who had
163. See been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or in-
Append. timidated by his power. The manner in which he
Tu XXIe exercised the authority which he had acquired, his
combinea- repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's
gains h per person, together wih some rash threatnings against
and Both- him, which he let fall t, added to the violence and
wel. promptness of their resolutions. A considerable
t Melv. P
161. body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered

into an association for the defence of the Prince's per-
son. Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home,

Lindsay,

f.indfay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy BOOK IV.
of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, -were the -
heads of this confederacy *. Stewart Earl of Athol Kj,,56
was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attach- 394.
mrnt to popery, but his indignation on account of
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
.lid, and his zeal for the fafery of the Prince,
,\vcrcame, on this occasion, all considerations of re-
iigion, and united him with the most zealous Pro-
rcitants. Several of the other nobles aed, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the safety
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the Ipirit which ome of them discovered, dur-
iga the ubfequent revolutions, leaves little room
to doubt, that ambition or rieentment were the
real motives of their condu&t and that, on many
occasions, while they were urfuing ends just and
necelary, they were a&uated by principles and pas-
sions altogether unjustifiable.

The first accounts of this league filled the Queen

and Bothwell with great consternation. They were
no strangers to the sentiments of the nation, with
refpe&t to their condut; and though their marriage
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murnurings of all ranks of men. They
torefaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the torm,
Mary issued a proclamation, requiring her iubjeAs ,,iay 28-
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, she published a fort
of manifesto, in which she laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which.
i: had been loaded, and employed the itrongelt
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her son. Neither of these produced
any conliderable effect. Her proclamation was ill
obeyed, and her mnanirci.o me: witrh litle credit +. 3
, ,,

T1 i O,6.

Boos IV. THE confederate Lords carried on their prepara-
~'-' ions with no less activity, and with much more
T 67. success. Among a warlike people, men osso much
Q2 ecn power and popularity found it an easy matter to raise
2nd Both- an army. They were ready to march before the
swell leti Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to resist

them. The castle of Edinburgh was the place whi-
ther the Queen ought naturally to have retired,
and there her person might have been perfectly safe,
But the confederates had fallen on means to shake,
or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de-
puty governor, and Bothwell durst not commit to
him such an important trut. He conduted the
Queen to the castle of Borthwick, and on the ap-
pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen's difguif-
ed in men's cloaths. The confederates advanced
towards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured,
in vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the
town againif them. They entered without oppo-
fition, and were instantly joined by many of the
citizens, whose zeal became the firmest support of

a Kith, their cause*.
3S." IN order to set their own condu& in the most fa,

vourable light, and to rouse the public indignation
against Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enume-
rated, all his wicked intentions displayed and aggra-
vated, and every true Scotsman was called upon to
join them in avenging the one, and in preventing

t Anlerf. the other -.
vol. i. 128. MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he oon gathered such strength, that he
ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness

and

and secrecy of their enterprize gave their friends at BooK IV.
a distance no time tojoin them; and as it is does not
appear that they were supported either with money 1567
or fed with hopes by the queen of England, they
could not have kept long in a body. But on the
other hand, Bothwell durst not rifque a delay * Keith,
His armyfollowed him with relutance in this quar- 401'
rel, and served him with no cordial affection; so
that his only hope of success was in surprising the
enemy, or in striking the blow before his own troops
had leisure to recolle& themselves, or to imbibe the
fame unfavourable opinion of his ations, which
had spread over the reft of the nation. These mo-
tives determined the Queen to march forward, with
an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the The no-

confederates advanced to meet her. They found bles''arch
her forces drawn up on the fame ground which the thagi't
English had occupied before the battle of Pinkie. July ;,.
The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but
there was no equality in point of discipline. The
Queen's army consisted chiefly of a multitude, hafti-
ly assembled, without courage or experience in war.
The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by
their most trusty dependants, who were no less brave
than zealous t. t Call

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was in vl. ii. -

.49.

the field, laboured, by negotiating both with the Anaccoin-
Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel nlodtiun
without the effusion of blood. He represented to tcr; r't:
the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards
peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences
which they had committed. Morton replied, with
warmth, that they had taken arms not against the
Queen, but against the murderer of her husband,
and if he were given up to justice, or banished from
her presence, fle should find them ready to yield

the

BooS IV. the obedience which is due from subjects to their
6- ~ Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not

come to ask pardon for any offence, but to punish
those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffectual, and that their paflions were too high
to allow them to liften tb any pacific propositions, or
Kelth, to think of retreating after having proceeded so far*.

THE Queen's army was poised to advantage, on

a riling ground. The confederates advanced to the
attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and disco-
vered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them; he wept, she threatened, he re-
proached them with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft stood wavering and irre-
solute, and some began to rteal out of the field.
Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno-
cence in single combat with any of his adversaries.
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and
Lord Lindsay contended for the honour of enter-
ing the lifts against him. But this challenge proved
to be a mere bravade. Either the confcioulnefs of
guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or

- Cald. the Queen, bv her authority, sorbad the combatT.
-V' ; 5. AFTER the symptoms of fear dilcovered by her

followers, Mary, would have been inexcusable, had
,he hazarded a battle. To have retreated in the
face of an enemy, who had already surrounded the
hill on which he stood, with part of their cavalry,
was utterly impracticable. In this situation, she
was under the cruel necessity of putting herself into
the hands of those subjects who had taken arms
against her. She demanded an interview with Kir-
kaldy. a brave and generous man, who command-

ed

ed an advanced body of the enemy. He, with Boor IV.
the consent and in name of the leaders of the party, , 7;
promised that, on condition he would dismiss Both- I567.
well from her presence, and govern thekingdom by
the advice of her nobles, they would honour and
obey her as their Sovereign.*. * Good.

DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- ol. 1l.

well of the Queen, and rode off the field with a few Mel. 65.
followers. This dismal reverse happened exactly Bothwell
one month after that marriage, which had cost him obliged to
lo many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so fly.
foul a stain on Mary's memory.

As so.on as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered Mary fur-

to Kirkaldy, who conducted her toward the con- render to
federate army, the leaders of which received her the nobles
with much respect; and Morton, in their name,
made ample. professions of their future loyalty and
obedience t. But she was treated by. the common t Good.
soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity. vol ii
As she marched along, they poured upon her all the 65.
opprobrious names, which are bestowed only on the
lowest and most infamous criminals. Wherever
lie turned her eyes, they held up before her a stand-
ard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, stretched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words,
"Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord !" Mary
turned with horror from such a hocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition
to which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered
the most bitter complaints, he melted into tears,
and could scarce be keptfrom finking to the ground.
T',e confeidrates carried her towards Edinburgh,
and, in spite of many delays, and after looking with
the fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate
for some extraordinary relief, flie arrived there. The
streets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or
curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an

unusual

BOOK IV. unusual scene. The Queen, worn out with fatigue,

567. covered with duf, and bedewed with tears, was

exposed as a fpe&acle to her own fubjeas, and led
to the Provost's house. Notwithstanding all her
arguments and intreades, the fame standard was
carried before her, and the fame insults and re-
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful,
and in distress, is naturally the object of compaf-
sion. The comparison of their present misery with
their former splendour, usually softens us in fa-
vour of illustrious sufferers. But the people be-
held the deplorable situation of their Sovereign
with insensibility ; and so strong was their perfua-
sion of her guilt, and so great the violence of their
indignation, that the sufferings of their Queen did
not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or
procure her that sympathy, which is seldom denied
to unfortunate Princes '.

Melvil, 6. Buch. 364.

THE

# BOOK V.

THE

I S T R Y
HISTORY

OF
S C O T L A N D.

B O O K V.

H E confederate Lords had proceeded to such BOOK .
extremities against their Sovereign, that it

tCX 0n 1567

now became almost impossible for them either to Delitera-
stop snort, or to pursue a course let violent. Ma- tin of
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them r:e no'les
in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. ig the
A mnall circumstance might abate that indignation Queen.
with which the multitude were, at present, anima-
ted against the Queen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation of
rhcir power. These considerations inclined some
of them to treat the Queen with great lenity.

Bu-, on the other hand, Mary's affection for

Lrothwell continued as violent as ever; he obiti-
nately refuitd to hearken to any proposal for diffoleh
in.! their marriage, and determined not to aban-
don a man, for whose love fli had already facri-
Eced lb much *. If they should allow her to re- * Keith,
civer the supre;r power, the first exertion of it 4'9, 416.
would be to recall Bothwell; and they had reason, 449. 1l'-

·i 7 See

both from his resentment, from her conduc, and Appendi,
riom their own, to expea the severest effects of N° XXI.
her vengeance. These considerations Surmounted
every other motive; and reckoning themselves ab-
lolved, by Mary's incurable attachmentr to Both-
well, from the engagements which they had come
under when fie yielded herself a prisoner, they,

VOL. I. A a vithout

Boor V. without regarding the duty which they owed her

as their Queen, and without consulting the reft of

Th1 '

- the nobles, carried her next evening, under a strong

priut.n her guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and signed a
in Loch- warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to
evi"n detain her as a prisoner. This castle is fituared in

a small island, in the middle of a lake. Douglas,
to whom it belonged, was a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mo.
ther. In this place, under ftri& custody, with a
few attendants, and fubjeaed to the insults of a
haughty woman, who boasted. daily of being the
lawful wife of James V. Mary suffered all the rigour

5Keith, and miseries of captivity *.
403 , IIMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment,

t the confederates were at the utmost pains to

strengthen their party; they entered into new bonds
of afociation; they assumed the title of Lords cf
thifecret Ccuncil, and without any other right, ar-
rogated to themselves the whole regal authority. One
of the first ats of power was to search the city of
Edinburgh for those who were concerned in the
murder of the King. This shew of zeal gained re-
putation to themselves, and threw an oblique re-
flection on the Queen for her remissness. Several
fufpeted persons were seized. Captain Blackadder
and three others were condemned and executed.
Bur no discovery of importance was made. If we
believe some historians, they were convicted by
iumcient evidence. If we give credit to others,
their lenrence was unjust, and they denied, with
:heir lait breath, any knowledge of the crime, for

+ c:J. which they suffered +.
,! .;. 3- A; unexpeted accident, however, put into the
:',t hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the

e. fullest evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left,

in the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing
several sonnets and letters written with the Queen's
c-vn hand; he now sent one of his confidants to

bring

bring to him this precious depofite. But as his Boos V.
messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the '--"'
casket seized by Morton *. The contents of it »A'er:
were always produced by the party, as the moftu.ii i,:
ample justification of their own condu&, and the Goo-d .'
molt unanswerable proof of their not having loaded i 9°0
their Sovereign with the imputation of imaginary
crimes . See Di
crimes ~fertation

BUT the confederates, notwithifanding their ex- ,t the end

traordinary success, were frill far from being per- ofthe p-
fectly at ease. That so small a part of the nobles pndix.
ihould pretend to dispose of theperfon of their Sove- Some of

the nobles

reign, or to assume the authority which belong-favour the
ed to her, without the concurrence of the eft, ap- QCeen.
peared to many of that body to be unprecedented,
and preiumptuous; Several of these were now as-
fembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what
course they should hold, in this difficult corijuniture.
The confederates made some attempts towards a
coalition with them, but without effect. They
employed the mediation of the assembly of the
Church, to draw them to a personal iterview at
Edinburgh, but with no better success. That par-
ty, however, though its numbers were formidable,
and the power of its leaders great, oon loft repu-
tation by the want of unanimity and vigour; all its
consultations evaporated in murmurs and complaints,
and no scheme was concerted for obstructing the
progress of the confederates . t.,

TI'HE. appeared Ibme profpeat of danger from E4;abeh

.nother quarter. ThiJ great revolution in Scotland interposes
had been carried on without any aid from Eliza-in her be-
beth, and even without her knowledge §. And half.
though he was far from being displeased to fee the § 4l
affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom
he hated, reduced to distress , she neither wished
that it should be in the power of the one factior
:ntirely to suppress the other, nor could she view

A a 2 the

.Boo V. the steps taken by the confederates without great

C-~ó offence. Notwithstanding the pupular maxims by
57' which he governed her own fubjecs, her notions

of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the
authority of their Sovereign, which they had no
right to controul, and had offered violence to her
person, which it was their duty to esteem sacred.
They had set a dangerous example to other subje&s,
and Mary's cause became the common cause of

· Kei!, Princes*. If ever Elizabeth was influenced with
4 : 4 5 regard to the affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of

her heart, rather than by considerations of interest,
June 30. it was on this occasion. She inifantly dispatched

Throgmorton into Scotland, with powers to nego-
tiate both with the Queen, and with the confede-
rates. In his inftruEtions there appears a remarka-
ble solicitude for Mary's liberty, and even for her
t I. 411. reputation t. And the choice of an Ambassador,

so devoted to the interest of the Scottish Queen,,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But
neither Elizabeth's friendihip, nor Throgmorton's
zeal, were of much avail to Mary. The confede-
rates foresaw what would be the effects of these good
officesi and that the Queen, elated by the prof-
pet of protection, would reject with scorn the '
overtures which they were about to make her.
They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throg-
morton access to their prisoner; and what propofi.
tions he made to them in her behalf, they either re-
t i,_ fused, or eluded T.

4 27, .7
hSch': ,cs MEAN while they deliberated with the utmost

ofrhe cr-anxiery, concerning the settlement of the nation,

:-::e and the future disposal of the Queen's person. Eii-
"n:3S'" zabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no pro-

grefs in his negotiations with them, and that they
would liften to none of his demands in Mary's fa-
vour, turned towards that party of the nobles who

were

were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take BooK V.
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and 'ó'
nromifed to assist them in such an attempt, to the 1567'
.tmoft of her power . But they discovered no See Ap-
greater union or vigour than formerly, and behav- pendi,:,
ing like men who had given-up all concern either N'xXII.
for their Queen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, whether we con-
fider it with refpeft to numbers, or to power, to
fettle the government of the Kingdom, and to dif-
pose of the Queen's person at pleasure. Many
consultations were held, and various opinions arose
with regard to each of thee. Some teemed defi-
rous of adhering to the plan on which the confede-
racy was at first formed; and after punishing the
murderers of the King, and dissolving the marriage
with Bothwell; after providing for the safety of
the young Prince, and the security of the Protestant
religion; they proposed to re-establish the Queen
in the possession of her legal authority. The fuc-
cess with which their arms had been accompanied,
inspired others with bolder and more desperate
thoughts, and nothing less would satisfy them than
the trial, the condemnation and punishment of the
Queen herself, as the principal conspirator against
the life of her husband and the safety of her son t :
the former was Maitland's system, and breathed
too much of a pacific and moderate spirit, to be
agreeable to the temper or wishes of the party.
The latter was recommended by the clergy, and
warmly adopted by many laics; but the nobles
durf not, or would not venture on such an unpre-
cedented and audacious deed :.

t Keith, 420, 41,422, 582.
I THE intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have

been carried on by Iome of her fubjetts: at this time we often find
Elizabeth boafling that Mary owed her life to her interposition.
Digges's Compl. Amb. 4, &c. See Appendix, N XVIII.

A a 3 BOTH

'ooK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, nei-
'--' her moderate as the one, nor so daring as the
1567.

Tr .7. other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to re-
b'Jg e sign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
Qce c claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
resig-n appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
-.e t. iry, with the name and authority of Regent. With

regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was
determined. It eems to have been the intention
of the confederates, to keep her in perpetual im-
prifonmnent; but in order to intimidate herself, and
to overawe her partizans, they still reserved to
themselves the power of proceeding to more violent
extremes.

Tr was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-

cuticn of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
high spirited, and accustomed to command. To
induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power
which The was born to enjoy, to become dependant
on her own subjects, to consent to her own bondage,
and to invest those persons, whom ihe confidered
as the authors of all her calamities, with that ho-
nour and authority of which he herself was strip-
ped, were points hard to be gained. These, how-
ever, the confederates attempted, and they did
not want means to insure success. Mary had en-
dured for several weeks, all the hardihips and
terror of a prison; no prolpe& of liberty appeared;
none of her subje&s had either taken arms, or so

' Keith, much as solicited her relief*; no person in whom
42;. Ihe could confide was admitted into her pretence;

even the Ambassadors oftheFrench King and Queen
of England were refused access to her. In this o-
litary frate, without a counsellor or a friend, under
the pressure of difi-efs, and the apprehension of
danger, it was natural for a woman to hearken
arnoft to any overtures. The confederates took'

advantage

a;dvantage of her condition, and of her fears. They BOOK V.
employed Lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the ,,
party, to communicate their scheme to the'Queen, '
and to obtain her subscription to thole papers which
were necessary for rendering it effetual. He exe-
culted his commission with harlhnefs and brutality.
Cer.ain death was before Mary's eyes, if he re-
fu:ied to comply with his demands. At the fame
rime, Ihe was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in
the name of Athol, Maitland, Kirkaldy, the per-
lons among the confederates who were molf atten-
tive to her interest, that a resignation extorted by
rear, and granted during her imprifbnment, w:!s
void in law, and might be revoked so oon as fle
recovered liberty. Throgmorton, by a note which
he found means to convey to her, suggested the
!ame thing *. Deference to their opinion, as well Keith,
as concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield 42G. Note

', (b). Mekv.

to every thing which was required, and to sign all 69.
the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By
one of there she resigned the Crown, renounced all
share in the government of the kingdom, and con-
sented to the coronation of the young King. By Jlly 24.
another, she appointed the Earl of Murray Regent,
and conferred' upon him all the powers and privi-
leges of that high office. By a third he lubititut-
ed ome other nobleman in Murray's place, if he
should refuse the honour which was designed for
him. Mary, when fie subscribed there deeds, was
bathed in tears; and while she gave away, as it
were with her own hands, the sceptre which she
had swayed so long, she felt a pang of grief and
indignation, one of the severest, perhaps, which t Ibd.
can touch the human heart t. 430.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- L(rawf

nation all the weight and validity in their power, Jam es V.
by proceeding without delay to crown the young crowned,
Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling, and Mur-
.n the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in ray choen

A a 4 prefencRegent.

IoKi V. presence of all the nobles of the party, a confider-
'_," able number of lesser Barons, and a great ainmbly

567. of the people. From that time all public writs

were ifiued, and the government carried on, ir

Keiti, name of James VI. .
437- No revolution so great was ever affefted withi

more cafe, OF by meani so unequal to the end. In a
warlike age, and in less time than two months, a part
of the nobles, who neither pofleffied the chief power
nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who
never brought 3000 men into the field, seized, im-
prisoned, and dethroned their Queen, and without
Ihedding a single drop of blood, ft her on, an in-
sant of a year old, on the throne.
t.fri- DUR!NG this rapid progress of the confederates,

the eyes of all the nation were turecd on them, with
t:e'! aftonilhment; and various and contradictory opi-

nions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
steps which they had taken.

EvEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

mcnt, which prevails in Scotland, said the favour.
crs of the Queen, and notwithstanding the exorbi-
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince pofleffes
considerable power, and his person is treated with
great veneration. No encroachments fould be
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happincfs
of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majority ot
the locietv, to judge of their existence. By what
action could it be pretended, that Mary had invad-
ed the rights or property of her fubjefts, or what
feheme had ihe formed againif the liberty and con-
i'itution of the kingdom ? 'cre fears, fup;i
cions, and furnifes, enough to jutilfy the imprison-
ing, and the dcpofing a Queen, to AwhO:i the crowr
delccnded from so long a race of LMonarchs ? The
r.incipal a:Jthor c.r v\. hl;tever "is rectkoned culpabli

i,

!Il her condut, was now driven from her presence. BooK V.
jiac murderers of the King might have been '- '
brought to condign punishment, the safety of the I567
i';incc have been ecured, and the Protestant reli-
,ion have been cftablifhed, without wresting the
!Lclctre out of her hands, or condemning her to
perpetual imprilonment. Whatever right a free
P'arliament might have had to proceed to such a ri-
orous conclusion, or whatever name its determi-
nations might have nlerited, a entence of this na-
tutre, paifed by a few nobles, without acknowledg-
ing or coniulting the reft of the nation, muff be
deemed a rebellion against the government, and a
conliiracy against the person of their Sovereign.

''HE partizans of the confederates reasoned very

differcntly. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave cnfent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid ac-
tion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and
bonours with which she loaded him, the manner in
which he suffered his trial to be carried on, and
the indecent speed with which the married a man,
lIained with so many crimes, raise strong suspicions
of the former, and put the latter beyond all doubt.
'[o have suffered the supreme power to continue
;n the hands of an ambitious man, capable of the
most atrocious and deiperate ations, would have
been disgraceful to the nation, dishonourable to the
Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse
tvas, therefore, had to arms. The Queen had
been compelled to abandon a husband, o unwor-
hyv of herself. But her affetion toward him still
continuing unabated; her indignation againit the
authors of this eparation being visible, and often
cxprecled in the ftrongelt terms; they, by restoring
her to her ancient authority, would have armed her
with power to destroy themselves, have enabled
her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded her an
-pportunity of pursuing chemes fatal to the nation,

with

BOOK V. with greater eagerness, and with more success. No.
'-~' thing, therefore, remained, but by one bold acion

567. to deliver themselves and their country from all

future fears. The expedient they had chosen was
no less respeCtful to the royal blood, than necessary
for the public faferv. While one Prince was set
aside as incapable of governing, the Crown was
placed on his head, who was the undoubted repre-
fentative of their ancient ings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on

comparing the arguments of the two contending
parties, whatever sentiments we may entertain con-
cerning the juffice or necessity of that course which
the confederates held, it cannot be denied that
their conduct, so far as regarded themselves, was
extremelyprudent. Other expedients, less rigorous
towards Mary, might have been found for fettling
the nation; but, after the injuries they had already
offered the Queen, there was none so effectual for
securing their own safety, or perpetuating their
own power.

Morray To a great part of the nation, the condu of
aisumes the confederates appeared not only wife, but just.
the go- The King's accession to the throne was every
ernmet. where proclaimed, and his authority submitted to

without opposition. And though several of the
nobles were frill assembled at Hamilton, and seem-
ed to be entering into some combination againit his
government, an association for supporting it was
formed, and signed by so many persons of power
and influence throughout the nation, as entirely

· Anders discouraged the attempt *
vol.ii. THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this

23 time, added strength to the party, and gave it a

regular and finished form. Soon after the mur-
der of the King, this nobleman had retired into
France, upon what pretence historians do not men-
tion. During his residence there, he had held a
close correspondence with the chiefs of the con-

federacy,

federacy, and, at their desire, he now returned. BOOK V.
He seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office '-'
of Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to 7
the scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Mur-
ray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor
ambition to aspire to this high dignity, He had re-
ceived the first accounts of his promotion with the
utmost fatisfa&ion; but by appearing to continue
for some days in suspense, he gained time to view
vith attention the ground on which he was to aft;
to balance the strength and resources of the two
contending factions, and to examine whether the
foundation on which his future fame and success
-uft reft, were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter,
and a Queen, in a prison, from which he had nei-
ther any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned
among the circumitances, which discover the great
want of delicacy and refinement in that age. Mur-
ray, who was naturally rough and uncourtly in his
manner *, expoftulated so warmly with the Queen Kcith,
concerning her past conduCt, and charged her faults 96.
so home upon her, that Mary, who had flattered
herself with more gentle and brotherly treatment
from him, melted into tears, and abandoned her-
self entirely to despair t. This interview, from t Ib.445,
which Murray could reap no political advantage, 446.
and wherein he discovered a spirit so evere and
unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bit-
ter circumstances in Mary's life, and is certainly
one of the most unjustifiable in his condut.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray

accepted the office of Regent, and began to act in
that character without opposition.

AMIDST so many great and unexpected events, Aug. 22.

the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all,
oath been almost forgotten. After his flight from

the

BOOK V. the confederates, he lurked for ome time among

ó'^- his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But

1567

Fate of finding it impofible for him to make head, in
Bothweli. that country, againit his enemies, or even to e-

cure himself from their pursuit, he fled for fhel-
ter to his kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and
when he, overawed by the confederates, was oblig-
ed to abandon him, he retired to the Orkney
isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his
friends, and accompanied by a few retainers, as
desperate as himl!-f, he suffered at once the mi-
fleies of infamy and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his in-
famy. He armed a few small hips, which had ac-
companied him from Dunbar, and attacking evenr
vessel which fell in his way, endeavoured to pro-
cure subsistence for himself and his followers by
piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tullibardin
were lent out against him by the confederates; and
surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered
his imall fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him
to fly with a ingle ship towards Norway. On
that coast he fell in with a vessel richly laden, and
immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed
with armed boats to its assistance, and after a def-
perate nghr, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the
indignity and rigour, which the odious crime of
piracy merited. His real character was oon dif-
covered; and though it saved him from the infa-
mous death to which his associates were condemn-
ed, it could neither procure him liberty, nor mi-
tigate the hardships of his imprisonment. He lan-
guifhed ten years in this unhappy condition; me-
lancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and
at last he ended his days unpitied by his country-

*Melv. men, and unassisted by ftrrngers *. Few men
168. ever

ever accomplished their ambitious projects byBooK V.
worse means, or reaped from them less fatisfacti-
on. The early part of his life was restless and '567.
enterprising, full of danger and of vicissitudes.
His enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he at-
tained by so many crimes, was extremely short;
imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted by
many fears. In his latter years, he suffered the
most intolerable calamities, to which the wretched
are fbject, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted. Success of

THE good effe&s of Murray's accerilon to the the Re-

regency were quickly felt. The party forming for ge.nt ado

70 a .... r ;

-.. o minifra-

the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited tion.
and no sooner was the government of the king-
dom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both
for his abilities and popularity, than the nobles of
whom it was composed loft all hopes of gaining
ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to ac-
knowledge the King's authority, that scarce any
appearance of opposition to the eftablifed go-
vernment was left in the kingdom. Had they ad-
hered to the Queen with any firmness, it is pro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time,
that she would have afforded them such assistance
as might have enabled them to face their enemies
in the field. But there appeared so little vigour
or harmony in their councils, that fle was difcou-
raged from espousing their cause; and the Regent
taking advantage of their situation, obliged them
to submit to his government, without granting any
terms, either to themselves, or to the Queen *. ' Keith,

THE regent was no less liccefsful in his attempt, 447, +4o,

to get into his hands the places of strength in the 463-
kingdom. Balfour, the deputy-governor, furren-
dered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron,

obtained

Boor V obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
~~~ Governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fide-

3567. liry, was oon forced t capitulate; ome other

small forts surrendered without reiftance.
A Parlia- This face of tranquillity in the nation encourag-

mDecen. ed the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. No-

thing was wanting to confirm the King's authority,
and the proceedings of the confederates, except the
approbation of this supreme court; and after the
success which had attended all their measures,
there could be little doubt of obtaining it. The
numbers that retorted to an assembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of so much impor-
tance, were great. The meeting was opened with
the utmost solemnity, and all its acts passed with
much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords,
who had discovered the warmeff attachment to the
Queen, were present. But they had made their
peace with the Regent. Argyle, Huntly, and
Herreis acknowledged, openly in Parliament, that
their behaviour towards the King had been un-
dutiful and criminal *. Their compliance, in this
manner, with the measures of the Regent's party,
was either the condition on which they were ad-
mitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

Confifrms THE Parliament granted every thing the confe-
thepro- derates could demand, either for the safety of
ceeding their own persons, or the security of that form of
ofthecon-
feder2aes. government which they had eftablihfed in the

kingdom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was
accepted, and declared to be valid. The King's
authority, and Murray's election, were recognized,
and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and
all the other proceedings of the confederatesi
were pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary
had written to Bothwell were produced, and the

' Anders. vol iv. 153. See Appendix, N'1 XXIII.

rwas

was declared to be accessory to the murder of the BOOR V.
King . At the fame time, all the ads of Parlia- ~
ment 560, in favour of the Protestant religion, 1567.
were publickly ratified; new tfatutes to the fame
purpose were enacted. And nothing that could
contribute to root out the remains of Popery, or to
encourage the growth of the Reformation, was
negle&ed.

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsi-

monious spirit prevailed in this Parliament, as in
that of 560. The Protestant clergy, notwith-
standing many discouragements, and their extreme
poverty, had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The expedients fal-
len upon for their subsistence had hitherto proved
ineffetual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm
remonstrances of the Assembly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more
for their relief, than prescribe ome new regula-
tions concerning the payment of the thirds of be-
nefices, which did not produce any considerable
change in the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, 1568.

four of Bothwell's dependants were convicted of January3.
being guilty of the King's murder, and suffered
death as traitors. Their confeflions brought to
light many circumstances relative to the manner
of committing that barbarous crime; but they were
persons of a low rank, and seem not to have been
admitted into the secrets of the conspiracy t. t Aderf.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal submission to X6S.

the Regent's authority, there till abounded in the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
partizans of the hoi.ie of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatel-
herault, who, as first Prince of the blood, had, in
their opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent.

* Good. vol ii. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 2o6.

The

Boos V. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began
' -' to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who
5-68.

leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded
the effecis of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his abi-
lities were great, did not possess the talents requi-
site for soothing the rage or removing thejealoufies
of the different factions. By insinuation, or address,
he might have gained or softened many, who had
opposed him; but he was a stranger to these gentle
arts. His virtues were severe; and his deportment
towards his equals, especially after his elevation to
the regency, distant and haughty. This behaviour
offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others,
The Queen's faction, which had been so easily dif-
perfed, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by some who had hitherto

' Melv. zealously concurred with the confederates *.
'79. SUCH was the favourable dilpofition of the na-
Mary
elcaps t tion towards the Queen, when she recovered her
from liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her friends,
Lochlevin. than unexpected by her enemies. Several attempts

had been made to procure her an opportunity of
eicaping, which some unforeseen accident, or the
vigilan.e of her keepers, had hitherto disappointed.
At lalt, Mary employed all her art to gain George
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and infinu-
ating, fne treateJ himr with the moit flattering dif-
tincion; she even allowed him to entertain the
most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some exprei-

t- Keith, sions, as if she would chooCf him for her husband -
r69. At his age, and in such circumitances, it was im-

pofiible to refill lfch a tcedipation. He yielded,
and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the
2d of MIa-, while his brother fat at supper, and the
reft of the family were retired to their devotions,
one of his accomplices found means to steal the
keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Queen and one of her maids. locked

them

them behind her, and then threw the keys into the BOOK. V.
lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the boat ,l

i 568.

which was prepared for her, and on reaching the
shore, was received with the utmost joy, by Doug-
las, Lord Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton, who,
with a few attendants, waited for her. She in-
ftantly mounted on horseback, and rode full speed
towards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lo-
thian. She arrived there that night, without being
pursued or interrupted. After halting three hours,
(he set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the
f ne pace, she reached it next morning.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends Arrives at
whom, in their present disposition, a much smaller Hanlilton,

and raises

accident would have roued, ran to arms. Ina a numre-
days, her court was filled with a great and splendid rous army.
train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of
followers, as formed an army above 6000 strong.
In their pretence she declared that the resignation of
the Crown, and other deeds she had signed during
her imprisonment, were extorted from her by fear.
Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and
cn that, as well as on other accounts, a council of
the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced
;.il these tranfations, void and illegal. At the fame May .
tine an association was formed for the defence of
her person and authority, and subscribed by nine
Earls, nine Bishops, eighteen Lords, and many
gentlemen of diltinaion *. Among them, we Keith,
find everal who had been present in the last Par- 475.
iiament, and who had signed the counter-affociation
in defence of the King's government; but such
sudden changes were then so common, as to be
ro matter of reproach.

AT the time when the Queen made her es- Confierna-

cape, the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court ton of the
of justice. An event so contrary to their expeta- decnt.

Vl. I. adbere
tions,

Boor V. tions, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great
'~" shock to his adherents. Many of them appeared
' 68 weavering and irrefolure; others began to carry on

private negotiations with the Queen; and some
openly revolted to her fide. In so difficult a junc-
ture, where his own fame, and the being of the
party depended on his choice, the regent's most
faithful associates were divided in opinion. Some
advised him to retire, without loss of time, to Stir-
ling. The Queen's army was already strong, and
only eight miles distant; the adjacent country was
full of the friends and dependents of the house of
Hamilton, and other Lords of the Queen's faction;
Glasgow was a large and unfortified town his own
train consisted of no greater number than was ufu-
al in times of peace; all there reasons pleaded for
a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens
of Glasgow were well affected to the cause; the
vassals of Glencairn, Lenox, and Semple lay near
at hand, and were both numerous, and full
of zeal; succours might arrive from other parts of
the kingdom in a few days ; in war, success depends
upon reputation, as much as upon numbers; re-
putation is gained, or loft, by the firt ftep one
takes; in his circumitances, a retreat would be at-
tended with all the ignominy of a flight, and would
at once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies

Hi: p"u- with boldnels. In such dangerous exigencies as
dPUt co- this, the superiority of Murray's genius appeared,

and enabled him both to choose with wisdom, and
to act with vigour. He declared against retreating,
and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while
he amused the QQucen for ome days, by pretending
to hearken to ome overtures, which she had made
for accommodating their differences, he was em-
ployed with the utmolt industry, in drawing to-

gether
ZZ

gther his adherents, from different parts 6' the BooK V.
kingdon. He was soon in a condition to take the '~
field; and though far inferior to the enemy in '56s
rlumber, he confided so much in the valour of his
t:oops, and the experience of his officers, that he
b:oke off the negotiation, and determined to hazard uchan
a battle *ucan

'<1~~ ,^t^~~

- 369

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had Mav 13.

:ommanded her army to move. Their intention
was, to conduca her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place
of great ftrengtlh, which the Regent had not been
able to wreit out of the hands of Lord Fleming the
governor; but if the enemy f.ould endeavour to
interrupt their march, they relolved not to decline
an engagement. In DMary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces
was assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern
clans were soon expected; her sufferings had re-
moved, or diminifhled the prejudices of many a-
mong her subjects; the addrels with which he
iurmounted the dangers that obftruced her escape,
dazzled and interested the people ; the sudden con-
fluence osso many nobles added lustre to her cause;
she might aituredly depend on the friendihip and
countenance of France; she had reason to expect
the prote&ion of England; her enemies could not
.pohibly look for support froin that quarter. She
had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious
,eaiafures; they had every thing to fear.
BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine,

and her paffons impetuous, was lo elevated by her
ludden transition from the depth of distress, to
such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that she
never doubted of fucces. H-er army, which was
aimoft double to the enemy in number, consisted
chiefly of the Hamiltons, and their dependants.
Of these the archbilhop of St. Andrew's had the
chief dircaion, and hoped, by a victQry, not only

B b 2 to

S.(oo( V. to crush Murray, the ancient enemy of his house,

'~' but to get the person of the Queen into his hands,
I -3' and to oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's

son's, or at least to commit the chief direction of
her affairs to himself. His ambition proved fatal

Bttle f to the Queen, to himself, and to his family *.
L:ngfie. MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was

not greater than the ill conduct of her generals in
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the regent had the
precaution to seize, and posted his troops in a small
village, and among some gardens and inclofures
adiacent. In this advantageous situation he waited
the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such
broken ground. The Hamiltons who composed
the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that
they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen
was fierce and desperate; but as the forces of the
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, attack-
ed on the other by the Regent's molt choice troops,
and not supported by the reft of the Queen's army,

--, they were loon obliged to give ground, and the
f .- 's rout immediately became universal. Few victories,

-* - in a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
::.:-' been pursued with less violence, or attended with

les bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field;
in the flight Ecarce any were killed. The Regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching
the soldiers to ipare their countrymen. The num-
ber of prisoners was great, and among them many
erfons of dilsinction. The Regent marched back
To Glafgo w, and returned public thanks to God

' A.nref. vol. iv. 32. Melv. 18. -

for

for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless 1ooK \V.
vitory .

DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,. KRi,

at no great distance, and beheld all that passed in 47.
the field, with such emotions of mind as are nort 1,l figl.
easily described. When she saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confu-
sion, her spirit, which all her pall misfortunes had
not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmost consternation, he began her flight,
and so lively were her imprefions of fear, that ihe
never closed her eyes till she reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottifhl miles
from the place of battle -. t Id 4. I.

THESE revolhtions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid, than singular. In the hort spade of
eleven days, he had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies; she had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a nu-
merous train of nobles at her devotion; and now
flhe was obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her
life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a cor-
ner of her kingdom, Not thinking herself safe,
even in that retreat; her fears impelled her to an
aftion, the most uadvifed, as well as the most
unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retir-
ing into England, a ftep, which, on many ac-
counts, ought to have appeared to her ralh and
dangerous.

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- Relolves
trust and jealousies had arisen between her and Eli- onretiring

into Eng-

;L.ibeth. All their subsequent tranfadtions had con- nl. ng
tributed to exasperate and inflame these passions.
She had endeavoured, by secret negotiations and
intrigues, to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's
government, and to advance her own pretensions
to the English Crown. Elizabeth, who possessed
greater power, and aed with less reserve, had
openly supported Mary's rebellious fubjets, and

B b 3 fomented

Boos V. fomented all the dissentions and troubles in which
~-... her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-

' icv still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame
cour!e, as by keeping Scotland in cor.fufion, fit
fetuallv Itcured the peace o her own kinedo!n.
The regent, after his victory, had marched to
Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the

c* c.-- Queen had taken, it was several days before he
!.,. ';, thought of pursuing her * She might have been

concealed in that retired corner, among fubjcts
devoted to her interest, till her party, which was
dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat,
should gather such strength, that ihe could again
appear vwith fafcry at their head. There was not
any danger, which she ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throv. herself into the hands of an enemy,
from which she had already suffered so many inju-
ries, and who was prompted both by inclination,
and by interest, t renew them.

BUT on the other hand, during Mary's confine-

ment, Elizabeth had declared againif the proceed-
ings of her fubjec's, and solicited for her liberty,
with a warmth which had all the appearance of fin-
ceritv. She had invited her to take rcfuge in England,
and had promised to meet her in person, and to give
her such a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally . \\ hatever apprehcniion Elizabeth might
entertain or Mary's designs, while she had power
in her hands, he was, at present, the objeE, not
or fear, but of pity ; and to take advantage of her
situation, would b bth ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors cii a prilon were frieh in Mary's me-
mory, and if e he old

f aol ll a fcn

i d time into the

hands of her iubjects, there was nr rwiury to whic'-

;ce prcfurmpilon of lccefs might Io; embolden
them to proceed. To atzempt -:cL:png into France,
-vas dangerolus and, i htr .tru- iO., almoit in-

. C.-c. 4: . Ar;:lf . ' :;-. c... ;: . Mjurciln. 369.

poiible,

possible; nor could fle bear the thoughts of ap- BOOK V.
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that king- v"
dom, where she had once enjoyed all the splendor 568
of a Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the intreaties of Lord Herreis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises or generofiry, her infatuation was
invincible, and he resolved to fly thither. Herreis, Her re-
by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy- ception at
governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he Calline.
would give her; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were so great, that
she got into a fiflier-boat, and, with about twenty
attendants, landed at Workington in Cumberland, May 16.
and thence she was conducted with many marks of
refpea to Carlisle *. Keiti,

So soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote 483.

a long letter to the Queen, representing, in the vol. i.
strongest terms, the injuries which she had suffered Elizabeth
from her own subje&s, and imploring that pity and deliberates
assistance which her present situation demanded t. concern-

ing the

An event so extraordinary, and the conduCt which manner of
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at- treating
tention, and employed the thoughts of Elizabethher.
and her council. If their deliberations had been in- t Id. 29Q
fluenced by considerations of justice or generosity
alone, they would not have found them long or in-
tricate. A Queen vanquished by her own subje&s,
and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and
thrown herself into the arms of her nearest neigh-
bour and ally, from whom he had received repeated
assurances of friendship and protection. These cir-
cumftances entitled her to refpet and to compaf-
sion, and required that she hould either be restored
to her own kingdom, or at least be left at full li-
berty to seek aid from any other quarter. But with

B b . Elizabeth

BooK V. Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,

68 what was most just or generous, but what was moss

beneficial to herself, and to the English nation.
Three different resolutions might have been taken,
with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-instate
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire
into France was another; to detain her in England,
was a third. Each of there drew consequences as-
ter it, of the utmost importance, which were exa-

Anders. mined, as appears from papers still extant *, with

vo. iv .3 , that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers
99, ''0 employed in all their consultations upon affairs of

moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the English interest,
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re-
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom strong or lasting, regard to her own interest
might soon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own
pretensions to the English Crown. Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent these dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful,
Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and
courage; a single victory might give them the lu-
periority, which they had loft by a tingle defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than ever
to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to retire

into France, were no less obvious The French
King could not refute his assistance towards reftor-
ing his filter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island,
overawing the Scots, and ready to enter her king-

dom;

dom; and if the commotions in France, on account BOOK V.
of religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain "''
might resume their ambitious projects, and the unit- 56
ed forces of France and Scotland might invade
England, where it is weakest and most defenceless.

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her Resolves

in England; and to permit her either to live at li- to detain
berty there, or to confine her in a prison. The her in,
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of refoit to all the Roman
Catholics, to the difaffeted, and to the lovers of
innovation. Though Elizabeth affeaed to repre-
sent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, she was not
ignorant that they did not appear in that light to
the nation, and that many thought them preferable
even to her own title. If the activity of her emif-
saries had gained her so many abetters, her own
personal influence was much more to be dreaded;
her beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the ad-
miration and pity which they would excite, could
not fail of making many converts to her party *. Anders

'Twas, indeed, to be apprehended, that thevol iv.

treating Mary as a prisoner would excite univer- 56, 60.
ial indignation against Elizabeth, and that by this
unexampled severity towards a Queen, who im-
plored, and to whom she had promised her pro-
teetion, fie would forfeit the praise of justice and
humanity, which was hitherto due to her admini-
ftration. But the English Monarchs were often so
solicitous to secure their kingdom against the Scots,
as to be little scrupulous about the means which
they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had
seized the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was
forced, by the violence of a storm, to take refuge
in one of the ports of his kingdom; and, in con-
tempt of the rights of hospitality, without regard-
ing his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of

his

BOOK IV. his father, detained him a prisoner for many years.

' This ation though detested by posterity, Eliza-
6. beth reolived now to imitate. Her virtue was not

more proof than Henry's had been, against the
temptations of interest; and the poffefflon of a pre-
lent advantage was preferred to the profpe of
future fame. The satisfaction which fne felt in
mortifying a rival, whole beauty and accomplish-
mrents she envied, had, perhaps, no less influence
than political confiderarions, in bringing her to
this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to
lcrcen heriflf from the censure which this conduct
rerited, and to make her treatment of the Scottish
Queen look like the effect of necessity, rather than
of choice, she determined to put on the appearance
of concern for her intereit, and of deep sympathy
with her sufferings.
May zo. WITH this view she instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her Vice-chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of expressions of kindness
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private instructions to watch all her motions, and
to take care that she hould not escape into her

A .ndef own kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary demand-
vol. iv. 36 ed a erfonal interview with the Queen, that the
M0, de might lay before her the injuries which she had
mands ad-fuffered, and receive from her those friendly offi-
mr:rance ces whiich she had been encouraged to expet.
intoOiZ1 Theyv nfwered, that it was with relutance this
b:~spe- honour vwa at present denied her; that while she

lay under the imputation of a crime so horrid as
the murder of her husband, their Mistress, to
whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without
bringing a stain upon her own reputation, admit
her into her pretence; but as oon as she had clear-
ed herself from that alperfion, they promiLed her

t bid. a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid pro-
vci. i. *, por ione- to her distress .
5;5 NOTHING

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this BooK V.
pretence. It was the occasion, however, of lead- "

1568.

ing the Queen of Scots into the snare, in which She offers
Elizabeth and her Ministers wished to intangle to vindi-
her. Mary expressed the utmost furprize at this cate her
unexpectcd manner of evading her request; but °ncdut
as he could not believe so many profefions of
friendship to be void of sincerity, he frankly
offered to submit her cause to the cognizance of
Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs
of her own innocence, and of the falfhood of the
accusations brought against her, as hould fully
remove the scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of
the English Queen. This was the very point to Elizabeth
which Elizabeth laboured to bring the matter. By takes ad-
this appeal of the Scottish Queen, he became the vntage of
umpire between her and her fubje&cs, and had itthis oHer.
entirely in her own power to protract the inquiry
to any length, and to perplex and involve it in
endlels difficulties. In the mean time, she was
furnified with a plausible pretence for keeping her
at a distance from court, and for refuing to con-
tribute towards replacing her on her throne. As
Mary's conduc had been extremely incautious,
and the presumptions of her guilt were many and
ftlonlg, it was pof'.ble her fubjedts might make
good their charge against her; and if this should
be the result of the inquiry, ihe would, thence-
forth, cease to be the object of regard, or of com-
palTion, and the treating her with coldneis arid
neglect would merit little censure. In a matter
so dark and mysterious, there was no probability
that Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, o
incontefted, as to render the conduEt of the Eng-
lifh Queen altogether culpable. And, perhaps, her
impatience under reifraint, her suspicion of Eliza-
beth's partialiky, cr her discovery of her artifices,
n:ght engage her in uch cabals, as would jiftify
the using her with greater rigour.

TLIZABETH

BooK V. ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages,
'- which would arise from an inquiry into the con-

duc of the Scottish Queen, carried on under her
dire&tion. There was ome danger, however, that
Mary might discover her secret intentions too soon,
and by receding from the offer which she had
made, endeavour to disappoint them. But even
in that event, she determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expe-
dients for carrying it on. The Countess of Lenox,
convinced that Mary was acc ffory to the murder of
her son, and thirsting for that vengeance which it was
natural for a mother to demand, had implored
Elizabeth's justice, and solicited her with many tears,
in her own name, and in her husband's, to bring
the Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime *. The
parents of the unhappy Prince had a just right to
prefer this accusation; nor could Ihe, who was
their nearest kinswoman, be condemned for liften-
ing to so equitable a demand. Besides, as the Scot-
tilh nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by sufficient proof, it would be no difficult matter
to prevail on them, to petition the Queen of Eng-
land to take cognizance of their proceedings a-
gainft their sovereign; and it was the opinion of
the English council, that it would be reasonable
to comply with the request t. At the fame time,
the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over
Scotland began to be talked of and, on that ac-
count, it was pretended that the decision of the con-
test between Mary and her subjects belonged of right
to Elizabeth. But tho' Elizabeth revolved all these
expedients in her mind, and kept them in re'erve
to be made use of as occalion might require, she
wished that the inquiry into Mary's conduct should
appear to be undertaken purely in compliance with

Camd. 412. Haynes, 469. + Anders. vol. iv. 37.

her

her own demand, and in order to vindicate her in-BooK V. -
nocence; and so long as that appearance could be '
preserved, none of the other expedients were to be 568.
employed.

WHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to

Elizabeth, he was far from fufpeing that any bad
consequences could follow, or that any dangerous
pretensions could be founded on her offer. She
expeced that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences *; she meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfation he was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom he was bound to plead her cause.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's
offer. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge
in the controversy between the Scottiih Queen and
her fubjefts, and began to at in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commilfioners to hear the
pleadings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent
of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear
before them, in his name, and to produce what he
could alledge in vindication of his proceedings a-
gainft his Sovereign.

MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable Mary

credulity on Elizabeth's profession of regard, and greatly
expected that so many kind speeches would, at last, offended

at Eliza-

be accompanied with bome fuit.ble acions. But beth's
this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly conduct
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's condut, and
saw what a diminution it would be to her own ho-
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious sub-
jests, and to stand together with them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. She retra&ted the offer which
she had made, and which had been perverted to
a purpose so contrary to her intention. She de-
manded, with more earnestness than ever, to be ad-
mitted into Elizabeth's pretence; and wrote to her,

< Anders. vol. iv. 10.

in

Book V. in a strain very different from what she had fol-
' .¥-J enmerly used, and which fully discovers the grief and

'jS. indignation that preyed on her heart. " In my

" present situation, fays she, I neither will, nor
"can reply to the accusations of my subjects. I

am ready, of my own accord, and out of friend-

" hip to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vin-
" dicate my own conduct. My fubjeas are not
· my equals; nor will I, by ubmitting my cause
"to a judicial trial, acknowledge them to be so. I
"fled into your arms, as into those of my nearest

relation and most perfec friend. I did you
honour, as I imagined, in choofing you pre-
" ferably to any other Prince, to be the restorer of

an injured Queen. Was it ever known that a

"Prince was blamed for hearing, in person, the
" complaints of those who appealed to his justice,
"against the false accusations of their enemies ?
"You admitted into your pretence my bastard bro-
"ther, who had been guilty of rebellion; and you
"deny me that honour ! God forbid that I hould
" be the occasion of bringing any stain upon your
"reputation. I expe&ed that your manner of treat-
"ing me would have added lustre to it. Suffer
' me either to implore the aid of other Princes,

whose delicacy, on this head, will be less, and
' their refentmenr of my wrongs greater; or let

me receve fron vour hands that alfiftance, which

" it becomes you, more than any other Prince,
" to grant; and by that benefit, bind me to your-

A-- ;.' fell' in the indifio!uble ties of gratitude i."

,'o!..-.. Tis letter lome;what dilconcerted Elizabeth's

lue'' :l an, but did not divert her from the prosecution
h eth. r-- it. She laid the matter before the Privy Council,
ciuie.sa-and it was there determined, notwithstanding the
g:.i . er. inreaties and remonstrances of the Scottish Queen,

to go on with the inquiry into her conduce, and till
that was -nifhed, it was agreed that Elizabeth could

not,

not, consistently with her own honour, or with the BooE V.
safety of her government, either give her the assist- ~~
ance which she demanded, or permit her to retire 5
out of the kingdom. And left she should have an
opportunity of escaping, while she resided so near
Scotland, it was thought advifeable to remove her
to some place, at a greater distance from the bor- * Ander.

ders .

ders

,. ibid. o102.

WHILE the English court was occupied in thee Proceed-

deliberations, the Regent did not neglect to improve ings of the
the victory at Langfide. That event was of the Regent a-
utmost importance to him. It not only drove the inet tshe
Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her ad- adherents.
herents dispersed, and without a leader, at his mer-
cy. He seemed resolved, at first, to proceed against
them with the utmost rigour. Six persons of some
diftintion, who had been taken prisoners in the
battle, were tried and condemned to death as rebels
against the king's government. They were led to
the place of execution, but by the powerful inter-
ceflion of Knox, they obtained a pardon. Hamil-
ton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the number, who
lived to give both the Regent and Knox reason to
repent of this commendable at of lenity t. f Cald

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army, l. ii. 99.

consisting of 4000 horse ard i oo foot, towards the
weft borders. The noble; in this part of the king-
dom were all of the Queen's faction ; but as they had
not force sufficient to obftrut his progress, he muff
either have obliged them to fubmir to the king, or
would have laid waste their lands with fire and
sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to ooth the Scottish Queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, theRegent, in compliance with dhe
Englifn Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an

expedition,

BooK V. expedition, which might have proved fatal to his

-- opponents, ended with a few acts of severity *.
Ca!d. THE resolution of the English Privy Council with
oli. ii. 99 regard to Mary's person, was oon carried into exe-
Mary car- cution; and, without regarding her remonstrances
ied to or complaints, she was condu&ed to Bolton, a caf-
Juiy I3 tle of Lord Scroope's, on the borders ofYorkfhiret.
t Anders In this place, her correspondence with her friends
vol. iv. 14. in Scotland became more difficult, and any profpecl

of making her escape was entirely cut off. She now
felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and
though treated as yet with the refpe&t due to a
Queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner.
Mary knew what i was to be deprived of liberty,
and dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the
remembrance of her late imprisonment was still
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind,
July 28. Elizabeth thought it a properjuncture to renew her

former proposition, that she would susser the Regent
and his adherents to be called into England, and
content to their being heard in defence of their own
conduct. And, on her part, the promised, whatever
should be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all

Agrees her power and influence towards replacing Mary on
that an her throne, under a few limitations, which were
inquiry. ce
madeinto far from being unreasonable. Fear, impatience,
her con- despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which
dumt. the proposition was accompanied, induced the Scot-

Anders- tifh Queen to comply :.
o. IN order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired no-
Haynes, thing so much as to render the union between them
468. as close as possible, she shewed a disposition to relax
Her difli- Somewhat in one point, with regard to which, du-
iutlation
with re- ring all her past and subsequent misfortunes, he
gard tore-was uniformly inflexible. She expressed a great
ilgior. veneration for the liturgy of the church of Eng-

land; she was often present at religious worship,
according to the rites of the reformed church,

made

made choice of a Protestant clergyman t be her B OOK V.
chaplain; heard him preach against the erirsiof '-
Popery with attention and seeming pleafiwe; and 1568
discovered all the symptoms of an approaching- con-
version *. Such was Mary's known and bigotted at- " Anders.
tachment to the Popish religion, that it is impoffi- vol. iv.
ble to believe her sincere in this part of her condu& Haynes;
nor can any thing mark more strongly the wretch- 50.s
ednefs of her condition, and the excels of her fears,
than that they betrayed her into dissimulation in
a matter concerning which her sentiments were, at
all other times, scrupulously delicate.

'AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Aug. 18.

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- A Parlia-
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The S'.'l ,n
Queen's faction was alarmed, and Argyle and
Huntly; whom Mary had appointed her lieute-
nants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to- assemble forces to ob-
ftru& this- meeting. Compassion for the Queen, and
envy at those who governed in the King's name,
had added so much strength to the party, that the
Regent would have found it difficult to withstand its
efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause to
Elizabeth she could not refuse, at her desire, to
command her friends to lay down their arms, and
to wait patiently till matters were brought to a de-
cifion in England. By procuring this celfarion of
arms, Elizabeth afforded as feaionable relief to the
Regent's fation, as he had formerly given to the
Queen's t. tAnderfi

THE Regent, however, would not cdnfent, even vol i.'

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of 125'
Parliament. But we may ascribe to her influence,
as well as to the eloquence of Maitland; who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
from exterminating the other, any appearances of
moderation which this Parliament diicovered in its
proceedings. The most violent opponents of the

Vot. I. C c King's

BooKV. King's government were forfeited; the reft were
'C- ' allowed still to hope for favour *.
Elizabeth No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her
requires cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
the Re- gent to fend to York, deputies, properly iriftructed
gent tno; for vindicating his condu&t, in presence of her com-
condua. mifioners. It was not without hesitation and anxi-

ety, that the Regent consented to this measure.
His authority was already established in Scotland,
and confirmed by Parliament. To susser its vali-
dity now to be called in question, and fubje&ed to
a foreign jurifdicion, was extremely mortifying.
To accuse his Sovereign before strangers, the an-
cient enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to
succeed in it was disgraceful. But the strength of
the adverse faction daily increased. He dreaded the
interposition of the French King in its behalf. In
his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had
so much at heart, her commands were neither to be
disputed, nor disobeyed --.

Both the THE neceflity of repairing in person to York ad-
Q and ded to the ignominy of the ftep which he was ob-
he apoin- liged to take. All his associates declined the office;
ic.ner. they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose them-

selves to the odium and danger with which it was
ea1? to foresee that the discharge of it would be at-
tended, unless he himself consented to hare these
in common with them. The Earl of Morton,
Bothwell Bithop of Orkney, Pitcairn Cornmenda-
ror of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay were joined
wvi:h him in commillion. Macgill of Rankeilor
and Balnaves of Halhill, two eminent Civilians,
George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man
whoie genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
icveral others, were appointed to attend them as
aflitar.ts. Maitland owed this diftinclion to the
Regent's fear, rather than to his affection. He had

' Euc;. 3-i. .- Buch. 372. SeeAppend. No XXV.

warmly

warmly remoifirated against this measure. He BOOK V.
wilhed his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that na-
tion. He was desirous ofre-eftablifhing the Queen
in some degree of power, not inconftent with that
which the King possessed; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whole
views were so contrary to his own, and who, by his
superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the
nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families *.

M.ARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord

Livingston, Lord Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Ha-
milton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John Gor-
don of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of Stir-
ling, to appear in her name t.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of SuIiex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commissioners to hear both
parties;

THE fourth of Otober was the day fixed for Thecon-

opening the Conference. The great abilities of the ference at
deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole tranfaffion no less illustrious than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared on this occasion, strikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival an independent Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and posses-
fed the authority of a King, stood in person at her
bar, And the fate of a kingdom, whose power her

" Buch. 372. Andttf. vol. i. 3$. Melv. 186, i88.
t Andcrl. vol. iv. 334.

C c g ancestors

Boor V. ancestors had often dreaded but could never sub-
'--'- due, was now absolutely at her disposal.
Vie68. THE views, however, with whic. the several
the diffe- parties consented to this conference, and the issue
rent par- to which they expe&ed to bring it, were extremely
t:es. different.

MARY'S chief objeft was the recovering her for-

mer authority. This induced her to consent to a
measure, against which she had long struggled.
Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for entertain-
ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in
order to which, she would have willingly, made
many concessions to the King's party; and the in-
fluence of the English Queen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more . The Regent aimed at no-
thing but securing Elizabeth's protecion to his
parry, and seems not to have had the most distant
thoughts of coming to any composition with Mary.
Elizabeth's views were more various, and her
fchemestnore intricate. She seemed to be full of
concern for Mary's honour, and solicitous that she
should wipe off the aspersions which blemiihed her
character. This the pretended to be the intention
of the conference; amusing Mary, and eluding the
bliciations of the French and Spanish ambaffa-
dors in her behalf by repeated promises of assisting
her, as oon as he could venture to do so, without
bringing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil
of friendship and gcnerofity, Elizabeth concealed
fcntiments of a ditferent nature. She expected that
the Regent would accuse Mary of being accessory
to the murder or her husband. She encouraged him,
as far as decency would permit, to take this defpe-
rate ftep +. And as this accusation might terminate
two different ways, she had concerted measures
for her future conduct suitable to each of these. If

A-e.. f. vcl. is. 33. Good. va!. ii. 337. f Anders. vol.
'

Wl . 4' Ha Xes. .;. the
' * the

the charge against Mary hould appear to be weellBooK V.
founded, he resolved to pronounce her unworthy . '-.
of wearing a Crown, and to declare that she would '56
never burden her own conscience with the guilt of
an acion so detestable, as the restoring her to her
kingdom *. If it hould happen, that what her Anders.
accusers allcdged, did not amount to a proof of vol. iv. 1.
guilt, but only of mal-administration, she deter-
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the lave of her own
fubjecs t. And as every Rep in the prQgrefs. of Id.-lid.
the conference, as well as the final result of it, ivas 16
in her own power, she would still be at liberty to
choose which of these courses fle would hold o.r
if there appeared to be any danger or iconvenien'y
in pursuing either of them, he might protract the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it- in in-
extricable perplexity.

THE conference, however, was opened.'with Complaint

much solemnity. But the very fir-t ftep difioeired of the
it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than Qu en'
to extinguish the dissentions and animofities _arvog ioners a-
the Scots, No endeavours were used to rteoaoile gainlt the
the contending parties, or to molify the fiEerclae Regent.
of their hatred, by bringing the -Queen .to o.ffr
pardon for what was past, or her ubje&s -tóoprm-
mise more dutifi1 obedience for -the futre Oh he

Oh ob. ,

contrary, Mary's commiflioners were permiitted to
prefer a complaint against he .Riegent and his par-
ty, containing-an enumeration of their treasonable
ations, of their seizing her person by force of arms,
committing her to prison, compelling her to refigh
the Crown, and making use of her son's nafie to
colour their usurpation of the whole royal autho-
rity. And of all these enormities, they required
such speedy and effectual redress, as the injuries of
one Queen demanded from thejuftice of another t. t Anderr.

C c 3 IT vol. iv. 5z,

Boo V. IT was then expected that the Regent would
'- v ' have disclosed the whole circumstances of that un-

; rarura! crime, to which he pretended the Queen

had been accessory, and would have produced evi-
dence in support of his charge. But far from ac-
cufing Mary, the Regent did not even answer the
complaints brought against himself. He discovered
a reluctance at the undertaking that office, arid
starred many doubts and scruples, with regard to
which, he'demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth

Hayes,herfelf *. His reserve and hesitation were no less
47s. surprising to the greater part of the English com-

miflioners than to his own associates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own condua with-
out charging the murder upon the Queen, and he
had not hitherto ihewn any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly car-
ried on, since his arrival at York, which explains
this mystery.

Intigues THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the
of Nofolk most powerful and most popular man in England.
etgeth His wife was lately dead; and he began already to

form a project, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland,' by a
marriage with the Queen of Scots. He saw the in-
famy which would be the consequence of a public
accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it
might be to her pretensions to the Englilh fuccef-
sion In order to save her this cruel mortification,
he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish-
ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for
wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so dishonourable to themselves, to their Queen, and
to their country; submitting the public tranfacions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of
their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whole kintiments were

the

the fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own BOOK V.
condut. He assured him, that he had employed '--
all his credit to dissuade his countrymen from this 568.
measure; and would fill contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This en-
couraged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warn-
ed him of the danger to which he must expose him-
self, by such a violent ation as the public accufa-
tion of his Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a
man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her character, If she ever recovered
any degree of power, his deftrucion would be in-
evitable, and he would justly merit it at her hands.
Nor would Elizabeth creen him from this, by a
public approbation of his conduct. For whatever
evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce, he was
resolved to give no definitive sentence in the cause.
Let him only demand that the matter should be
brought to decision, immediately after hearing the
proof, and he would be fully convinced how false
and insidious her intentions were, and, by confe-
quence, how improper it would be for him to ap-
pear as the accuser of his own Sovereign *. The
candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in these
remonstrances, as well as the truth which they
contained, made a deep impression on the Regent.
He daily received the strongest assurances of Mary's
willingness to be reconciled to him, if he abifained
from accusing her of such an odious crime, together
with denunciations of her irreconcilable hatred,
if he acted a contrary part -. All these confidera-
tions concurred in determining him to alter his
purpose, and to make trial of the expedient which
the Duke had suggested.

* Melv. 187. Haynes, 573. 1 Anders. vol. iv 77.
Good. vol. ii. 157. See Append. NO XXVI.

Cc4 HE

Boor V. HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before

~y~'2 he proceeded rarther, whether the English commis-
OCCbr S. fioners were irmpowered to declare the Queen guilty,

by a judicial act; whether thev would promise to
pass sentence, without delav ; whether the Queer.
fhould-be kept under such restraint, as to prevent her
from disturbing the government now established
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if she ap-
proved of the proceedings of the King's party,

A-.e-r. would engage to protect it for the future *. The
vol.i- ; paper containing there demands was signed by

himself alone, without communicating it to any

+t Ib;. 6 of his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil t
-i'v. 150o Nothing could appear more natural than the Re-

gent's solicitude to know on what footing he flood.
To have ventured on a ftep so uncommon and dan-
gerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without
previously ascertaining that he might take it with
,-ffe', would have been unpardonable imprudence.
But Elizabeth, who did not expee that he would
have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered
her commiffoners to give him that fatisfation which
he demanded. It became ne-cessary to transmit
the articles to herself, and by the light in which
Norfolk .placed them, it is easy to fee that he wifil-
ed that they ihould make no flight impression on
Elizabeth and her Ministers. " Think not the
- Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precifc. Let

us vuiew their conduct, as we -would .wifl our

-- own to be viewed in a like fituatien. The game
- they play is deep; their efiates. their lives, their

honour are at frake. It is now in their own power
: to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend her
' irrecoverably, and in a rmatter of so much i.m-

portance, the utmoli degree of caution is n: ex-

An:'. " ce'jivc t.
vo!.i.77. WTHILE the Engiih comm!ii;orners -;ai:ed so:

ftiler instructions with regardi to t;E Regent's
re

.... ;- .*. -

mands, he gave in an answer to the complaint, BooK V.
which had been offered in the name of the Scottish -'
Queen. It was expressed in terms perfectly con-
formable to the system which he had at that time
adopted. It contained no insinuation of the Queen's
being accessory to the murder of her husband, the
bitterness of stile peculiar to the age was confidera-
bly abated; and though he pleaded, that the infa-
my of the marriage with Bothwell, made it necef-
lary to take arms in order to dissolve it; though
Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the
keeping her for ome time under restraint; yet no-
thing more was said on there fubjets than was
barely requisite Wi his own defence. The Queen's Oaob. .
commissioners did not fail to reply *. But while Anderl.
the article with regard to the murder remained un- vol1 iv.
touched, these were only flkimifhes at a distance, 64, SO.
of no consequence towards ending the contest, and
were.little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conducted The con-

in a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, ference re-
and produced none of these discoveries which she lmove to

W elflllli-

had expected. The distance between York and her
London, and the necessity of consulting her upon
every difficulty which occurred, consumed much
time. Norfolk's negotiation with the Scottish Re-
gent, .however fecretly.carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Princess so xemarkable
for her Lgacity in penetrating the designs of her
enemies, and iceing through their dpeft schemes -. -t Good.
Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to the vol.ii.6o.
Regent's demands, she rebolved to remove the con- n. 4ol.
ference to Wefltminflcr, and to appoint new com-
mifioners, in whom he .could more absolutely con-
.fide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of t Haynes,
this resolution 4. 484. An-

derf. vol.
E iv. 94.

BOOK V. WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority
wy-J of her commissioners during the conference at York,

156' and how, by the strength of their arguments, they

confounded her adversaries, and silenced all their

Good cavils . The dispute stood, at that time, on a
v01. s6, footing, which rendered her victory not only ap-

parent, but easy. Her participation of the guilt
of the King's murder was the only circumstance,
which could juilify the violent proceedings of her
subjects. And while they industriously avoided
mentioning that, her cause gained as much as that
of her adversaries loft by suppressing this capital
argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mag should not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
Westminster. She deliberated with the utmost anxi-
ety, how she might overcome the Regent's fcru-
ples, and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She
confidered of the most proper method for bringing
Mary's commissioners to answer such an accusation;
and as she foresaw that the promises with which it
was necessary to allure the Regent, and which it
was impossible to conceal from the Scottish Queen,
would naturally exasperate her to a great degree,
he determined to guard her more narrowly than
ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her no
reason to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet be-
cause he was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law,
she thought it proper to remove the Queen as soon
as possible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and com-
mit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury,

t Hayes, to whom that catle belonged t.
487·-U MARY began to fufpec the design of this second
picions of conference, and notwithstanding the satisfaction mhe
Elizabeth's expressed at feeing her cause taken more immediate-
intentins. ly under the Queen's own eve -, he iramed her
Oaob. 2i. inftruEtions to her commifioners, in such a man-
o. Ainer,
vol.iv.95. ner,

ner, as to avoid being brought under the necessity BOOK V.
of answering the accusation of her fubjets, if they '-- "

1568.

should be so desperate as to exhibit one against her *. Good.
These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circum- vol.ii.349.
fiance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's pretence, and received by her, not only with
refpe&, but with affecion. This Maryjuftly con-
fidered as an open declaration of that Queen's par-
tialitv towards her adversaries. In the first emo- NOv. 2z.
tions of her resentment, he wrote to her commis- Chliis a
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the ,onal
presence of the English nobles, and before the am- :: i;,nce
baffadors of foreign Princes, of the usage he had b'th
hitherto met with, and the additional injuries which
she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious sub-
je&s were allowed access to the Queen, she was ex-
cluded from her pretence; they enjoyed full liberty,
she languished under a long imprisonment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending h! tr't
she laboured under every disadvantage. For tr.e
reasons he once more renewed her demand, o be-
ing admitted into the Queen's pretence; and if that
were denied, he inftru&ed them to declare, that
she recalled the content he .had given to the con-
ference at Westminster, and protested, that what-
ever was done there, should be held to be null and
invalid t. t Good.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution vol.ii.184.

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
she declined the conference were plausible, and the
j unture for offering them well chosen. But either the
Queen's letter did not reach her commissioners in due
time, or they suffered themselves to be deceived by
Elizabeth's professions of regard for their Mistress,
and consented to the opening of the conference A. t Anders.

To the commissioners who had appeared in her vol. iii- 25.
name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Nov. 25.

Bacon

Boor V. Bacon keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of Arun-
'--"--' del and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William

6

Adrf Cecil . The difficulties which obstructed the pro-
vol. iv.99. ceedings at York were quickly removed. A satis-

fying answer was given to the Regent's demands;
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and raise
obiections as formely. His negotiation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by some of
Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to

t- Melv. Cecil -. His personal safety, as well as the conti-
191. nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By

favouring Mary, fne might, at any time, ruin him;
and by a question which she artfully started, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of
Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority,
she let him fee, that even without restoring the
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive

X Havnes, him of the supreme direction of affairs . These
484. considerations, which were powerfully seconded by

most of his attendants, at length determined the
Regent to produce his accusation against the Queen.

The Re- HE endeavoured to lessen the infamy with which
gent ac- he was sensible this ation would be attended, by
cu es the protesting, that it was with the utmost reluctance
Qbueen of he undertook this disagreeable tak ; that his party
ceffory to had long suffered their conduct to be misconstrued,
her hus- and had borne the worst imputations in silence, ra-
band's ther than expose the crimes of their Sovereign to

the eyes of strangers; but that now the insolence
and importunity of the adverse faction forced them
to publiih, what they had hitherto, though with
§ AnderE loss to themselves, endeavoured to conceal §. These

vI i pretexts are decent; and had the party discovered

any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the Queen's
ac-ions, in the reft of their condu&t, might have
passed for the real principles by which they were
influenced. But their former treatment to the Qlueen

renders

renders it impoflible to give any credit of these pro- BoOK V.
feiffons. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn --»--
by the necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's ar- 568'
rifices, into a situation, where no liberty of choice
was left him; and was obliged either to acknow-
ledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge
Mary with having committed murder.

THE accusation itself was conceived in the strong-

eft terms. Mary was charged, not only with hav-
ing consented to the murder, but with being accef-
fory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
pursuits ofjuftice by her favour; and he had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than subversive of the liberties and confti-
tution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes
fliould be denied, an offer was made, to produce
the most ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge *. Anders

vol. iv.

AT the next meeting of the commiflioners, the,, 9.

Earl of Lenox appeared before them; and after be- Nov. 29,
wailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alledged. The entrance of a new a&or on
the stage, so opportunely and at a juncture so cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy of
the Scottih Queen -F. t Id. ibid.

MARY'S commissioners expressed the utmost fur- 122.

Her corn-

prize and indignation at the Regent's presumption, iiflioners
in loading the Queen with calumnies, which, as they refuse to
affirmed, she had so little merited. But, instead ofanfwer.
attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to Decem.4.
the charge, they had recourse to an article in their

inftrutions,

Boos v. inffrucaions, which they had formerly negle&ed to
- '-' mention in its proper place. They demanded an
1568. audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their

Mistress's request, of a personal interview, they
protested, if that were denied hers against all the

* Anders. future proceedings of the commissioners *. A pro-
vol. iv. teftation of this nature, offered just at the critical
133, 58. time, when such a bold accusation had been prefer-

red against Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to sus-
pe& that she dreaded the event of that examination.
This suspicion received the strongest confirmation
from another circumstance; Ross and Herreis, be-
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protestation, privately acquainted Leicef-
ter and Cecil, that as their mistress had, from the
beginning, discovered an inciipation towards bring-
ing the differences between herfeif and her ubje&s
to an amicable accommodation, o she was frill de-
firous, notwithstanding the Pegent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they hould be terminated in that

t bid. iv. manner t.
134- SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the
Cabala, strong resentment which calumniated innocence na-
157. turally feels; or with that eagerness to vindicate it-

self which it always discovers. In Mary's situation,
an offer so ill-timed muff be confidered as a con-
session of the weakness of her cauie. The known
character of her commissioners exempts them from
the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of treache-
ry. Some secret convicton, that the conduct of
their Mistress could not bear so ftric a scrutiny,
seems to be the most probable motive of this im-
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
Dec. 4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for rejecting it. She told
Mary's commissioners, that, in the present juncture,

nothing

hothing could be so diihonourable to their Mistress, BooK V.
as an accommodation; and that the matter would'" "
seem to be huddled up in this manner, merely to 568.
suppress discoveries, and to hide her shame; nor
was it possible that she could be admitted, with any
decency, into her presence, while she lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
seemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incompleat, and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful, as any he
had hitherto employed. She commanded her com-
missioners to testify her indignation and displeasure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the
duty of a subject, as to accuse his Sovereign of such
atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the good
opinion of such a powerful protetrefs, offered to
shew that his accusations were not malicious, nor
ill-grounded. Then were produced, and delivered
to the Engliih commissioners, the as of the Scot-
tifh Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au-
thority, and of the Queen's resignation; the con-
sessions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der; and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contracts, that have been already
mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her possession, Elizabeth

began to lay aside the expressions of friendship and treats Ma-
refpet which she had hitherto used in all her lettersr With
to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her ingaur.
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almost to certainty; she blamed her for
refuting to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanswered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her characer; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unless that were done, no change would

be

Boor V. be made in her present situation *. She hoped that
'v' such a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate

1 568.
A- nderf. Mary, who was scarce recovered from the shock of

vol. iv. the Regent's attack on her reputation, and force
179, 183. her to confirm her resignation of the Crown, to ra-
Goodvol. tify Murray's authority as Regent, and to content

that both herself and her son should reside in Eng-
land, under her prote&tion. This scheme Elizabeth
had much at heart; he proposed it both to Mary
and to her commissioners, and neglected no argu-
ment, nor artifice, that could possibly recommend
it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her
reputation, to her pretensions, and even to her per-
fonal safety. She rejected it without hesitation.
"Death, said she, is less dreadful than such an
"ignominious ftep. Rather than give away, with

my own hands, the Crown which descended to

' me from my ancestors, I will part with life; but
" the last words I utter, shall be those of a Queen

t Haynes," of Scotland t.'
4957 AT the fame time she seems to have been enfible
see - P how open her reputation lay to censure, while she
XXVI. suffered such a public accusation to remain unan-
Good. vol fwered; and though the conference was now dif-
i.- 274, solved, she impowered her commiffloners to present

a reply to the allegations of her enemies, in which
she denied, in the trongeft terms, the crimes im-
Dec. 24. puted to her; and recriminated upon the Regent

and his par:r, bv accusing them of having deviled

+ GoJ. and executed the murder of the King . The
ii. 25. Regent and his associates alferted their innocence

with great warmth. Mary continued to insist on a
persona! interview, a condition which lfie knew

» Ibid would never be granted §. Elizabeth urged her
283. to vindicate her own hnour. But it is evident
Caeai,, from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to
', which both Queens had recourse by turns, that

Mar) avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make
any further progres in the inquiri.

rT 1P

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Boo V.

Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavouring, '-"J
in his absence, to raise ome commotions. Before ?'- 69.
hi lfit out, he was called into the Privy Council, Diliiliies
to rec-tive a final declaration of Elizabeth's finti- thiRegent
menrs. Cecil acquaintred him, in her name, that w'ni'!out
on one hand nothing- had been objected to his con- ptroi g-or
dt:ut, which lie could reckon detrimental to his conde:ln-
honol:ur, or inconflltent with his duy ; nor had he, ig his

en the other hand, produced any thing againlt his co;tu;'

Sovereign on which she could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her actions; and for this reason,
ihe relolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland,
prcelily in the fame situation, in which fihe had
tfound them, at the beginning of the conference.
The Q-een's comminflioners were dlifmifed mnuch
in the f:une manner '. * Good.

At ER the attention of both nations had been 2 315

fixed so earnestly on this conference, upwards of 333
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at firit light, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
Elizabeth's original views, or more subservient to
her future schemes. Notwithiftanding her seeming 1utfecret-
partiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neu- 1y lupports
ter ; nor was flie at any loss on whom to bestow 15 py
her protection. Before the Regent left London,
lhe iupplied him with a considerable fum of money,
and engaged to support the King's authority to the
utmolt of her power -1-. Mary by her own con- t Id 213.
dlur f'ortifiel this resolution. Enraged at the re- Cabie, 3.
ueated instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, 47s8
which the had dilcovered during the progress of
the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining
any ilccour from her, Ihe endeavoured to rouze
her own adherents in Scotland to arms, by imput-
ing such designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as could
not fail to inlpire every Scotchman with indignation.

Vo'.. D d Murray

BooK V. Murray, she pretended, had agreed to convey the

Prince her son into England; to surrender to Eliza-
569 beth the places of greatest strength in the kingdom;

and to acknowledge the dependance of the Scottish
upon the English nation. In return for this, he
was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of
Scotland; and, at the fame time, the question with
regard to the English succession was to be decided
in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who had promised
to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account of
theie wild and chimerical projets was spread in-
duftrioufly among the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving
it was calculated on purpose to bring her govern-
ment into difreputation, laboured to destroy its es-
sects, by a counter-proclamation, and became more
disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen *.

E-o:tsof THE Regenr, on his return, found the kingdom
Mary'sa '-in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
ga.in.h . Queen's adherents, which had been suspended in

expectaton that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war. They
were encouraged, too, by the appearance of a lead-
er, whole high quality and pretensions intitled him
to great authority in the nation. This was the
Duke of Chatelherault, who had resided for ome
years in France, and was now lent over by that
court, with a frall supply of money, in hopes
that the prelfnce of the firit nobleman in the king-
dom would strengthen the Queen's faction. Eli-
s zabcth had detained him in England, for ome

months, under various pretences, but was obliged

;
b. : at last to uffler him to proceed on his journey. Be-

z3jre his deparnure, Mary invested him with the
high dignity of her Lieutenant General in Scotland,
together with the fantaltic title of her adopted fa-
ther.

THE
* tynes, c, ;c. See Append. NJ XXVIII.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his BooK V

party into any regular body. He assembled an ar- "
my with his usual expedition, and marched to Hi,9.i
Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Hunltly, rols con-
who composed the chief part of the Queen's fac-duet
tion, lying in very distant corners of the kingdom, breaks her
and many of the Duke's dependants having fallen, partry
or having been taken in the battle of Langfide, the
spirit and strength of his adherents were totally bro-
ken, and an accommodation with the Regent was
the only thing, which could prevent the defruction
of his estate and vassals. This was effected without
difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The
Duke promised to acknowledge the authority both
of the King and of the Regent; and to claim no
jurifdiftion in consequence of the commission, which
lhe had received from the Queen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the act, which had passed
for attainting several of the Queen's adherents; to
restore all, who would submit to the King's govern-
ment, to the possession of their estates and honours;
and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differen-
ces between the two parties hould be fettled by
mutual content. The Duke gave hostages for his
faithful performance of the treaty; and, in token
of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied
the Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King.
The Regent et at liberty the prisoners taken at
.angfide *. Cabala,
ARGYLL and Huntly refuled to be included in II.

this treaty. A secret negotiation was carrying on, crc.lm5
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better apect, and her return into her own kingdom
teemed to be an event not very distant. The
French King had lately obtained such advantages
over the Hugonots, that the extinction of that par-
ty appeared to be inevitable, and France, by re-

D d 2 covering

BJoK V. covering domestic tranquillity, would be no longer

'9. prevented from prote&ing her friends in Britain.

' These circumstances not only influenced Argyll

and Huntly, but made so deep an imprefion on
the Duke, that he appeared to be wavering and
irresolute, and plainly discovered that he wished to
evade the accomplishment of the treaty. The
Regent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to
ihake himself loose, in this manner, from his en-
gagements and instantly formed a resolution equal-
ly bold and politic. He commanded his guards
to seize Chatelherault in his own house in Edin-
burgh, whither he had come, in order to attend
the Convention agreed upon; and, regardless either
of his dignity as the firt nobleman in the kingdom,
and next heir to the Crown, or of the promises of
personal security, on which he had relied, com-
mitted him and Lord Herreis, prisoners to the castle
of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and unexpected
ADi! 16. dilpirited the party. Argyll submitted to the King's

government, and made his peace with the Regent,
on very easy terms; and Huntly, being left alone,
was at last obliged to lay down his arms.

IU!v 2:. SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland,
A-i "'-l"'and brought letters to the Regent both from the
'.t ,'v Engliih and Scottish Queens. A Convention was
=:oe.'. held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-

beth's letter contained three different proposals with
re.ard1 to Mary; that he should either be restored
io the full poiffefion of her former authority; or
be admitted to reign jointly with the King her son;
or at ilaft be allowed to reside in Scotland, in some
Ccctrr retirement, without any share in the ad-
-rinir-ation of government. These overtures

:.-c- extorted b the importunity of Fenelon the

rench ambassador, and have ome appearance of
ping favourable to the captive Queen. They

' ,.'. Mem. le . . Melv. 202.

were,

were, however, perfectly suitable to Elizabeth's BooK V.
general system with regard to Scottish affairs. A- - '
mong propositions so unequal and disproportionate, '
she easily saw where the choice would fall. The
two former were rejeted; and long delays must
necessarily have intervened, and many difficulties
have arisen, before every circumstance relative to the
last could be finally adjusted . * Spots-

MARY in her letter, demanded that her mar-wood,23o.

riage with Bothwell should be reviewed by the pro-
per judges, and if found invalid, should be dissolved
by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal marriage
was the principal source of all the calamities he
had endured for two years; a divorce was the
only thing which could repair the injuries, her re-
putation had suffered by that ftep. It was her in-
terest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy
to account for her long silence with respect to this
point. Her particular motive for proposing it, at
this time, began to be so well known, that the
demand was rejected by the Convention of estates.
They imputed it not so much to any ahorrence of
Bothwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a mar-
riage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that secret ne- Noflk's

gotiation in England, which we have already men- ci'hmefo r
tioned but, like all thole concerted for the relie ih .2,
of the Queen of. Scots, it ended tragically. The of ScoQs.
fertile and proje&ing genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bishop of Ross. The former readily closed
with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The
latter confidered it as a probable device for restoring
his Mistress to liberty, and replacing her on her
throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held
a correspondence, by means of his sifter Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have

D d 3 restored

Boo \V. resTored her to her kingdom with so much fplen-
'-~ dor .. The sudden removal of the conference frotn

i's9. York to Westminster suspended, but did not break

off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were still the
Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let-
ters and love-tokens were exchanged between him
and the Queen of Scots.

c'inS BUT as he could not hope, that under an admi-
Elizabeth. nifration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue

could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance of openness and can-
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He
mentioned to her the rumour, which was spread
of his marriage with the Scotrfil Queen; he com-
plained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many ex-
pressions full of contempt, both for Mary's charac-
ter, and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of
every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, she
seems to have credited these professions -. But
instead of discontinuing the negotiation, he renew-
ed it with greater vigour, and admitted into it new
associates. Among there was the Regent of Scot-
land. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by
his public accusation of the Queen, in breach of
the concert into which he had entered at York,
He was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England,
was grear. The Earls of Northumberland and
WVeftmoriand, the most powerful noblemen in that
part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the Regent, the injuries he had done his Sovereign.
In order to secure his fare retreat, he addressed
hirnfell to Norfolk, and, after ome apology for his
past conduct, he insinuated that the Luke's scheme
of marrying the Queen his filter was no lels ac-

' Cnmd. 419 Haynes, 573. Stare Tril!s, . 73.
t Haynes, 574. Stte Trials, I. 79, 8. .

centable

ceptable to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms; BOOK.V.
and that he would concur, with'the utmost ardour, ^
in promoting so desirable an event *. Norfolk *5 n69.s
heard him with the credulity, natural to those, who 3. 34.
are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote
to the two Earls to desist from any hostile attempt
against Murray, and to that he owed his passage
through the Northern Counties, without diftur-
bance;

ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re- Gains the

gent, he next attempted to draw the Engliih nobles consent of
to approve his design. The nation began to de-'leEObli
ipair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept
the question with regard to the right of ucceffion
undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the disputed titles of tire houses of York
and Lancaster, was fill recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself
had been brought to the brink of destruction, in
that unhappy contest. The Scottish Queen, though
her right of succession was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marry a foreign and a Popish Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.
But, by marrying her to an Englifman, a zealous
Protestant, the most powerful and most universally
beloved of all the nobles, an effeRual remedy seem-
ed to be provided against all these evils. The great-
er part of the Peers, either directly or tacitly, ap-
proved of it, as a salutary projet. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley
subscribed a letter to the Scottish Queen, written
with Leicester's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promise, that she should at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the English Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to

D d 4 her

Ber- V her pofierity; that he should consent to a league

_,_' offensive and defcnfive between the two kingdoms;
' 9. that fnc si -.uid confirm the present eftablihmlent o

reliion in Scotland; and rceie into favour such
ors hEr llbects as had appeared in arms against her,
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
these articles, they engaged that the English nobles
w.ould not only concur in reforing her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
rs England, in reversion. Mary readily consented
to all these proposals, except the second, with re-
gard to which, she demanded ome time for con,
ful:ing her ancient ally the French King "

THE whole of this negotiation was induftriouii-

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish iQucen was well known, nor could it be
expected, that fbe would willingly come into a
meaiure, which tended so visibly to save the repu-
tation, and to increase the power. of her rival. But
in a matter os.so much consequence to the nation,
the taking a few steps without her knowledge,
could icarce be reckoned criminal; and while every
person concerned, even Mary and Norfolk them-
selves declared that nothing should be concluded
-.-ithout obtaining her consent, the duty and allegi-
ance of subjects seemed to be fully pefervcd. The
grea r part of the nobles regarded the matter in
this light. Those who conducted the intrigue, had
farther and more dangerous views. They aw the
ad-al-ntages which Mary proculrd by this treaty,
to be prefc-nt and certain and :lhe execution of
the promrics which fne came under, to le d ifa..n
and uncertain. They had earl- communicated thei;'
scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and ob-
tained their approbation -. A treaty, concerni;ng
which they confuited foreign Princes, while thi-,
;onceaild it from their o'r, Sovereign, could nrt

' r-e-i. ;c' ii ;.;. C::' .

-- AS--s . :. i:.
i 63.

be

be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that BooK V.
the union of so many nobles would render it necef- 6
fary for Elizabeth to comply; they flattered them- 569
selves, that a combination so strong would be al-
together irresistible; and such was their confidence
of success, that when a plan was concerted in the
north of England, for rescuing Mary out of the
hands of her eepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that
if she recovered liberty, her sentiments in his fa-
vour might change, ued all his interest to dissuade
the conspirators from attempting it .

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord

Boyd arrived from England; and, besides the let-
ters which he produced publickly, brought others
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
most sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, said they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was it poffi-.
ble that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so
much art, and supported both by power and by
numbers, could miscarry, or be defeated in the ex-
ecution. Nothing now was wanting, but the con-
cluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to
haften that, by procuring a sentence of divorce,
which would remove. the only obstacle that flood in
the way. This was expected of him, in consequence
of his promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded ei-
ther his interest or his fame, or even his Iafety, he
would not fail to fulfil these engagements --.

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumftances, fiom those which had formerly indu-
ced him to affect an approbation of Norfolk's
schemes. He saw that the downfall of his own pow-
er must be the first consequence of the Duke's fuc-
cess. And if the Queen, who confidered him as
the chief author of all her misfortunes, should re-

Caind. 420. Lt Haynes, o. pot. 3Spot . . See Ap-
pendix, N XXIX.

cover

BooK V. cover her ancient authority, he could never expet
'-v-~' favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No wonder

1569' he declined a ftep so fatal to himself, and which

would have eftal-lifed the grandeur of another on
the ruins of his own. This reftial occasioned a de-
lay. But, as every other circumrfance was fettled,
the Bishop of Rcfs, in name of his Mistress, and
the Duke, in person, declared, in presence of the
French Ambassador, their mutual consent to the
marriage, and a contract to this purpose was signed,
and entrusted to the keeping of the Ambassador *.

Aug. t7. THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it
Elizabeth could not long remain a secret. It began to be whif-
d.fcover s
the Duke's pered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Duke in-
design and to her presence, expressed the utmost indignation at
deeats it. his conduct, and charged him to lay aside allthoughts

of prosecuting such a dangerous design. Soon as-
ter, Leicester, who perhaps had countenanced the
project with no other intention, revealed the whole
circumstances of it to the Queen. Pembroke, A-
rundel, Lumley, and Throgmorton were confined,
and examined. Mary was watched more narrow-
ly than ever; and Hastings Earl of Huntington,
who pretended to dispute, with the ScottifihQueen,
her right to the fucceffon, being joined in commis-
sion with Shrewsbury, rendered her imprisonment
more intolerable, by the excess of his vigilance and
rigour . The Scottilh Regent, threatened with
Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke;
put his letters into her hands; and furnished all the
intelligence in his power . The Duke himself re-
tired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-
tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy
Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated
by the imprisonment of his associates; coldly re-
ceived by his friends in that county; unprepared
for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel;

Carte, o'. iii. 486. t Haynes, 525, 526, 530, 532.
See Append. N XXX.

he

he hesitated for some days, and at laif obeyed a BOOK V.
fcond call, and repaired to Windsor. He was first - '

1569.

kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then ent Oc. 3.
to the Tower. After being confined there upwards
of nine months, he was released upon his humble
filbmiffion to Elizabeth, giving her a promile, on
his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen *. During the progress of* Haynes,
Norfolk's negotiations, the Queen's partizans in s5, 597.
Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in
her rcftoration to the throne, with an increase of
authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland Maitland
was the foul of that party, and the person, whole iprilon-

ed by the

activity and abilities the Regent chiefly dreaded. R egnt.
He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He conti-
nued to foment the spirit of difaffccaon in Scotland,
and had seduced from the Regent Lord Home,
Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason he
employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being acceflory to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. iHe would oon have been
brought to trial, but was aved by the friendship of
Kirkaldy, governor of the cattle, who, by pretend-
ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,
got him out of the hands of the person, to whose
care he was committed, and conducted him into
the caflie, which, from that time, was entirely un-
der Maitland's command. The loss of a place of
to much importance, and the defection of a man
so eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought
the Regent into some dilreputarion, for which,
however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abun-
dantl' compenf.lted

BooS V. THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scot-
b"-ó ttifh Queen to liberty having been discovered, and
A rebel- di..ppoined, an attempt was made, to the fame
lion a- purpose, by force of arms; but with no better
gainfl Eli- iuccefs. The Earls of Northumberland and Weft-
Mab by moriand, though little distinguished by their per-
adherents. fonal merit, were two of the most ancient and pow-

erful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they polfcfled
that influence over the inhabitants, which was he-
redia.ry in the popular and martial families of Percy
and of Nevil. They were both attached to the Po-
pilh religion, and discontented with the court,
where new men, and a new fft em prevailed. Ever
since Mary's arrival in England, they had warmly
espoused her interest; and zeal for popery, oppofi-
tion to the court, and commiseration of her iuffer-
ings, had engaged them in different plots for her
relief. Norwithitanding the vigilance of her keep-
ers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs *. They
were privy to Norfolk's schemes; but the caution
vwi:h which he proceeded did not uit their ardour

' Haynes, and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottilh
595. Queen was not their sole object. They aimed at
Murddin bringing about a change in their religion, and a
44, 62, I

,
c. revolution in the government of the kingdom.

For this reason, they solicited the aid of the King
of Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Po-
perv in that age. Nothing could be more delight-
f-: to the reitlefs spirit of Philip, or more necef-
ifrv towards facilitatin his schemes in the Nether-
lands, than the involving England in the confu-
sion and m!eries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alv?, by his direction, encouraged the two Earls,
and promi:ed, so loon as they either took the field
with trheir forces, or furpriled any place of
:en-rh. or reicued the Queen of Scots, that he

would

would supply them both with money, and a strong BOOK V.
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dun- -
kirk, in the disguise of a sailor, founding the ports 159
where it would be most proper to land. And Chia-
pini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was dif-
patched into England, on pretence of fettling some
commercial differences between the two nations;
but in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a
leader of experience, so oon as they ventured to
take arms *.

THE condu&t of this negotiation occasioned nla- Defeate-

ny meetings and messages between the two Earls.
Elizabeth was informed of these; and though the
fufpefted nothing of their real design, fli conclud-
ed that they were among the number of Norfolk's
confidants. They were summoned, for this rea-
son, to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and a-
fraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedience.
A second, and more peremptory order was issued.
This they could not decline, without shaking off
their allegiance. And as no time was left for deli- Nov. 9.
beration, they instantly erected their standard a-
gainft their Sovereign. The re-establishing the ca-
tholic religion ; the fettling the order of succession
to the Crown; the defence of the ancient nobili-
ty; were the motives they alledged to justify their
rebellion -. Many of the lower people flocked to
them, with such arms as they could procure; and
had the capacity of the leaders been, in any de-
gree, equal to the enterprize, it must have soon
grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth aci-
ed with prudence and vigour; and was served by
her fubjets with fidelity and ardor. On the firt
rumour of an infurretion, Mary was removed to
Coventry, a place of strength, which could not be
taken without a regular siege; a detachment of
the rebels, which was ent to relcue her, returned

*Carte, vol. ii. 489, 490. Cai!d. 421.
t Scrype, ;vc., . 547.

without

Boor V. without success. Troops were assembled in difFe-

rent parts of the kingdom; as they advanced, the
1569. malecontents retired. In their retreat their num-

bers dwindled away, and their spirits funk. De-
fpair and uncertainty whither to dire& their flight,
kept together for some time, a inall body of them,
Dec. 21. among the mountains of Northumberland. But

they were at length obliged to disperse, and the
chiefs took refuge among the Scottish borderers.
The two Earls, together with the Countess of
Northumberland, wandering for some days in the
waste of Liddifdale, were plundered by the bandit-
ri, exposed to the rigours of the season, and left
destitute of the necessaries of life. Westmorland
was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of
Ferniherft, and afterwards conveyed into the Ne-
therlands. Northumberland was seized by the Re-
gent, who had marched with ome troops towards
the borders, to prevent any impreflion the rebels
might make on those mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST o many surprising events, the affairs of
Tff2ai. the church, for two years, have almost escaped

our notice. Its General Assemblies were held regular-
ly; but no business of much importance employed
their attention. As the number of the protestant
clergy daily encreafed, the deficiency of the funds,
ler apart for their fubfiftance, became greater. Ma-
ny efforts were made towards recovering the anci-
enz patrimony of the church, or a: least o much or
it, as was poffefied by the Popiih incumbents, a race
of men, who were, now, not only uelcfs, but bur-
denfome to the nation. But though the manner in
which the Regent received their addresses and com-
Dlaints, was very different from that to which they
had ben accustomed, no effectual remedy was pro-
v-ded; and while they suffered intolerable oppression,

*Cabzl!a, I-1. Cmd. -2.an

and

and groaned under extreme poverty, fair words, BoUSV.
and liberal promises, were all they were able to ob-

570.
tain 1

ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keepingElizabeth

such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish Queen. resolves to
During the former year, the tranquillity of her go- Mary to
vernment had been disturbed, first by a secret corn- the Re-
bination of ome of her nobles, then by the rebel-gent'
lion of others; and she often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the hidden cause of both.
Many of her own fubjees favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the
continent were warmly interested in her cause.
The detaining her any longer in England, she fore-
saw, would make the pretext or occasion of perpe-
tual cabals and insurreCtions among the former, and
might expose her to the hostile attempts of the lat-
ter. She resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into
the hands of the Regent, whose security, no less
than her own, depended on preventing her from
reafcending the throne. The negotiation for this
purpose was carried some length, when it was dif-
covered by the vigilance of the Bishop of Ross, who
together with the French and Spanish Ambassadors,
remonstrated against the infamy of such an aion,
and represented the surrendering the Queen to her
rebellious fubjeas, to be the fame thing, as if Eli-
zabeth should, by her own authority, condemn her
to instant death. This procured a delay and the
murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that
design t.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person

who committed this barbarous aion. He had
been condemned to death oon after the battle of
Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his But he is
estate had been bellowed upon one of the Regent's murdered

Cald. vol. ii. 8o, &. t Carte, vol. iii. 491. Anders.
vol. iii. 84'

favourites,

Boor V. iavourites who seized his house, and turned out

y~~' his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
~'5'- where, before next morning, she became furiously

mad. This injury made a deeper impression on
him, than the benefit he had received, and from
that moment he vowed to be revenged upon the
Regent. Party-rage strengthened and infiarmec
his private resentment. His kintmen the Hamil-
tons applauded the enterprize. The maxims of
that age justified the most desperate course he could
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent
for ome time, and watched for an opportunity to
strike the blow. He resolved at last to wait till his
enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through which
he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edin-
burgh. He took his stand in a wooden gallery,
which had a window towards the street; spread a
feather bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of his
feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth b-
hind him that his hadow might not be observcd
from without; and after all this preparation,
calmly expected the Regent's approach, who had
lodged during the night in a hou!e not far distant.
Some indistinct infornation of the danger which
threatened him, had been conveyed to the Regent.
and he paid so much regard to it, that he resolved
to return by the fame gate through which he had
entered, and to fetch a compass round the town.
But as the crowd about the gate was great, and
he himself unacquainted with fEar, he proceeded
dircstlv along the freel; and the throng of the
people obliging him to move very s!owly, gave th:
aiafEin time to take io true an aim, that he ihor
him with a tingle bullet, through the lower part of
his belly, and killed the horl' of a gentleman who
rode on his other fide. H:.s illowers instantly
endeavoured to break into the iou1le whence th
blowv had come, but thly fo'und the door Itrongly

barricaded

barricaded; and before it could be forced open, Boo V
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which stood -
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far '570
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound , * Buchan,

THERE is no person, in that age, about whom 385.

historians have been more divided, or whose cha- Crawf.
rafter has been drawn with such opposite colours. H, cha24
Personal intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and raaer,
vigour in the administration of civil affairs, are
virtues, which even his enemies allow him to have
possessed, in an eminent degree. His moral quali-
ties are more dubious, and ought neither to be
praised, nor censured, without great reserve, and
many diftintions. In a fierce age, he was capable
of using viftory with humanity, and of treating the
vanquiflied with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown,
or despised. Zealous for religion, to a degree,
which distinguished him, even at a time, when
professions of that kind were not uncommon. His
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior
only to his liberality towards them, which knew
no bounds. A disinterested passion for the liberty
of his country, prompted him to oppose the per-
nicious fyftcm, which the Princes of Lorrain had
obliged the Queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's
return into Scotland, he served her with a zeal and
affection, to which he sacrificed the friendship of
those who were most attached to his person. But,
on the other hand, his ambition was immoderate;
and events happened, that opened to him vast
profpe&s, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to ations, inconsistent with the duty
of a subjea. His treatment of the Queen, to whose
bounty he was so much indebted, was unbrotherly
and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, un-

VOl. I. E e der

Boos V. der which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to
'-~- the nation. He deceived and betrayed Norfolk,

5 with a baseness unworthy of a man of honour. His

elevation to such unexpeaed dignity, inspired him
with new passions, with haughtiness and reserve;
and instead of his natural manner, which was
blunt and open, he affeced the arts of diffimula-
tion and refinement. Fond, towards the end of
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his
creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him astray,
while his ancient friends stood at a distance, and
predi&ed his approaching fall. But, amidfl the
turbulence and confusion of that fatious period,
he ciilpcnfed justice with so much impartiality, he
repressed the licentious borderers with so much
courage, and established such uncommon order and
tranquillity in the country, that his administration
was extremely popular, and he was long and assec-
tionately remembered among the comr.i-ons, by the
name of the Good Reget.

The END of the FIRST VOLUME,
