THE
I-I I S T 0 R Y

o P
A M E R I C A,

V 0 L. IIL

\.' "

HIS T O R

o F
A ME R I A,

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRI NCIPAL ofthe Univcrfity of EDINBURGH, IISTORIO-

GRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND, and

MEMBER of the ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY at MADRID.

VOL. II.
THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON:
rinted for W. STRAHAN ; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

M DCCLXXX.

/Ir·J~~~" / 9 s a ;'·

s~~~~~9 A

"' ~8i T-^ j~

^^~*^*^^s i~ ~ I ~

_z(*~zhNi Wr'rv IT

- y'~ I

l

t^ r^

· "' £

J'^.J~szp~r /^ 'o

° J.;~,-' \ \ .Is \\"

i If-,",~ ! (S'~.,/~t ,..3t sr ....; ,,

,1

. I . 'z,.,,, .~:, .-" ~ . - \ 1~,,e"" '---% "1;% \ L. ' >\r

.~-.: ¢ I-. .'"-**

~

' F \1 _' ::

;. ' '^< - _</ ^ -B-i U t-l s /' ,.

", \

.

., m.
·

H ,---

.., '8

. -s"1 ·.*
,-tsn$ ,,.~- -rci -..^

~ ,\ \ \
, . _.:

d -'

a--,.A , ..o s^ ,
li..

;~ ~ ~ N~ .*.1^,^l

c1 ,..,,.,,.^'/'<J.~,?>:;^ --

nnpr .----..~..zz..-
q,,,.~_o ,~ '~ ",, ,~ V

1^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a~,~. ' ^%~^^-.-.... '

~ .4- ^.

~ .,.

..q

^--I--------- --

_ ~. --,... t \ %-"'"" g_ .... ,-1 , ~ ' ^ ^ ^ -.- "^'/ - /^ *i

----. o?-

·

:. \,,^,,

.,,,;. :-.:-.I' '

'.

---"

I -'"g- ,~':: :^' a,, -.;. - ~r ,. -:' I -

' , ; "-e ,' %· -- " ,/lJ

;'T
^ ^ ^ ^ '^ ^ ^ "'^ ^ ^a ^ ^ ^ '^

_,. .-s--~. T,'' .%.....I ..^;-' r' >~,
1 -

67 A

..I.il 4 1: C? Pei 9

cr,~~~~-e~~~R r a~~~~~·jl'r"7"Te

ua

g :;

--

^ ^

^ -^ **

^.. . .

' .

---"o .....

;=' , -

~ , - ..... , - - - - '.

.

'" ._ .fro ' . :'-

~~: - : :t /'( '~ _, _ ~___ ~ '

. (/i
....' /;,,~-^ ~ =

*,4~/4';Z-.J~wy.z'-~'."z¢,7^'/','M'.',. "S.C,/'b'.),-- .- z- n:.¢?-,;/......... ,,- y/'. z.,,,..*- .........'

Aparpic
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-r~b·~v ~ct c; : ~~~8~-les
74n,2rrr

= ,_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~p
I _'~~~~~=Ja~~~oS iS

'h4, 7,1 di, -7,4,P'-~'(3 "
1 i~~~~~~~~1

.-b~~~~y~~~·1 ~ ~ li
-Ic~~C7lr , -·i

27 -'~~~~~~~~,
K~ ~ -I' -·--- - .n-. 9 ~ ·. -:.P _~

~~~~~~~~I~~~~~~~ Ci~~,
RChbt~ ,bS ~ ~,aai ~ / Y~Bró4

r~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ et·j ~~

A~~~'~~ 4Sr.

-ga3- - .,

?sg ~ ~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

e '· 4.
~P

d ~ ~ ~

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ____

r i

c

,

- I'- S
, S~ *-~'~'

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

THE
H IS TORY

F
A M E RI C A.

BOOK IV.
T WENTY-SIX years had now elapsed BooKIV.

since Columbus conducted the people What p
of Europe to the New World. During that of Amr'ica

were rhen

period the Spaniards had made great progress k.nown.
in exploring its various regions. They had
visited all the iflards scattered in different
clusters through that part of the ocean which
flows in between North and South'America.
They had failed along the eastern coast of the
continent from the river De la Plata to the
bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found
that it stretched without interruption through
this vafn portion of the globe. They had dif-
covered the great Southern Ocean, which
opened new profpeds in that quarter. They
had acquired tome knowledge of the coast of
Florida, which led them to observe the conti-

VOL. II. B nent

Eo-rnV. nent as it extended in an opposite diretion;

' and though they pushed their discoveries no

farther towards the north, other nations had
visited those parts which they neglected. The
English, in a voyage, the motives and success
of which shall be related in another part of this
History, had failed along the coast of America
from Labrador to the confines of Florida; and
the Portuguese, in quest of a shorter pasSage
to the East Indies, had ventured into the
northern seas, and viewed the fame regions'.
Thus, at the period where I have chosen to
take a view of the state of the New World, its
extent was known almost from its northern
extremity to thirty-five degrees south of the
equator. The countries which stretch from
thence to the iou.hern boundary of America,
the great empire of Peru, and the interior
f:a:e of the extcnfive dominions fubje& to the
iovereigns of Mexico, were still undiscovered.

.. . \HEN we contemplate the New World, the

,. V',, '
d firl eircuiiftance that iirikes us is its immense

extent. It was not a firall portion of the
earth, lo inconsiderable that it might have
efciped the observation or research of former
agcs, vi.-lh Columbus dicovered. He made

= }--r-.'l, d-c. x. ..b. i. c. 16

. , I. ,known

e. <. .- ~~.
:- A I~3.
:·-rrrrrr~~~~~~~

known a new hemisphere, larger than either BooKIV.
Europe, or Aia, or Africai the three noted -
divisions of the ancient continent, and not much
inferior in dimensions to a third part of the
habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its mag-

nitude, but for its position. It stretches from
the northern polar circle to a high southern
latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond
the farthest extremity of the old continent on
that fide of the line. A country of such extent
passes through all the climates capable of be-
coming the habitation of man, and fit for
yielding the various productions peculiar either
to the temperate or to the torrid regions of the
earth.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, GrCnd b.

the grandeur of the objects which it presents ite',,P '
to view is most apt to strike the eye of an ''"w
observer. Nature seems here to have carried
on her operations with a bolder hand, and to
h.vc distinguished the features of this country
bv a peculiar magnificence. The mountains Ismoun-
of America are much superior in height to
rhofe in the other divisions of the globe. Even
the plain of Quito, v:hich may be confidered

B ^ as

BooK IV. as the bale of the Andes, is elevated farther

C'*" above the lea than the top of the Pyrenees.

This stupendous ridge of the Andes, no less
remarkable for extent than elevation, rites in
different places more than one third above the
Pike of Teneriffc, the highest land in the
ancient hemisphere. The Andes may literally
be iaid to hide their heads in the clouds;
the ftonns often roll, and the thunder bursts
below their summits, which, though exposed to
the rays of the fun in the center of the torrid
zone, are covered with everlasting snows b.
, FROM thofl lofty mountains descend rivers

proportionally large, with which the streams
in the ancient continent are not to be com-
pared, either for length of course, or the vass
body of water which they roll towards the
ocean. The Maragnon, the Orinoco, the
Plata in South America, the Miflifippi and St.
Laurence in North America, flow in such spa-
clous channels, that, long before they feel the
influence of the tide, they refeirble arms of the
lea rather than rivers of fresh water'.

THE lakes of the New World are no Iefs
confiicuous for grandeur than its mountains

5 Se NGTE I. c See NOTE II.

and

and rivers. There is nothing in other parts BooK 1V.
of the globe which resembles the prodigious -
chain of lakes in North America. They may
properly be termed inland seas of fresh water;
and even those of the second or third class in
magnitude, are of larger circuit (the Caspian
lea excepted) than the greatest lake of the an-
cient continent.

THE New World is of a form extremely t, form fa-

vourable to

favourable to commercial intercourse. When commerce.
a continent, like Africa, is composed of one
vatl solid mass, unbroken by arms of the lea
penetrating into its interior parts, with few
large rivers, and those at a considerable distance
from each other, the greater part of it seems
destined to remain for ever uncivilized, and to
be debarred from any a':ive or enlarged com-
munication with the reit of mankind. When,
like Europe, a continent is opened by inlets of
the ocean of vat extent, itch as the Mediter;-a-
neau and Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coalt
is broken by deep bays advancing far iito thl.
country, such as the Black Sea, the gulfs of
Aral)!:, of Perlia, of Bengal, of Siam, and of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled
with large and frtiile islands, and the continent
it' it' watered with a variety of navigable rivers,
!'',,' :(cgionS inay be laid to poffcfs whatever

B 3 can

Boos IV. can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants

in commerce and improvement. In all these
relpects America may bear a comparison with
the other quarters of the globe. The gulf of
Mexico, which flows in between North and
South America, may be confidered as a Medi-
terranean tea, which opens a maritime com-
merce with all the fertile countries by which
it is encircled. The ifands 'cattered in it are
inferior only to those in the Indian Archipe-
lago, in number, in magnitude, and in value.
As we stretch along the northern division of
the American hemisphere, the Bay of Chefa-
peak presents a spacious inlet, which conduts
the navigator far into the interior parts of pro-
vinces no less fertile than extensive; and if ever
the progress of culture and population shall
mitigate tie extreme rigour of the climate in
the more northern districts of America, Hud-
ion's Bav miv become as fubtervient to com-
mercial intercourse in that quarter of the globe,
as the Bl:tic is in Europe. The other great
portion of the Ne'. World is encompafied on
every fide by the sea, except one narrow neck,
which separates the Atlantic from the Pacific
Ocean; and though it be no; opened by Ipa-
cious bays or arms of the :c-., i:s interior parts
are rendered acceffble bv a number of large
ri:-crs, fed by Io many auxsiiarv reams, fiow-

ingu

ing in such various directions, that, without BooK IV.
any aid from the hand of industry and art, an
inland navigation may be carried on through
all the provinces from the river De la Plata to
the gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty of Na-
ture confined to the southern division of Ame-
rica; its northern continent abounds no lets in
rivers which are navigable almost to their
sources, and by its immense chain of lakes
provision is made for an inland communication,
more extensive and commodious than in any
quarter of the globe. The countries stretch-
ing from the gulf of Darien on one fide, to
that of California on the other, which form the
chain that binds the two parts of the American
continent together, are not destitute of peculiar
advantages. Their coast on one fide is wafled
by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by the
Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into the
former, some into the latter, and secure to them
all the commercial benefits that may result from
a communication with both.

BUT what most diflinguiflles America fiom Tempera-

other parts of the earth, is the peculiar tempe- ..l'^.
rature of its climate, and the different laws to
which it is fubjccR with respect to the Lliftribu-
tion of heat and cold. We cannot determine
with precilion the portion of heat felt in any

B 4 part

PrcoIV. part of the globe, merely by measuring its

' ' diflance from the equator. The climate of a

country is affected, in some degree, by its ele-
vation above the lea, by the extent of conti-
nent, by the nature of the foil, the height of
adjacent mountains, and many other circum-
frances. The influence of theie, however, is,
from various causes, lets considerable in the
greater part of the ancient continent; and from
kn;rowing the position of any country there, we
can pronounce with more certainty, what will
be the warmth of its climate, and the nature
of its productions.

....- ~i- THE maxims which are founded upon obfer-
...;' vation of our hemisphere will not apply to the

other. There, cold predominates. The rigour
of the frigid zone extends over half of that
which fiould be temperate by its position.
Cour:rirs wnhere the grape and the fig llould
ripen, are buried under snow one half of the
year; a;-' lans Eru;sted in the fame parallel
with trh- moil ferir!e and best cultivaed pro-
vinces in Europ:, are chil:ed with perpetual
froits, which alMroif deltroy the power of vege-
tation . As we a.dvance to thoie parts of
Amei;rica which lie in the imle parallel with
Fpr''::;es of Aa and Afiica, bl!-frd with an

e See NOT . 1l1.

;. .': . 1Ol'!]]

uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth as is BooK IV.
moik friendly to life and vegetation, the domi-
nion of cold continues to be felt, and winter,
though during a short period, often reigns with
extreme severity. If we proceed. aong the
American continent into the torrid zone, we
ihail find the cold prevalent in the New World
extending itself allb to this region of the globe,
and mitigating the excess of its fervour. While
the negro on the coast of Africa is scorched
with unremitting heat, the inhabitant of Peru
breathes an air equally mild and temperate,
and is perpetually ffiaded under a canopy of
grey clouds, which intercepts the fierce beams
of the fun, without obftruRing his friendly in-
fluence . Along the eastern coast of America,
the climate, though more similar to that of the
torrid zone in other parts of the earth, is never-
thclels considerably milder than in those coun-
trics of Asia and Africa which lie in the fame
latitude. If from the southern tropic we con-
tinue our progress to the extremity of the Ame-
rican continent, we meet with frozen seas, and
countries horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable
for cold, sooner than in the north '.

e Vov!.gc de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage,
p. I84.

' Anson's Voyagc, p 7. ; and Voyage de Quiros, chez

l ill. Gen. decs Vo..:ges, tomn. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hia.
>..:;:1r. de l'Air, ii. 305, &c.

VARIOUS

Boosar. VARIOUS cauies combine in rendering the
c-.--- climate of America so extremely different from
.'-.- that of the ancient continent. Though the

utmost extent of America towards the north be
not yet discovered, we know that it advances
much nearer to the pole than either Europe or
Asia. The latter have large seas to the north,
which are open during part of the year; and
even when covered with ice, the wind that
biows over them is less intensely cold than that
which blows over land in the fame high lati-
tudes. But in America the land flretches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out immenlely to the weft. A chain
of enormous mountains, covered with snow and
ice, runs through all this dreary region. The
wind, in pafimng over such an extent of high
and frozen land, becomes Ib impregnated with
cold, that it acquires a piercing keenness, which
it retains in its progress through warmer cli-
ma:es, and is not entirely mitigated until it
reach the Gulf of Mexico. Over all the con-
tine.-t of North America, a north-westerly
wind and excessive cold are Iynonymous terms.
Even in the most sultry weather, the moment
that the wind veers to that quarter, its pene-
trating influence is felt in a trar.tion fron
hear to cold, no lets violent than sudden. To
this powerful caule we .ay ascribe the extra-

or inarv

ordinary dominion of cold, and its violent in- BooKIV.
roads into the southern provinces in that part
of the globe

OTHER causes, no less remarkable, diminish

the active power of heat in those parts of the
American continent which lie between the
tropics. In all that portion of the globe, the
wind blows in an invariable direction from eaff
to weft. As this wind holds its course across
the ancient continent, it arrives at the countries
which stretch along the western shore of Africa,
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it
hath colleced from the sultry plains of Asia,
and the burning sands in the African deserts.
The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the region
of the earth which feels the most fervent heat,
and is exposed to the unmitigated ardour of
the torrid zone. But this fame wind which
brings such an accefflon of warmth to the
countries lying between the rivet of Senegal
and Cafraria, traverses the Atlantic Ocean, be-
fore it reaches the American shore. It is cooled
in its passage over this vast body of water, and
is felt as a refreshing gale along the coast of
Bralil ', and Guiana, rendering these countries,

z Charlevoix Hist. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hill. generale
Voyages, torn. xv. 215, &c.

' See NOTE I.

though

BooK IV. though among the warmest in America, tem-,

perate, when compared with those which lie
oprofite to them in Africa '. As this wind
advances in its course acrols America, it meets
with immense plains, covered with impene-
trable forests, or occupied by large rivers,
marshes, and stagnating waters, where it can
recover no considerable degree of heat. At
length it arrives at the Andes, which run from
north to ibuth through the whole continent.
In paTing over their elevated and frozen fum-
mits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them
hardly feel the ardour to which they seem ex-
posed b- their filuation t. In the other pro-
vinces of America, from Tierra Fermi weft-
-wa dto to th Mexican e.pire, the heat of the
cl:mate is tenmpered, in some places, by the
e!eva:ion us the lznd above the sea, in others,
by th-eir extr..din :-' humidity, and in all, by
t:e cnc -m.':5s mountains feattered over this
trac-. i;.. -.d of America in the Torrid
Zone re c-ier fn-!1 or mountainous, and
are fanned al rn :c;ky by refreihing sea and
ind br'c-zs.

c : . ) r '.

'.... c

.

:".:: c. i. 1. Bufbon Hilt.
N._: : -, . -, . :. ::!. . ,:,.* . ;. 17,, '.. Osborn's

THE

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards Boor IV.

the southern limits of America, and in the seas
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner
equally satisfying. It was long fuppofed'that
a vast continent, distinguished by the name of
Terra Aufiralis Incognita, lay between the
southern extremity of America and the An-
tarctic pole. The fame principles which ac-
count for the extraordinary degree of cold in
the northern regions of America, were em-
ployed in order to explain that which is felt at
Cape Horn and the adjacent countries. The
imienfe extent of the southern continent, and
the large rivers which it poured into the ocean,
were mrentioned and admitted by philosophers
as causes sufficient to occasion the unusual fen-
fation of cold, and the still more uncommon
appearances of frozen seas in that region of the
globe. But the imaginary continent to which
such influence was ascribed, having been
searched for in vain, and the space which it
was supposed to occupy having been found to
be an open sea, new conjectures muff be formed
with rlpetea to the causes of a temperature of
climate, so extremely different from that which
we experience in countries removed at the fame
distance from the opposite pole'.

1 See N O T £ VI.

AFTER

BooK I'. AFTER contemplating those permanent andi
oniion characteritfic qualities of the American conti-

n i nent, which arise from the peculiarity of its

fituadon, and the disposition of its parts, the
next object that merits attention is its condition
when firit discovered, as far as that depended
upon the industry and operations of man. The
effets of human ingenuity and labour are more
extensive and considerable, than even our own
vanity is apt at first to imagine. When we
survey the face of the habitable globe, no
fiall part of that fertility and beauty, which
we ascribe to the hand of nature, is the work
of man. His efforts, when continued through
a fuccelfion of ages, change the appearance
and improve the qualities of the earth. As a
great part of the ancient continent has long
been occupied by nations far advanced in arts
and industry, our eye is accustomed to view
the earth in that form which it assumes when
rendered fit to be the residence of a numerous
race of men, and to supply them with nourish-

nient.

r.a.. .

BUT in the New WVorld, the itate of man-
.. .. k' !:d ,vas ruder, and the alpecE of Nature ex-

tremei- different. Throughout all its vafl re-
gions, there were only two monarchies remark-
able for extent of'territorv, or ditfinguifhed by

any

any progress in improvement. The reft of BooK IV.
this continent was poflefled by small inde- ' '
pendent tribes, destitute of arts and industry,
and neither capable to correEt the defects, nor
desirous to meliorate the condition of that part
of the earth allotted to them for their habita-
tion. Countries, occupied by such people,
were almost in the fame Itate as if they had
been without inhabitants. Immense forests
covered a great part of the uncultivated earth;
and as the hand of induitry had not taught the
rivers to run in a proper channel, or drained
off the itagnating water, many of the most
fertile plains were overflowed with inundations,
or converted into marshes. In the southern
provinces, where the warmth of the fun, the a
moisture of the climate, and the fertility of the
foil, combine in calling forth the most vigor-
ous powers of vegetation, the woods are so
choked with its rank luxuriance, as to be
almost impervious, and the surface of the
ground is hid from the eye under a thick cover-
ing of ihrubs and herbs and weeds. In this
tlare of wild unafliited nature, a great part of
the large provinces in South America, which
extend from the bottom of the Andes to the
sea, frill remain. The European colonies have
cleared and cultivated a few {pots along the
coast, but the original inhabitants, as rude

and

Boo IV. and indolent as ever, have done nothing to

open or improve a country, possessing almost
every advantage of situation and climate. As
we advance towards the northern provinces of
America, Nature continues to wear the fame
uncultivated aspea, and in proportion as the
rigour of the climate increases, appears more
desolate and horrid. There the forests, though
not encumbered with the fame exuberance of
vegetation, are of equal extent; prodigious
marshes overspread the plains, and few marks
appear of human activity in any attempt to
.ultivate or embellish the earth. No wonder
that the colonies sent from Europe were afto-
nithed at their first entrance into the New
World. It appeared to them waste, solitary,
and uninviting. When the Engliih began to
fettle in America, they termed the countries of
which they took poffefion, The TWildernefs.
Nothing but their eager expectation of finding
mines of gold, could have induced the Spa-
niards to penetrate through the woods and
marshes of America, where, at every ftep, they
observed the extreme difference between the
uncultivated face of Nature, and that which
it acquires under the forming hand of industry
and art:.

- S-e NOTE V;I.

THE

THE labour and operations of man not only BOOKIV.

improve and embellish the earth, but render Uwhole-
it more wholesome, and friendly to life. When fomc'
any region lies negleced and destitute of cul-
tivation, the air flagnates in the woods, putrid
exhalations arise from the waters; the surface
of the earth, loaded with rank vegetation, feels
not the purifying influence of the fun; the
malignity of the distempers natural to the cli-
mate increases, and new maladies no less noxious
are engendered. Accordingly, all the pro-
vinces of America, when firit difcoveredj were
found to be remarkably unhealthy. This the
Spaniards experienced in every expedition into
the New World, whether destined for conquest
or settlement. Though by the natural confii-
tution of their bodies, their habitual temper-
ance, and the persevering vigour of their
minds, they were as much formed as any
people in Europe for active service in a sultry
climate, they felt severely the fatal and perni-
cious qualities of thole uncultivated regions
through which they marched, or where they
endeavoured to plant colonies, Great numbers
were cut off by the unknown and violent
diseases with which they were infected. Such
as survived the destructive rage of those mala-
dies, were not exempted from the noxious
effets of the climate. They returned to

VOL. II. C Europe,

Boor IV. Europe, according to the description of thl

early Spanifn historians, feeble, emaciated,
with languid looks, and complexions of such
a sickly yellow colour, as indicated the un-
wholesome temperature of the countries where
they had resided °.
It animaL., THE uncultivated fRate of the New World

affected not only the temperature of the air,
but the qualities of its produEtions. The prin-
ciple of life seems to have been less active and
vigorous there, than in the ancient continent.
Notwithstanding the vast extent of America,
and the variety of its climates, the different
species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer
in proportion, than thole of the other hemi-
sphere. In the islands, there were only four
kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On
the continent, the variety was greater; and
though the individuals of each kind could not
fail of multiplying exceedingly, when alinofl
unmolested by menr, who were neither 1b nume-
rous, nor lo united in ibcietv, as to be for-
midable enemies to the animal creation, the
number of di!tinc. species muit itill be confi-
dered as extremiely fimall. Of two hundred

' Gomr.-a Hi.'. c. 20. z2. Oviern Hinl. !ib. ii. c. 13.

l'b. v. c. 10o. P. IMa-t. F :.i' .
j. D-.a. p. 1-5.

diifferent

diffcrent kinds of animals spread over the face BooK IV.
of the earth, only about one third existed in
America, at the time of its discovery . Na-
ture was not only less prolific in the New
World, but she appears likewise to have been
lels vigorous in her productions. The animals
originally belonging to this quarter of the
globe appear to be of an inferior race, neither
so robuff, nor so fierce, as those of the other
continent. America gives birth to no creature
of such bulk as to be compared with the ele-
phant or rhinoceros, or that equals the lion
and tyger in strength and ferocity P. The lapvr
of Brasil, the iargeft quadruped of the ravenous
tribe in the New World, is not larger than a
calf of fix months old. The Puma and 7aguar,
its fiercest beasts of prey, which the Europeans
have inaccurately denominated lions and tygers,
poffels neither the undaunted courage of the
former, nor the ravenous cruelty of the latter q.
They are inactive and timid, hardly formidable
to man, and often turn their backs upon the
least appearance ofrefifiance r. The fame qua-

o Buffon Hist. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86.
P See NOTE VIII.
q Buffon Hill. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hist.

Nat. Brasil, p. 229.

' Buffbn Hilt. Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acofla Hilt. lib. iv.

c. 3+. Piibnis Hilt. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. i.
lib. x. c. 13.

C lities

Boo rIV. lities in the climate of America which stinted

the growth, and enfeebled the spirit, of its
native animals; have proved pernicious to such
as have migrated into it voluntarily from the
other continent, or have been transported
thither by the Europeans'. The bears, the
wolves, the deer of America, are not equal in
size to those of the Old World '. Most of the
domestic animals, with which the Europeans
stored the provinces wherein they fettled, have
degenerated with refpeEt either to bulk or
quality, in a country whose temperature and
foil seem to be less favourable to the strength
and perfection of the animal creation .
:::s and T~THE fame cables, which checked the growth

and the vigour of the more noble animals, were
friendly to the propagation and increase of
reptiles and infeEts. Though this is not pecu-
liar to the New World, and those odious tribes,
the offspring of heat, moisture, and corrup-
rion, infeet ever- part of the torrid zone; they
multiply faster, perhaps, in America, and grow

Churchill, v. p. 691. OvalleRela:. of Chili, Church.

iii. p. 10. Sommari.o de Oviedo, c. 14-2z. Voyage du
Des Marchais, iii. 299.

: Buffon Hist. Natur. ix. Ic3. Kalm's Travels, i. ioz.
Biet. Voy. de France Equinox. P. 339.

D See NOTE IX.

to

to a more monstrous bulk. As this country BooK IV,
is, on the whole, less cultivated, and less
peopled, than the other quarters of the earth,
the active principle of life waftes its force in
producions of this inferior form. The air is
often darkened with clouds of infeats, and the
ground covered with shocking and noxious
reptiles. The country around Porto-Bello
swarms with toads in such multitudes, as hide
the surface of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes
and vipers are hardly less numerous. Cartha-
gana is infested with numerous flocks of bats,
which annoy not only the cattle but inhabit-
ants". In the islands, legions of ants have,
at different times, consumed every vegetable
productionY, and left the earth entirely bare,
as if it had been burnt with fire. The damp
forests, and rank foil of the countries on the
banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem
with almost every offensive and poisonous crea-
ture, which the power of a sultry fun can'
quicken into life z.

Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 89. Id. p. 147. Herrera,

dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. 19. Y See NOTE X.

- Voyage de Condamine, p. 167. Gumilla, iii. 120o,

&c. Hilt. gener. des Voyages, xiv. 317. Dumonc Me-
moires fur la Loufiane, i. io8. Somrmario de Oviedo,
c. Sz-62.

C 3 TH

BO1O IV. THE birds of the New World are not diffin-
Bjds. guifhed by qualities io conspicuous and cha-

radceriftical, as those which we have observed
in its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent
of man, and less affected bv the changes which
his industry and labour make upon the state
of the earth. They have a greater propensity
to migrate from one country to another, and
can gratify this inftin&L of their nature without
difficulty or danger. Hence the number of
birds cc:nmon to both continents is much
greater than that of quadrupeds ; and even such
as are peculiar to America nearly resemble
those with which mankind were acquainted in
similar regions of the ancient hemisphere.
The American birds of the torrid zone, like
those of the fame climate in Asia and Africa,
are decked in plumage, whiclh'dazzles the eye
with the vivid beauty of its colours; but na-
ture, atisfied with clothing them in this gay
dress, has denied mot of them that melody
of found, and variety of notes, which catch
and delight the ear. The birds of the tempe-
rate climates there, in the fame manner as in
our continent, are lefls ilendid in their ap-
pearance, but, in compen!ation fur that defect,
have all the power and ;P-eetnefs of music in
their voice. In fume diftricis of America, the
unwholeflo:e tc:'em rature of the air seems to

be

be unfavourable even to this part of the crea- BooK IV.
tion. The number of birds is less than in
other countries, and the traveller is struck with
the amazing solitude and silence of its forests a.
It is remarkable, however, that America, where
the quadrupeds are so dwarfifli and dastardly,
should produce the Condor, which is intitled to
pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk,
in ifrength, and in courage b.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as Ame- Soil.

rica, muff of course be extremely various. In
each of its provinces, we shall find some diftin-
guiflhing peculiarity, the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular
history. In general, we may observe, that the
moisture and cold, which predominate so re-
markably in all parts of America, must have
great influence upon the nature of its foil;
countries lying in the fame parallel with thole
regions which never feel the extreme rigour of
winter in the ancient continent, are frozen
over in America during a great part of the

Bouguer Voy. an Perou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a

la Martinique, p. 96. Warren Defcript. Surinam. Olborn's
ColledL. ii. 924. Lettres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlcv.
Hiit. de la Nouv. France, iii. 155.

b \oyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine,

J-5. Bufibn Hlit. Nat. xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Mar-
lhais, iii. 320.e

C + year,

SooK IV. year. Chilled by this intense cold, the ground

never acquires warmth sufficient to ripen the
fruits, which are found in the corresponding
parts of the other continent. If we would
rear in America the productions which abound
in any particular ditrict of the ancient world,
we must advance fevrral dec-ees nearer to the
line, than in the other hemisphere, as it requires
such an increase of heat to counterbalance the
natural frigidity of the foil and climate'. At
the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants,
and fruits peculiar to the countries with;n the
tropics, are cultivated with fucceis; whereas,
St St. Auguiftine, in Flri:da, and Charles-
Town, in South-Carolina, though considerably
nearer the li;e, they cannot be brought to
thrive with equal certainty'. But, if allow-
ance be made for this diversity, the foil of
America is naturally as rich and fertile as in
any part of the earth. As the country was
thinly inhabited, and by a people .f little in-
duitry, who had none of the domefitic animals,
which civilized nations rear in such vast num-
bers, the earth was not exhausted by their
consumption. The vegetable productions, to
which the fertility of the foil gave birth, often
remained untouched, and being futfcred to

' See NOTE XI. d See NOT E XII.

coirupt

corrupt on its surface, returned with increase BooK IV.
into its bosom'. As trees and plants derive a
great part of their nourishment from air and
water, if they were not destroyed by man and
other animals, they would render to the earth
more, perhaps, than they take from it, and
feed rather than impoverish it. Thus the un-
occupied foil of America might go on enrich-
ing for many ages. The vast number as well
as enormous size of the trees in America, indi-
cate the extraordinary vigour of the foil in its
native state. When the Europeans first began
to cultivate the New World, they were afto-
nilled at the luxuriant power of vegetation in
its virgin mould; and in several places the
ingenuity of the planter is still employed in
diminiflhing and wafting its superfluous ferti-
lity, in order to bring it down to a ifate fit for
ufiful culture '

1-HAING thus surveyed the state of the New H~o ras

World at the time of its dilcovery, and con- pme':.
fidered the peculiar features and qualities
which diftinguifl and chara&erife it, the next
inquiry that merits attention is, How was

P Ruffon, Hifl. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. 151.

f Charlevoix, Hill. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage
diu DI) Marchais, iii. zz9. Lcry ap de Bry, part iii. p.

:. See NOTE Xll.

America

BooK TV. America peopled? By what course did man-

^~' kind migrate from the one continent to the

other? and in what quarter is it most probable
that a communication was opened between
them ?

No -:::on W\E know, with infallible certainty, that all

..... ~

" the human race spring from the fame source,
-'... and that the descendants of one man, under

the protection, as well as in obedience to the
command of Heaven, multiplied and reple-
nifhed the earth. But neither the annals nor
the traditions of nations reach back to those
remote ages, in which they took poflelTion
of the different countries, where they are now
fettled. We cannot trace the branches of this
firn: family, or point out with certainty the
tine and manner in which they divided and
spread over the face of the globe. Even
a;mong the most enlightened people, the period
of authentic history is extremely short, and
ever' thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure.
It is not lurprifing, then, that the unlettered
inhabitants of America, who have no Iblicitude
about futurity, and little curio.sity concerning
v.ha is pall, fiould be altogether unacquainted
with [heir own original. The Californians and
E!kimnaux, in particular, who occtpy tLhofe
counr.iics in America which approach ncareft

tq

to the ancient continent, are so remarkably BoorKV.
rude, that it is altogether vain to search among
them for iluch information as might discover
the place from whence they came, or the an-
ceftors of whom they are descended'. What-
ever light has been thrown on this fubjie, is
derived, not from the natives of America, but
from the inquisitive genius of their conquerors.

\HIEN the people of Europe unexpectedly varios

discovered a New World, removed at a vast
dilltance from every part of the ancient conti-
nent which was then known, and filled with
inhabitants whose appearance and manners dif-
sered remarkably from the reft of the human
species, the question concerning their original
became naturally an object of curiosity and
attention. The theories and speculations of
ingenious men with respect to this fubjeft,
would fill many volumes; but are often if wild
and chimerical, that I should offer an insult to
the understanding of my readers, if I attempted
either to enumerate or to refute them. Some
have presumptuously imagined, that the people
of America were not the offspring of the fame
common parent with the reft of mankind, but
that they formed a separate race of men, diftin-

f Vcnega's Hill. of California, i. 6g.

guifhable

BooK Ii. ginfhablle by peculiar features in the conftitu,

11tion of their bodies, as well as in the cha-
rateriffic qualities of their minds. Others
contend, that they are descended from tome
remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the
earth, who survived the deluie, which swept
away the greatest part of the human species in
the days of Noah; and preposterously suppose
rude, uncivilized tribes, scattered over an un-
cultivated continent, to be the most ancient
race of people on the earth. There is hardly
any nation from the north to the south pole, to
which some antiquary, in the extravagance of
conjecture, has not ascribed the honour of
peopling America. The Jews, the Canaanites,
the Phcenicians, the Carthaginianr, the Greeks,
the Scythians in ancient times, are supposed
to have fettled in this western world. The
Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwegians, the
Veldih, the Spaniards, are iaid to have sent
colonies thither in later ages, at different
periods, and on various occasions. Zealous
advocates itand forth to if;pport the respective
claims of those people; and though they reft
upon no better foundation than the casual re-
fc-nblance of some culfom-s, or the IIppoied
a;.?ni:v between a few words'in their different
l.an:iacls, much erudition and more zeal have
beeCn e mplo.-ed, to little pu::-pu, in defence

of

tf the opposite systems. Those regions of cdh- BOOK IV.
jefture and controversy belong not to the hifto-
rinn. His is a more limited province, con-
fined to what is established by certain or highly
probable evidence. Beyond this I flhall net
venture, in offering a few observations, which
may contribute to throw some light upon this
curious and much agitated question.

i. THERE are authors who have endeavoured Ought not

to be siand.

by mere conjectures to account for the peopling ed o.n r.ne
of America. Some have supposed that it was co"j,'aurc
originally united to the ancient continent, and
disjoined from it by the shock of an earth-
quake, or the irruption of a deluge. Others
have imagined, that tome vessel being forced
from its course by the violence of a wefrerly
wind, might be driven by accident towards the
American coast, and have given a beginning
to population in that desolate continent . But
with refpe to all those systems, it is vain
cither to reason or inquire, because it is im-
pofiible to come to any decision. Such event's
as they ilippofc are barely pofible, and may
have happened. That they ever did happen,

g Ptrl)n's Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Uni-

verf. I. vol. xV. p. 164. P. Feyjoo Teat.o Critico,
l. :n. Pv. 304, &c. Acofta Hilt. Moral. N3vi Orbis,
li iC.
i c . 16. 19.

we

BooT 1V. we have no evidence, either from the clear
'- tRetimony of history, or from the obscure inti-

mations of trad.tion.
E.T3-. C- 2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or un-

.., certain than the attempts to discover the origi-

nal of the Americans, merely by tracing the
resemblance between their manners and those
of any particular people in the ancient conti-
nent. If we suppose two bodies of men, though
in the molR remote regions of the globe, to be
placed in a state of society, similar in its degree
of improvement, they must feel the fame wants,
and exert the fame endeavours to ulpply them.
The fame ob.ie s will allure, the fame paffons
will animate them, and the fame ideas and fen-
timents will arise in their minds. The cha-
racter and occupations of the hunter in America
mull be little di.errent troni thoe of' an Asiatic,
who depends for fubfillence on the chace. A
tribe of sava-es on the banks of the Danube
nmut nearly refemllbl one upon the plains
waihed by the MlFlifipi. Inlfead then ofpre-
fuming from this fimilaritv, that there is any
affnity between them, we should only con-
ciude, that the dilpofirion and manners of men
are formed by their firuation, and arise from
the ilare of iociet- in which they live. The
iuoliiie;t Lha; begins to vary, the character of

a people

a people muff change. In proportion as it Boor IV.
advances in improvement, their manners refine,
their powers and talents are called forth. In
every part of the earth the progress of man
hath been nearly the fame, and we can trace
him in his career from the rude simplicity of
savage life, until he attains the industry, the
arts, and the elegance of polished society.
There is nothing wonderful then in the fimili-
tude between the Americans and the barbarous
nations of our continent. Had Lafitau, Garcia,
and many other authors, attended to this, they
would not have perplexed a fubje& which they
pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endea-
vours to establish an affinity between various
races of people in the old and new continents,
upon no other evidence than such a resemblance
in their manners as necessarily arises from the
similarity of their condition. There are, it is
true, among every people some customs, which,
as they do not flow from any natural want or
desire peculiar to their situation, may be deno-
minated ulages of arbitrary institution. If be-
tween two nations fettled in remote parts of
the earth, a perfec agreement with refpec& to
any of these should be discovered, one might
be led to fulpec that they were connected by
itobm afilnity. If a nation were found in Ame-
rica tiat consecrated the seventh day to reli-

gious

BooK IV. gious reft, if in another the first appearance ¢f

the new moon was celebrated with festivity,
we might justly suppose that the former had
derived its knowledge of this usage of arbitrary
intiiurtion from the Jews, while the monthly
festival of the latter might be confidered as
nothing more th:'nj an expreflion of joy natural
to man on the return of tile planet which guides
and cheers him in the night. The instances
oi cuttoms, merely arbitrary, common to the
inhabitants of both hemispheres, are, indeed,
Ib few and so equivocal, that no theory con-
cerning the population of the New World
ought to be founded upon them.
o-rf'ii- 3. THE theories which have been formed

w ith relpect to the original of the Americans,
from observation of their religious rites and
practices, are no less fanciful, and destitute of
solid foundation. When the religious opinions
of any people are neither the result of rational
inquiry, nor derived from the instructions of
revelation, they mult needs be wild and extra-
vagant. Barbarous nations are incapable of
the former, and have not been blessed with the
advantages arising from the latter. Still, how-
ever, the human mind, even where its operations
appear mole wild and capricious, holds a course
io re:ular, that in every age and country the

dominion

dominion of particular paflions will be attended BOOK IV.
with similar effects. The savage of Europe or
America, when filled with fuperiftitous dread
of invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude
to penetrate into the events offuturity, trembles
alike with fear, or glows with impatience. He
has rccourle to rites and practices of the fame
kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he
fuppoles to be impending over him, or to di-
vine the secret which is the objec of his cu-
riolity. Accordingly, the ritual of superstition,
in one continent, seems, in many particulars,
to be a transcript of that established in the
other, and both authorise similar institutions,
sometimes so frivolous as to excite pity, iome-
times lo bloody and barbarous as to create
horror. But without supposing any confan-
guinity between such distant nations, or ima-
gining that their religious ceremonies were con-
vcved by tradition from the one to the other,
we may ascribe this uniformity, which in many
intlances seems very amazing, to the natural
operation of superstition and enthufiafin upon
the wcakncis of the human mind.

4. \VT may lay it down as a certain prin- N.t popled

ciple in this inquiry, that America was not tinighly
peopled by any nation of the ancient continent, ciiliz"d,
which had made considerable progress in civili-

VOL. II. D zatcon.

Boorl V. zation. The inhabitants of the New World

were in a state of iocievty t extremely rude, as
to be unacquainted with those arts which are
the first etfavs of human ingenuity in its advance
towards improvement. Even the morft culti-
vated nations of America were strangers to
many of those flmp!e inventions, which were
aimolt coeval with focietv in other parts of the
world, and were known in the earliest periods
of civil life. Frcn this it is manifest, that the
tribes which ori-ii:,ill migrated to America,
ca:mn off trom nations which muf: have been
no le's barbarou:s than their posterity, at the
time when they w re first discovered by the
Euro eans. For, a!:hough the elegant and re-
ined arts may dec .e or perilh, amidst the vio-
lent fnocks of thole revolutions and disasters to
which nations are expose,, the necessary arts of
life, when once they have been introduced
among any people, are never loft. None of
the viciflitudes in human aftairs asset these, and
they centinue to be practised as long as the race
of men exists. If ever the use of iron had been
known to the lavages of America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they h1d; employed aplough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of thole inven-
tions would have pre;erved them, and it is im-
poT ib'e that they hl-culd have been abandoned
c cr f.-t:en. W\e nma, concluce then, that the

Americans

Americans sprung from some people, who were BOOK IV.
themselves in such an early and unimproved
stage of society, as to be unacquainted with all
tie neccffary arts, which remained unknown
among their posterity.

5. Ir appears no leTs evident, that America norfiom

was i)t peopled by any colony from the more rgio ns"
outlhcrn nations of the ancient continent. None ""' ""n'-
of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our he-
mifplhere can be supposed to have visited a coun-
try so remote. They possessed neither enter-
pritb, nor ingenuity, nor power, that could
prompt them to undertake, or enable them to
perform, such a distant voyage. That the
more civilized nations in Asia or Africa are not
the progenitors of the Americans is manifefr,
not only from the observations which I have
already made concerning their ignorance of the
most simple and necelfary arts, but from an ad-
ditional circumftancc. Whenever any people
have experienced the advantages which men en-
joy, by their dominion over the inferior ani-
mals, they can neither ibbfifl without the
nourilhment which rhefe afford, nor carry on
any conliderable operation independent of their
mini'rv and labour. Accordingly, the first
care of the Spaniards when they fettled in
Amirica, was to flock it with all the domestic

D 2 animals

EBOK IV. animals of Europe; and if prior to them, the

Tyrians, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or
any other polilfied people, had taken possession
of that continent, we should have found there
the animals peculiar to those regions of the
globe where they were originally feated. In all
America, however, there is not one animal,
tame or wild, which properly belongs to the
warm, or even the more temperate countries of
the ancient continent. The camel, the drome-
dar,, the horle, the cow, were as much un-
known in America, as the elephant or the lion.
From which it is obvious, that the people who
first fettled in the wetlern world did not issue
from the countries where those animals abound,
and where men, from having been long ac-
customed to their aid, would naturally confider
it, not only as beneficial, but as indispensably
necefiar- to the improvemenrt, and even the
preservation, of civil focier-.

:. .0.o 6. FROMf confidering the animals with which
'....,r. America is itore., we iman conclude that the
.........- nearest point of contact between the old and

' o- new continents is towards the northern ex-

tremlitv of both, and th t there the comimuni-
ca.:ion was opened, and the intercouri- carried
on b-tween them. All t!le extensive countries
in Amer:ca wh.ch lie within :h e tropics, or ap-

proach

proach near to them, are filled with indigenous BooK IV.
animals of various kinds, entirely different from ~t
thole in the correlfponding regions of the an-
cient continent. But the northern provinces of
the New World abound with many of the wild,
animals which are common in such parts of our
hemisphere as lie in a similar situation. The
1'.ar;, the wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer, the
roebuck, the elk, and several other species fre-
quent the forests of North America, no lets
than thole in the north of Europe and Aia h. It
fecms to be evident then, that the two con-
tinents approach each other in this quarter, and
are either united, or so nearly adjacent, that
th!cie animals might pass from the one to the
other.

.THE auttal vicinity of the two continents Ths aLrr.
is ib clearly eftablifned by modern discoveries, t"nd "ly

· - ' diifcovery.

that the chief difficulty with respect to the
popiling of America is removed. While those
in:'cnle regions, which itretch eastward from
the river Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were
unl:known, or imperfectly explored, the north-
eall extremities of our hemisphere were sup-
posed to be so far distant from any part of the
New World, that it was not easy to conceive

h Buffon Hist. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

D 3 how

B3osri'. ho- any co;n:nunic2.tion should have been

carried on between thein. But the Ruffians,
having fubjeted the wfccirn part of Siberia to
their empire, gradually extended their know-
ledge of that valt cnuntr.-, bv advancing to-
vards the ea:t :nto unknown provinces. These
were dil'overed bv hunters in their ex:cursions
after game, or bv soldiers emcioved in levying
the taxes, and the court of Miolow estimated
the i:portance of thoie countries only by the
samall addition which the . made to its revenue.
At length, Peter the Grc.: a..Jc!c'd the Ruffian
throne. His e ii'. entnd, coln-ehenfivemind,
intent upon ever:- circuimft-.nce that could ag-
grandize his e:.-pire, or rcnder his retign il-
iufrriou'., di;.e.-edi coni:'q:uences of thole dif-
coveries, i. h;ch had eicaied the ohbLrvation of
his ignorant p rceceffTrs. He perceived, that
in proprrion as the regions of Asia extended
towards the ea'.c, the ni-u! approach nearer to
Amrerica; that the co.n-:unication between the
two con:ir.,n:s, xv.hich h- ', long been learched
for in vain, wou.i pr-'. .:bi- be found in this
quarter, and. :.;.t

t b ob eing this intercourse,

some part of the ;a t and commerce of the
weflern world might be made to sow into his
cdominions bv a new channel. Such an objea
suited a genrius that delighted in grand Ichchmes.
Peter drew up inflructions with his own hand

for

for profilcuting this design, and gave orders for BOOK IV.
carrying it into execution'.

Il s successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

hi plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employ)edl in this service, had to struggle with
flo many difficulties, that their progress was ex-
tremely flow. Encouraged by some faint tra-
ditions among the people of Siberia, concerning
a i.iccclaful voyage in the year one thousand
fix hundred and forty-eight, rpund the north-
eall: promontory of Af.a, they attempted to
follow the fame courli. Vefiels were fitted
out, with this view, at different times, from
the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen
ocean, which nature seems not to have deflined
for navigation, they were exposed to many
d:l.ii'erls, without being able to accomplilh their
prpoi:O-. No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formidable Cape ; we
are indebted for what is known of those ex-
treime regions of Asia, to the discoveries made
in cxcurlions by land. In all those provinces,
an opinion prevails, that countries of great ex-
tent and ferrilitv lie at no considerable diltance
from their own coasts. These the Ruffians

; Muller Voyages et Decouvcrtes par les Rufles, tom. i.
l' 4, 5 '4i'

Sec NOTE XIV.

D 4. imagined

BertnI. imagined to be part of America; and several

c;ircumitances concurred not only in confirming
them in this belief, but in persuading them that
some portion of that continent could not be very
remote. Trees of various kinds, unknown in
those rnaked regions of Asia, are driven upon
the coast by an eafrerly dind. By' the fame
wind, floating ice is brought thither in a few
days; fiights of birds arrive annually from the
fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among
the inhabitants, of an in:trcourse formerly
carried on v.ith some countruis situated to the
eafr.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and

cGpnraringr the position of the countries in Asia
which had been difcovcrcd, with such parts in
the north-west of America as were already
known, the Ruffian court formned a plan, which
would have hardly occurred to any nation less
accuitomed to engage in arduous undertakings,
and to contend with great diffculties. Orders
were isTued to Euild two vefiels at Ochorz, in
the sea of Kamchatka, to fail on a voyage of
difcoverv. Though that dreary uncultivated
region furnished nothing that could be of use in
conliructing them, but some larch trees;
though not only the iron, the cordage, the
fails, and all the numerous articles requisite for

their

their equipment, but the provisions for vic- BooK IV.
tualling them, were to be carried through the "'
immlenfe deserts of Siberia, along rivers of dif-
ficult navigation, and roads almost impassable,
the mandate of the sovereign, and the perse-
vcr.ace of the people, at last surmounted every
obitacle. Two vessels were finifled, and, , 41.
under the command of the captains Behring J""'
and Tfclhirikow, failed from Kamchatka in
quest of the New World, in a quarter where it
had never been approached. They shaped their
course towards the east; and though a storm
soon leparated the veifels, which never rejoined,
antl many disasters besel them, the expetations
from the voyage were not altogether frustrated.
Each of the commanders discovered land, which
to them appeared to be part of the American
continent; and, according to their obferva-
tions, it leems to be situated within a few de-
grees of the north-wefc coast of California. Each
iet some of his people aflhore; but in one place
the inhabitants fled as the RuffTans approached;
in another, they carried off those who landed,
and de troyed their boats. The violence of the
weather, and the diptrefs of their crews, obliged
both to quit this inhospitable coast. In their
return they touched at several islands, which
firetch in a chain from east to weft between the

country

BooKIV. country which they had difovered and the coast

of Asia. They had some intercourse with the
natives, who 1eemed to them to rcfemble the
North Americans. They presented to the Ruf-
sians the caluiet, or pipe of peace, which is a
symbol of friendship univerlal among the people
of North America, and an usage of arbitrary
in:titution, peculiar to them.

TIuE islands of this new Archipelago Ilave

been frequented by the Ruffian hunters since
that time; but the court seemed to have relin-
qui.hed its scheme of prosecuting discoveries in
this quarter. It was unexpectedly relfined in
the year one thousand fcven hundred and sixty-
eight, and captain Krenitzin had the command
of two fiall vefels fitted out for that purpose.
In his vo vage outward he held nearly the fame
course with the former navigators, he touched at
the iinme islands, observed their situation and
produntions more carefully, and discovered fe-
veral new islands, with which they had not
fallen in. Though he did not proceed to far
to the eail as to revisit the country which
Behring and Tfchirikow luppofed to be part of
the American continent, yet, by returning in a
course confiderablv to the north of theirs, he
corrected some capital mifrakes into which they

had

had fallen, and has contributed to facilitate the BooKIV.
p1;Irels of future navigators in those seas '

rTHus the possibility of a communication be-

trwen the continents in this quarter refts no
longer upon mcre conjecture, but is eftablilhed
by ui-;loubted evidence ". Some tribe, or some
fam.ilies of wandering Tartars, from the restless
sp)rit peculiar to their race, might migrate to
the nearell: ifands, and, rude as their knowledge
,AS navigation was, might, by paffng fiom one
to the other, reach at length the coast of
A:: rica, and give a beginning to population
;i :',,: continent. The distance between the
M '.i: (Ior Ladrone islands and the nearest land
in A';:, is greater than that between the part of
An lcric. whlich the Rufflans discovered, and
the coni'l of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabit-
ants of those ifands are manifefly of Asiatic
tclxtra;. If, notwithstanding their remote situ-
arion, we admit that the Marian ifands were
pco;i!ci fi-om our continent, distance alone is
no rc:!cin why we fliould hesitate about ad-
mitting that the original of the Americans may
bi' t-omi the fame source. It is probable that
future navigators in those seas, by steering
fairler to the north, may find that the conti-

I Sec NOTE E XV.
" Muller's Voyages, tom. i. 248, &c. 267. 276.

nent

Boor IV. nent of America approaches still nearer to Asia.
'- According to the information of the barbarous

people, who inhabit the country about the
norrh-eaft promontory of Asia, there lies, off
the coafi, a small island, to which they fail in
Icls than a day. From that, they can descry a
large continent, which, according to their de-
Icription, is covered with forests, and possessed
by people whose language they do not under-
stand . By them they are supplied with the
;kins of martens, an animal unknown in the
northern parts of Siberia, and which is never
found but in countries abounding with trees.
If we could rely on this account, we might con-
clude, that the American continent is ieparated
from ours only by a narrow strait, and all the
difficulties with respeCt to the communication
between them would vanish. Perhaps the
merit of ascertaining this is reserved for the so-
vereign now feated on the throne of Peter the
Great, who, by perfecting his plan, may add
this splendid event to those which already
distinguish her reign.

Ano:h.r It is likewise evident from recent discoveries,
cr-ni- b that an intercourse between our continent and
ci,,,n by
t.-...;h- America might be carried on with no less faci-

M- Muller's Voyages e; Dzccuv, i. 166.

lity

lity from the north-west extremities of Europe. BooKIV.
As early as the ninth century, the Norwegians A. D. %,o.
discovered Greenland, and planted colonies
there. The communication with that country,
after a long interruption, was renewed in the
last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian
minfionaries, prompted by zeal for propagating
the Christian faith, have ventured to fettle in
this frozen and uncultivated region °. To
them we are indebted for much curious informa-
tion with relpect to its nature and inhabitants.
We learn, that the north-west coast of Green-
land is tfparated from America by a very nar-
row firait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this strait conducts, it is highly probable
that they are united P; that the inhabitants of
the two countries have some intercourse with
one another; that the Efquimaux of America
perfetly resemble the Greenlanders in their
aspect, dress, and mode of living; that some
tailors, who had acquired the knowledge of a
few words in the Greenlandifh language, re-
ported that these were understood by the Efqui-
maux; that, at length, a Moravian minilonary, AD. 1764.
well acquainted with the language of Green-
land, having vilited the country of the Efqui-

o Crantz' HiK. of Greenl. i. 242. 244. Prevot Ilia.

Gcn. des Voyages, tom. xv. 152, not. (96).
P Eggedc, p. z, 3.

maux,

BoorIV. maux, found, to his aftoifhmenr, that they

"'" spoke the fame language with the Greenlanders,

and were in every respect the fame people, and
he was accordingly received and entertained by
them as a friend and a brother.

BY these decisive sacs, not onlv the confan-

guinity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is
eftablilhed, but the poTilbility of peopling
America from the north of Europe is demon-
ftrated. If the Norwegians, in a barbarous
age, when science had nor begun to dawn in
the north of Europe, pofflred such naval skill
as to open a communication with Cr:enland,
their ancestors, as much addi ted to roving by
sea, as the Tartars are to wandering by land,
might, at some more remote period, accom-
plilh the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there,
whole defcendcnts might, in progre!s of time,
migrate into America. But if, instead of ven-
turing to fail directly from their own coast to
Greenland, we suppose that the Norwegians
held a more cautious course, and advanced from
Shetland to the Feroe Islands, and from them
to Iceland, in all which they had planted colo-
nies, their progrelf may have been so gradual,
that this navigation carnot be confidered as

s Crant7.' Hi;L. of Gr-ern.. . 2C6, 22.

e ther

either longer or more hazardous, than those BooKIV.
voyages which that hardy and enterprising race
of men is known to have performed in every
age.

8. THOUGH it be possible that America may ProbaIly

have received its first inhabitants from our con- ,Pm'oh
tinent, either by the north-west of Europe or north-ea".
the north-eafc of Asia, there seems to be good
realon for supposing that the progenitors of all
the American nations, from Cape Horn to the
fouthcrn confines of Labrador, migrated from
the latter rather than the former. The Efqui-
manx are the only people in America, who, in
their alpe&t or charater, bear any resemblance
to the northern Europeans. They are mani-
fefly a ifeparate species of men, diffint from all
the nations of the American continent, in lan-
guage, in disposition, and in habits of life.
Their original, then, may warrantably be traced
up to that source, which I have pointed out.
But, among all the other inhabitants of Ame-
rica, there is such a frinking similitude in the
form of their bodies, and the qualities of their
minds, that, notwithstanding the diversities oc-
cafioned by the influence of climate, or unequal
progress in improvement, we muff pronounce
them to be descended from one bource. There
may be a variety in the lhades, but we can every

where

Boojc-V. where trace the fame original colour. Each

tribe has fpmething peculiar which diftinguilies
it, but in all of them we discern certain features
common to the whole race. It is remarkable,
that in every peculiarity, whether in their per-
sons or dilpofitions, which chara.'terife the Alne-
ricans, they have some relemblance to the rude
tribes scattered over the north-east of Alia,
but almost none to the nations lettled in the
northern extremities of Europe. We may, there-
fore, refer them to the former origin, and con-
clude that their Asiatic progenitors, having
fettled in those parts of America, where the
Ruffians have discovered the proximity of the
two continents, spread gradually over its various
regions. This account of the progress of po-
pularion in America, coincides with the tradi-
tions of the Mexicans concerning their own
origin, which, imperfect as they are, were
preierved with more accuracy, and merit greater
credit, than those of any people in the New
World. According to them, their ancefrors
came from a remote country, situated to the
north-weir of Mexico. The Mexicans point
out their various iations as they advanced from
this, into the interior provinces, and it is pre-
cifelv the fame route which they must have held,
if they had been emigrants from Asia. The
Mexicans, in describing the appearance of their

progenitors,

progenitors, their manners, and habits of life BooKIV.
at that period, exacly delineate those of the
rude Tartars, from whom I suppose them to
have fprungr.

THUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it
would have been improper to omit it in writing
the history of America. I have ventured to
inquire, but without presuming to decide. Sa-
tisfied with offering conjecures, I pretend not
to establish any system. When an investigation
is, from its nature, so intricate and obscure,
that it is inipoffible to arrive at conclusions
which are certain, there may be some merit in
pointing out such as are probable '.

THE condition and charater of the American condition

nations, at the time when they became known nrdlh the
to the Europeans, deserve more attentive con- Americans,
fideration, than the inquiry concerning their
original. The latter is merely an object of cu-
riofity, the former is one of the most important

r Acofta Hilt. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. z, &c. Garcia

Origen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torquemada Monar.
Ind. lib. i. c. z, &c. Boturini Benaduci Idea de una Hill.
de la Amer. Septentr. § xvii. p. 127.

' Memoires fur la Louifiane, par Dumont, tom. i. p.
119.

VOL. II. E as

Boor IV. as well as instructive researches, which can oc-

cupy the philosopher or historian. In order to
complete the history of the human mind, and
attain to a perse& knowledge of its nature and
operations, we muff contemplate man in all
those various situations wherein he has been
placed. We muff follow him in his progress
through the different stages of society, as he
gradually advances from the infant state of civil
life towards its maturity and decline. We mufi
oblerve, at each period, how the faculties of
his understanding unfold, we must attend to the
efforts of his active powers, watch the motions
of affection as they rife in his breast, and mark
whither they tend, and with what ardour they
are exerted. The philosophers and historians
of ancient Greece and Rome, our guides in this
as well as every other disquisition, had only a
limited view of this fubjeEt, as they had hardly
any opportunity of surveying man in his rudefl
and mofl early itate. In all those regions of
the earth with which they were well acquainted,
civil society had made considerable advances,
and nations had finished a good part of their
career before they began to obirv-e them. The
Scvthians and Germans, the rudefl people of
v.'lo;m any ancient author has transmitted to us
an authentic account, poffecfed flocks and
herds, had acquired property of various kinds,

4 and,

ana, when compared with mankind in their BooK IV.
primitive state, may be reckoned to have at-
tained to a great degree of civilization.

BUT the discovery of the New World en- Lefrim-

larged the sphere of contemplation, and pre- iprovepd h,
lented nations to our view, in stages of their of°th earth.
progress, much less advanced than those wherein
they have been observed in our continent. In
America, man appears under the rudest form
in which we can conceive him to subsist. We
behold communities just beginning to unite,
and may examine the sentiments and actions of
human beings in the infancy of social life, while
they feel but imperfecly the force of its ties,
and have scarcely relinquished their native li-
berty. That state of primreval simplicity, which
was known in our continent only by the fanci-
ful description of poets, really existed in the
other. The greater part of its inhabitants were
itrangers to industry and labour, ignorant of
arts, and almost unacquainted with property,
enjoying in common the blessings which flowed
spontaneously from the bounty of nature. There
were only two nations in this vast continent
which had emerged from this rude slate, and
had made any considerable progress in acquiring
the ideas, and adopting the institutions, which
belong to polished Societies. Their govern-

E 2 ment

Boo IV. ment and manners will fall naturally under our

review in relating the discovery and conquest of
the Mexican and Peruvian empires; and we
lhall have there an opportunity of contemplating
the Americans in the state of highest improve-
ment to which they ever attained.

Th, i.n- AT present, our attention and researches
n-j'o :he s(hall be turned to the flnall independent tribes
.... 'which occupied every other part of America.

Among there, though with Ibme diversity in
their character, their manners and institutions,
the slate of society was nearly similar, and to
extremely rude, that the denomination of Sa-
-'age may be applied to them all. In a general
history of America, it would be highly im-
proper to describe the condition of each petty
community, or to investigate every minute cir-
cumftance which contributes to form the cha-
rarer of its members. Such an inquiry would
lead to details of immeasurable and tiresome
extent. The qualities belonging to the people
of all the different tribes have such a near re-
:emblance, that they may be painted with the
fame features. Where any circumstances seem
to confitute a diversity in their character and
manners worthy of attention, it will be sufficient
to point these out as they occur, and to inquire
into the causes of such peculiarities.

5 IT

IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying BOOK IV.

and authentic information concerning nations P-fculty or
while they remain uncivilized. To discover ainag
their true character under this rude form, and tin,
to collect the features by which they are diftin-
guifled, requires an observer possessed of no
lefts impartiality than discernment. For, in
every itage of society, the faculties, the senti-
ments and desires of men are so accommodated
to their own Rfate, that they become standards
of excellence to themselves, they affix the idea
of perfe6tion and happiness to those attainments
which resemble their own, and wherever the
objects and enjoyments to which they have been
acculltored are wanting, confidently pronounce
a people barbarous and miserable. Hence the
mutual contempt with which the members of
communities, unequal in their degrees of im-
provement, regard each other. Polifled na-
tions, conscious of the advantages which they
derive from their knowledge and arts, are apt
to view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and,
in the pride of superiority, will hardly allow
either their occupations, their feelings, or their
pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has seldom
been the lot of communities, in their early and
unpolifhed state, to fall under the observation
of perbons endowed with force of mind fu-
perior to vulgar prejudices, and capable of con-

E 3 templating

Boor IV. templating man, under whatever aspec& he ap-

pears, with a candid and discerning eye.
f-. -he THE Spaniards, who first visited America,

:th ,ift and who had opportunity of beholding its va-
c'i'n, rious tribes, while entire and unfubdued, were

far from possessing the qualities requisite for ob-
serving the striking fpeatacle prclented to their
view. Neither the age in which they lived,
nor the nation to which they belonged, had
made such progress in true science, as inspires
enlarged and liberal sentiments. The con-
querors of the New World were mostly illiterate
adventurers, deltitute of all the ideas which
should have direc&ed them in contemplating
objeEts, so extremely different from those with
which thev were acquainted. Surrounded con-
tinually with danger, or struggling with hard-
ships, they had little leisure, and less capacity
for any speculative inquiry. Eager to take
poffcfTion of a country of luch vast extent and
opulence, and happy in finding it occupied by
inhabitants so incapable to defend it, they
hastily pronounced them to be a wretched order
of men, formed merely for servitude; and were
more employed in computing the profits of
tleir labour, than in inquiring into the opera-
tions of their minds, or the reabons of their
cuitoms and institutions. The persons who pe-

netrated

netrated at subsequent periods into the interior Booc IV.
provinces, to which the knowledge and devafta-
tions of the first conquerors did not reach, were
generally of a similar character; brave and en-
terprifing in an high degree, but so uninformed
as to be little qualified either for observing or
describing what they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices and the;r

of the Spaniards, render their accounts of the p idice
people of America extremely defecive. Soon
after they planted colonies in their new con-
quefis, a difference in opinion arose with refpe&
to the treatment of the natives. One party,
Iblicitous to render their servitude perpetual,
represented them as a brutish, obstinate race,
incapable either of acquiring religious know-
ledge, or of being trained to the funcions of
social life. The other, full of pious concern
for their conversion, contended that, though
rude and ignorant, they were gentle, assec-
tionate, docile, and by proper inftru&ions and
regulations might be formed gradually into
good Christians and useful citizens. This con-
troverfy, as I have already related, was carried
on with all the warmth which is natural, when
attention to interest on the one hand, and reli-
gious zeal on the other, animate the disputants.
Most of the laity espoused the former opinion;

E 4 all

Boor IV. all the ecclesiastics were advocates for the latter;

-" and we shall uniformly find that, accordingly

as an author belonged to either of these parties,
he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate
the defects of the Americans beyond measure.
Those repugnant accounts increase the difficulty
of attaining a perfet knowledge of their cha-
rafter, and render it necessary to peruse all the
descriptions of them by Spanifl writers with
difiruft, and to receive their information with
some allowance.

-

irAt/rn ~ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the difi

ci h-blc- covery of America, before the manners of its
Fr' s' inhabirants attracted, in any considerable de-

gree, the attention of philosophers. At length,
they discovered that the knowledge of the con-
dition and charac.er of the Americans might
enable them to fill up a considerable charm in
the history of the human species, and lead to
freculations no less curious than important.
They er.ered upon this new field of study with
great ardour; but,. ihiead of throwing light
upon the fubjecl, they have contributed, in
tome degree, to involve it in additional obfcu-
rity. Too impatient to inquire, they hastened
to decide; and began to erect systems, when
they ihould have been searching for fats on
which to establish their foundations. Struck

with

with the appearance of degeneracy in, thehuman BooK IV.
species throughout the New World, and afto-' -
nifhed at beholding a valt continent occupied
by a naked, feeble, and ignorant race of inen,
some authors of great name have maintained,
that this part of the globe had but lately
cmerged from the 'ea, and become fitfor the
relidence of man; that every thing in it bore
marks of a recent original; and that its inha-
bitants, lately called into existence, and (till at
the beginning of their career, were unworthy to
be compared with the people of a more ancient
and improved continent'. Others have ima-
gined, that, under the influence of an unkindly
climate, which checks and enervates the prin-
ciple of life, man never attained in America
the perfeftion which belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, de-
feciive in the vigour of his bodily frame,' arid
dectitute of sensibility, as well as of force, in
the operations of his mind". In opposition to
both these, other philosophers have supposed
that man arrives at his highest dignity and ex-
cellence long before he reaches a state' of refine-
ment; and, in the rude simplicity of .avage
life, displays an elevation of sentiment, an in-

, M. de Buffon HiR. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 1l4.
M. de P. Rccherches Philof. fur les Americ. paflim.

dependence

BEoox'. dependence of mind, and a warmth of attach-

ment, for which it is vain to search among the
members of polished societies I. They seem to
confider that as the moss perfect state of man
which is the least civilized. They describe the
manners of the rude Americans with such rap-
tore, as if they proposed them for models to the
reft of the species. These contradiStory theo-
ries have been proposed with equal confidence,
and uncommon powers of genius and eloquence
have been exerted in order to clothe them with
an appearance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in render-

ing an inquiry into the state of the rude nations
in America intricate and obscure, it is necessary
to carry it on with caution. When guided in
our researches by the intelligent observations of
the few philosophers who have visited this part
of the globe, we may venture to decide. When
obliged to have recourse to the superficial re-
marks of vulgar travellers, of sailors, traders,
buccaneers, and missionaries, we must often
pause, and comparing detached sacs, endeavour
to discover what they wanted sagacity to ob-
serve. Without indulging coniecure, or be-
traying a propensity to either system, we must

M. Rouifea-.

study

study with equal care to avoid the extremes of BooKIV.
extravagant admiration, or of supercilious con-
tempt for those manners which we describe.

IN order to conduct this inquiry with greater Method ob.

served in

accuracy, it should be rendered as simple as theinquiry.
possible. Man existed as an individual before
he became the member of a community; and
the qualities which belong to him under his
former capacity should be known, before we
proceed to examine those which arise from the
latter relation. This is peculiarly necessary in
investigating the manners of rude nations,
Their political union is so incomplete, their
civil institutions and regulations so few, so
simple, and of such small authority, that men
in this state ought to be viewed rather as inde-
pendent agents, than as members of a regular
society. The charater of a savage results al-
most entirely from his sentiments or feelings as
an individual, and is but little influenced by his
imrperfet fubjeftion to government and order.
I shall condu& my researches concerning the
manners of the Americans in this natural order,
proceeding gradually from what is simple to
what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily conffitution
of the Americans in those regions now under

review.

BooEIV. review. II. The qualities of their minds. III.

Their domestic state. IV. Their political state
and infitutions. V. Their lyftem of war, and
public security. VI. The arts with which they
were acquainted. VII. Their religious ideas
and inifitutions. VIII. Such singular detached
customs as are not reducible to any of the for-
mer heads. IX. I shall conclude with a ge-
neral review and estimate of their virtues and
defects.

Te t.er... I. The bodily confitution of the Americans.
I.:r,.... -The human body is less affected by climate

rhan that of any other animal. Some animals
arc confined to a particular region of the globe,
and cannot exist beyond it; others, though they
may be brought to bear the injuries of a cli-
mate foreign to them, ceaie to multiply when
carried out of that district which Nature
destined to be their mansion. Even such as
icein capable of being naturalized in various
climates, feel the effect of every remove from
their proper station, and gradually dwindle and
degenerate from the vigour a:id perfection pe-
culiar to their species. Man is the only living
, rearure whose frame is at once so hardy and so
:ex.ble, that he can spread over the whole earth,
become the inhabitant of every region, and
thrive aad multiply under every climate. Sub-

jec,

jeR, however, to the general law of Nature, BooK IV.
the human body is not entirely exempt from '
the operation of climate, and when exposed to
the extremes either of heat or cold, its size or
vigour diminishes.

THE first appearance of the inhabitants of the Comple;.

New World, filled the discoverers with such 0"' &C.
aftonifhnent, that they were apt to imagine
them a race of men different from those of the
other hemisphere. Their complexion is of a
reddifl brown, nearly resembling the colour of
copper'. The hair of their heads is always
black, long, coarse, and lank. They have no
beard, and every part of their body is perfectly
fiooth. Their persons are of a full size, ex-.
tremely itrait, and well proportioned'. Their
features are regular, though often distorted by
absurd endeavours to improve the beauty of
their natural form, or to render their aspef
more dreadful to their enemies. In the islands, More
where four-footed animals were both few and
small, and the earth yielded her producions
almost spontaneously, the constitution of the
natives, neither braced by the active exercises
of the chace, nor invigorated by the labour of

Y Oviedo Somario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c.
24.

See NOTE XVI.

cultivation,

BooK IV. cultivation, was extremely feeble and languid.

On the continent, where the forests abound
with game of various kinds, and the chief oc-
cupation of many tribes was to pursue it, the
human frame acquired greater firmness. Still,
however, the Americans were more remarkable
for agility than strength. They resembled
beasts of prey, rather than animals formed for
labour'. They were not only averse to toil,
but incapable of it; and when rouzed by force
from their native indolence, and compelled to
work, they funk under talks which the people
of the other continent would have performed
with ease . This feebleness of constitution
was universal among the inhabitants of those
regions in America which we are surveying,
and may be confidered as chara&eriftic of the
species there .

THE beardless countenance and smooth skin

of the American seems to indicate a defect of
vigour, occasioned by some vice in his frame.
He is destitute of one sign of manhood and of

a See O T E XVHI.

Oriedo Som. p. 5;, C. Vov. de Correal, ii. i38.

Wafer's Description, p. 131.

' B. Las Calas Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torquem. Monar.
i. 5.o. Oviedo Somario, p. 41. HiIlor. lib. iii. c. 6.

H. Crera, !ec . lib. ix. c. 5. aiimo., p. 41.

strength.

strength. This peculiarity, by which the in- BooK IV.
habitants of the New World are distinguished '
from the people of all other nations, cannot be
attributed, as some travellers have supposed, to
their mode of fubfiftenced. For though the
food of many Americans be extremely insipid,
as they are altogether unacquainted with the
uile of salt, rude tribes in other parts of the earth
have subsisted on aliments equally simple with-
out this mark of degradation, or any apparent
fynmpomi of a diminution in their vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads L-rs app-

us to iufpe& that there is rome natural debility tit"
in their frame, the smallness of their appetite
for food has been mentioned by many authors
as a confirmation of this suspicion. The quan-
titv of food which men consume varies according
to the temperature of the climate in which they
live, the degree of activity which they exert,
and the natural vigour of their confitutions.
Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pals their days in indolence and
ease, they require less nourishment than the
active inhabitants of temperate or cold coun-
tries. But neither the warmth of their climate,
nor their extreme laziness, will account for the

Charlev. Iill. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 310.

uncommon

BocK TV. uncommon defect of appetite among the Ameri-

' cans. The Spaniards were astonished with ob-

serving this, not only in the islands, but in fe-
veral parts of the continent. The constitutional
temperance of the natives far exceeded, in their
opinion, the abstinence of the most mortified
hermits'; while, on the other hand, the ap-
petite of the Spaniards appeared to the Ameri-
cans insatiably voracious; and they affirmed,
that one Spaniard devoured more food in a day
than was sufficient for ten Americans f.

Lrivehce A PROOF of tome feebleness in their frame
~d= .o still more striking, is the inienfibility of the

Americans to the charms of beauty, and the
power of love. That pallion which was destined
to perpetuate life, to be the bond of social
union, and the source of tenderness and joy, is
the inoft ardent in the human breast. Though
the perils and hardships of the savage state,
though excessive fatigue, on some occasions,
and the difficulty ar all times of procuring sub-
fiftence, may seem to be adverse to this pafiion,
and to have a tendency to abate its vigour, yet
the rudest nations in every other part of the
globe seem to feel its influence more powerfully

Ramufio, iii. 304, F. :c6. A. Simon Conquin.,

&c p. 39. Hakluyt, iii 463. ;or.
f Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 16.

than

than the inhabitants of the Ne W6otld'.' Th'e lbdii'V.
negro glows with all the warnith of aefireria- "
tural to his climfiate; and the' mbft uihultdate'd
Asiatics discover that'fenfibility,' wliih, 'friom
their situa'tion on the globe, We ihbuld 'expe&t
them to have felt. But the Americans are, in
an amazing degree, strangers to the force of
this first infrinc of nature. In every part of the
New World the natives treat their women with
coldness and indifference. They are:neither
the objects of that tender attaclhirent which
takes place in civilized society, nor of that ar-
dett desire conspicuous among rude n'atibns.
Even in climates where this passion urually ac-
quires its greatest vigour, the savage ds A'ierica
views his female with disdain, as an animal of
a less noble species. He is at nio pins to win
her favour by the assiduity of courtship, and
still less solicitous to preserve it by indilgence
and gentleness". Missionaries theminelves, not-
withstanding the austerity of m6naftic' ideas,
cannot refrain from expressing their altfnifh-
ment at the dispassionate c6ldief of tlie Ameri-

E Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, 32, &c.. .Rochefort

Hist. des Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii.
141. Ramuflo, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defer. del Gran
Chaco, 71. Falkner's Defer. of Patagon. p. I2Z. . Let-
tere di P. Cataneo ap. Muratori II Chriltian. Felice, i.
3c5.

VOL. II. can

Book IV. can young men in their intercourse with the

other lex=. Nor is this reserve to be ascribed
to any opinion which they entertain with refpet
to the merit of female chaitiit. That is an idea
too refined fur a savage, and suggested by a de-
licacy of sentiment and afciuon to which he is
a ilranger.

R --Ta o. BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily
_, ,ro - or mental qualities of particular races of men,
A"j.' there is not a more common or more seducing

error, than that of ascribing to a tingle cause,
thoie charactcriitic peculiarities, which are the
efect of the combined operation of many causes.
The climate and foil of America differ, in so
many refpeds, from thole of the other hemi-
sphere, and this difference is.fo obvious and
iriking, that philosophers of great eminence
have laid hold on this as fufircient to account
for what is peculiar in the conltitution of its in-
habitants. They reft on physical causes alone,
and confider the feeble frame and languid desire
of the Americans, as consequences of the tem-
perament of that portion of the globe which
they occupy. But the influences of political

v Cha. valon. p. 5; . Lettr. Edif. tom. ::.:iv. 31.

T--tre, ii. 3--. Ven-gas, i. Si. Riba Hin'. de los
T.:umf. p. I.

3 and

,nd moral causes ought not to have been over- BooKIV.
looked. These operate with no less effe& than
that on which many philolophers reft as a full
explanation of the singular appearances which
have been mentioned. Wherever the state of
lociety is such as to create many wants and de-
fires, which cannot be satisfied without regular
exertions of industry, the body accustomed to
Jaibour becomes robust and patient of fatigue.
In a more limple state, where the demands of
men are so few and to moderate, that they may
be gratified, almost without any effort, by the
spontaneous productions of nature, the powers
of the body are not called forth, nor can they
attain their proper strength. The natives of
Chili and of North-America, the two temperate
regions in the New World, who live by hunt-
ing, may be deemed an active and vigorous
race, when compared with the inhabitants of
the isles, or of those parts of the continent
where hardly any labour is requisite to procure
fubfitence. The exertions of a hunter are not,
however, so regular, or so continued, as those
of perlnls employed in the culture of the earth,
or in the various arts of civilized life, and
th ,ugh Iis agility may be greater than theirs,
In llrcngth is on the whole inferior. If another
dirccTiol were given to the aaive powers of
mlan in the New World, and his force aug-

F 2 mented

Boos IV. mented by exercise, he might acquire a degree
,- --.. of vigour which he does not in his present state

possess. The truth of this is confirmed by ex-
perience. Wherever the Americans have been
gradually accustomed to hard labour, their
conffitutions become robust, and they have been
found capable of performing such tasks, as
seemed not only to exceed the powers of ilch a
feeble frame as has been deemed peculiar to
their country, but to equal any effort of the
natives, either of Africa or of Europe '.

THE fame reasoning will apply to what has

been observed concerning their slender demand
for food. As a proof that this should be ascribed,
as much to their extreme indolence, and often
total want of occupation, as to any thing pecu-
liar in the physical structure of their bodies, it
has been observed, that in those diftrics, where
the people of America are obliged to exert any
unusual effort of activity, in order to procure
subsistence, or wherever they are employed in
severe labour, their appetite is not inferior to
that of other men, and, in some places, it has
truck oblervers as remarkably voracious k.

i See NOTE XVIII.
k Gumi!la, ii. 12. 70. 237. Lnit.:.u, i. 15S. Ovalle
Church. i;. SI. \uratori, i. :."

T.tL

THE operation of political and moral causes BooK IV.

is Rill more conspicuous, in modifying the de*
gree of attachment between the sexes. In a
i-ate of high civilization, this paflion, inflamed
by r-elhaint, refined by delicacy, and cherished
by taflhion, occupies and engrosses the heart.
It is no longer a simple inltint of nature; fen-
tim.ent heightens the ardour of desire, and the
most tender emotions of which our frame is iuf-
ceptible, boothe and agitate the foul. This
description, however, applies only to those,
who, by their situation, are exempted from
the cares and labours of life. Among persons
of inferior order, who are doomed by their con-
dition to incefrant toil, the dominion of this
parion is less violent i their solicitude to procure
ifbliftence, and to provide for the first demand
of nature, leaves little leisure for attending to
its second call. But if the nature of the inter-
courle between the sexes varies so much in per-
sons of different rank in polished societies, the
condition of man, while he remains uncivilized,
mull occasion a variation frill more apparent.
\We may well suppose, that amidst the hard-
lhips, the dangers, and the simplicity of savage
life, where subsistence is always precarious, and
often Icanty, where men are almost continually
engaged in the pursuit of their enemies, or in
guarding against their attacks, and where neither

F 3 dress

Boo,: TV. dress nor refcrve are employed as arts of female

a----' !reent, that the attention of the Americans
t- t'-- ' women would be extremely feeble,
witlho-: :-; r':-c :hit '-1 $H! :-. -: r.hyfical de-
sect or degradatiua .n t.;cn irrame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those

countries of America, where, from the fertility
of the foil, the mildness of the climate, or
some farther advances which the natives have
made in improvement, the means of fubfiflence
are more abindant, and the harllhips of savage
life are leis severely felt, the ani:nal pafTion of
the sexes becomes more arnient. Striking ex-
amples of this occur among lome tribes feated
on the banks of great rivers well flored with
food, among others who are ma-icrs of hunting-
grounds abounding so much with game, that
ithv have a regular and plentiful supply of
nourilhment with little labour. The luperior
deree of security and affluence which thele
tribes enioy, is followed 1v their naturial effecs.
The palions implanted in the human frame by
the hand of nature acniqire additi nal force;
nv'w tafRes and desires are tfrmed; the women,
s thev are more valued .n.! admirel., become
nmore attentive to drcfi and ornament; the
ircn, beginning to feel ho,. m;ch of their own
happinc-l depends upon them, no longer disdain

the

the arts of winning their favour and affection. BooK IV.
The intercourse of the sexes becomes very dif- ,'
ferent from that which rakes place among their
ruder countrymen; and as hardly any restraint
is imposed on the gratification of desire, either
by religion, or laws, or decency, the dissolution
of their manners is excefive'.

NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the N'on of

Americans, hardly any of them are deformed, frned.
or mutilated, or defective in any of their senses.
All travellers have been struck with this cir-
ctrmftance, and have celebrated the uniform
symmetry and perfection of their external figure.
Some authors search for the cause of this ap-
pearance in their physical condition. As the
parents are not exhausted or over-fatigued with
hard labour, they suppose that their children
are born vigorous and found. They imagine,
that in the liberty of savage life, the human
body, naked and unconfined firom its earliest
age, preserves its natural form ; and that all
its limbs and members acquire a juster propor-
tion, than when fettered with artificial reilraints,
which flint its growth, and distort its shape "

i Bict. 389. Charlev. iii. 423. Dumnont Mem. fur
J,ouifi: ne. i. 155.

l Pifo, p. 6.

F 4 Something,

BooK r. Something, without doubt, may be ascribed

- to the operation of these causes; but the true

reasons of this apparent advantage, which is
common to all savage nations, lie deeper, and
are closely interwoven with the nature and ge-
nius of that itate. The infancv of man is so
long and so helpless, that it is extremely diffi-
cult to rear children among rude nations. Their
means of subsistence are not only scanty, but
precarious. Such as live by hunting must
range over extensive countries, and shift often
from place to place. The care of children, as
well as every other laborious talk, is devolved
upon the women. The distresses and hardships
of the savage life, which are often such as can
hardly be supported by persons in full vigour,
must be fatal to those of more tender age.
Af-aid of undertaking a tafl so laborious, and
of such long duration, as that of rearing their
offspring, the women, in some parts of Ameri-
ca, procure frequent abortions by the use of
certain herbs, and extinguish the first sparks of
that life which they are unable to cherish .
Sensible that only stout and well formed children
have force of constitution to struggle through
such an hard infancy, other nations abandon or

* Ellis's Voyage to Hadfon's Ba., i9S. Herrera, dec.
7. lib. ix. c. a.

destroy

destroy such of their progeny as appear feeble or BOOK IV.
defective, as unworthy ofattentiono. Even when '
they endeavour to rear all their children without
diftintion, so great a proportion of the whole
number perishes under the rigorous treatment
which must be their lot in the savage state, that
few of those who laboured under any original
frailty attain the age of manhood . Thus, in
poliffed societies, where the means ofifbfiftence
are secured with certainty, and acquired with
ease; where the talents of the mind are often
of more importance than the powers of the
body; children are preserved notwithstanding
their defets or deformity, and grow up to be
useful citizens. In rude nations, such persons
are either cut off as soon as they are born, or
becoming a burden to themselves and to the
community, cannot long protract their lives.
But in those provinces of the New World
where, by the establishment of the Europeans,
more regular provision has been made for the
subsistence of its inhabitants, and they are re-
tfraincd from laying violent hands on their
children, the Americans are so far from being
eminent for any superior perfection in their
form, that one should rather fufpecl some pe-

° Gumilla Hilt. ii. 234. Techo's Hill. of Paraguay,
&c. Churchill's Collea. vi. 108.

P Creuxii Hist. Canad. p. 57;

culiar

Boo. IV. culiar imbecillitv in the race, from the extra-

' ordinary number of individuals who are de-

formed, dwarfih, mutilared, blind, or deaf'

t-r;-ri;, How feeble soever the cnnfsitution of the
o. th'ir 2F-
.p.... Americans may be, it is remarkable, that

there is lets variety in the human form through-
out the New World, than in the ancient con-
tinent. When Columbus and the other dif-
coverers first visited the different countries of
America which lie within the torrid zone, they
naturally expected to find people of the fame
complexion with those in the corresponding
regions of the other hemisphere. To their
amazement, however, they discovered that
America contained no negroes'; and the cause
of this singular appearance became as much the
objet of curiofitr, as the sac& itfilf was of
wonder. In what part or membrane of the
body that humour resides which tinges the
cormplexion of the negro with a deep black, it
is the bufinels of anatomists to inquire and
describe. The powerful operation of heat ap-
pears manifestly to be the cause which pro-
duces this striking variety in the human Ipe-
c:es. All Europe, aliofi the whole of Asia,
and the temperate parts of Africa, are occu-
c Vc'-age de U'Li a, i. :2. : P. I r, dec. p. 7.

'icd

pied by men of a fair complexion. All the BooK IV.
torrid zone in Africa, some of the warmer
regions adjacent to it, and a few countries in
Asia, are filled with people of a deep black
colour. If we trace the nations of our conti-
nent, making our progress from cold and tem-
perate countries towards those parts which are
exposed to the influence of vehement and un-
remitting heat, we shall find, that the extreme
whiteness of their skin soon begins to diminifl;
that its colour deepens gradually as we ad-
vance; and after passing through all the fuc-
cefnive gradations of shade, terminates in an
uniform unvarying black. But in America,
where the agency of heat is checked and
abated by various causes, which I have already
explained, the climate seems to be destitute of
that force which produces filch wonderful effets
on the human frame. The colour of the na-
tives of the torrid zone, in America, is hardly
of a deeper hue than that of the people in the
more temperate parts of their continent. Ac-
curate oblervers, who had an opportunity of
viewing the Americans in very different cli-
mates, and in countries far removed fiom each
other, have been struck with the amazing fimi-
larity of their figure and atpet '.

5 See NOTE XIX.

BuT

BocK n'. BuT though the hand of Nature has deviated

~" Go little from one standard in fafnioning the

human form in America, the creation of fancy
hath been various and extravagant. The fame
fables that were current in the ancient conti-
nent, have been revived with respect to the
New World, and America too has been peopled
with human beings of monstrous and fantastic
appearance. The inhabitants of certain pro-
vinces were described to be pigmies of three
feet high; those of others to be giants of an
enormous size. Some travellers published ac-
counts of people with only one eye, others
pretended to have discovered men without
heads, whose eves and mouths were planted in
their breasts. The variety of Nature in her
productions is, indeed, so great, that it is pre-
iumptuous to set bounds to her fertility, and
to reject indiscriminately every relation that
does not perfe&ly accord with our own limited
observation and experience. But the other ex-
treme, of yielding a hasty assent, on the slightest
evidence, to whatever has the appearance of
being strange and marvellous, is no less unbe-
coming a philosophical inquirer, as, in every
period, men are more apt to be betrayed into
error, by their weakness in believing too
much, than by their arrogance in believing
too little. In proportion as science extends,

and

and nature is examined with a discerning eye, BOOK IV.
the wonders which amused ages of ignorance "
disappear. The tales of credulous travellers
concerning America are forgotten; the mon-
fters which they describe have been searched
for in vain; and those provinces where they
pretend to have found inhabitants of singular
forms, are now known to be possessed by peo-
ple no wife different from the other Ame-
ricans'.

THtoucGI those relations may, without dif-

cufflon, be rejected as fabulous, there are other
accounts of varieties in the human species in
some parts of the New World, which reft upon
better evidence, and merit more attentive exa-
mination. This variety has been particularly
observed in three different districts. The sirs:
of there is situated in the isthmus of Darien,
near the centre of America. Lionel Wafer, a
traveller pofeffed of more curiosity and intel-
ligence than we Ihould have expected to find
in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there
a small, but singular race of men. They are
of low feature, according to his description, of
a feeble make, incapable of enduring fatigue.
Their colour is a dead milk white; not refem-

See NOTE XX.

bling

Boo. I. bling that of fair people among Europeans;

' but without any tincture of a blush or sanguine

complexion. Their skin is covered with a fine
hairv down of a chalky white, the hair of their
heads, their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are of
the fame hue. Their eyes are of a singular
form, and so weak, that they can hardly bear
the light of the fun; but they fee clearly by
moon-light, and are most active and gay in
the night'. No race similar to this has been
discovered in any other part of America.
Cores, indeed, found Ibme persons exactly
resembling the white people of Darien, among
the rare and monstrous animals which Monte-
zuma had collected'. But as the power of
the Mexican empire extended to the provinces
bordering on the isthmus of Darien, they were
probably brought from thence. Singular as
the appearance of those people may be, they
cannot be confidered as constituting a distinct
species. Among the negroes of Africa, as well
as the natives of the Indian islands, nature
sometimes produces a finail number of indivi-
duals, with all the characteristic features and
qualities of the white people of Darien. The
former are called ,:bin5s bv the Portugueie,

- Wafer Dclcri.:. of ;;'h. Ia-. D ier. imi. p. 346.

Co-:e, a. Ramus. iii. v. 21i, L.

the

the latter lKackcrlakes by the Dutch. In Darien BooKIV.
the p:! cnts of those Y/hites are of the fame "'"~
coloui' with the other natives of the country;
and this observation applies equally to the
anomalous progeny of the negroes and Indians.
The lunae mother who produces some children
of a colour that does not belong to the race,
brings forth the reft of the complexion pecu-
liar to her country x. One conclusion may
then be formed with respect to the people de-
fcribed by Wafer, the Albinos and the Kacker-
lakcs; they are a degenerated breed, not a
separate class of men; and from rome disease
or deftet of their parents, the peculiar colour
and debility which mark their degradation are
tranlinitted to them. As a decisive proof of
this, it has been observed, that neither the
white people of Darien, nor the Albinos of
Africa, propagate their race: their children
are of the colour and temperament peculiar to
the natives of their refpectivc countries y.

THE fccond diftric that is occupied by in-

ha.bitants difFering in appearance from the other
people of America, is situated in a high north-
crn latitude, extending from the coast of

Malrgr:a-. Hill. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.

Y Wafer, p. 348. Demanet. Hill. de l'Afrique, ii.
:4. Rcchcrch. Philof. fur Ics Amer. ii. I, &c.

L.abrador

Boor KV. Labrador towards the pole, as far as the

country is habitable. The people scattered
over those dreary regions, are known to the
Europeans by the name of Efqimaux. They
themselves, with that idea of their own fupe-
riority, which consoles the rudest and most
wretched nations, aifu;me the name of Keralit
or Men. They are of a middle size and robust,
with heads of a disproportioned bulk, and feet
as remarkably small. Their complexion,
though swarthy, by being continually exposed
to the rigour of a cold climate, inclines to the
European white, rather than to the copper
colour of America, and the men have beards
which are fometiimes bushy and long'. From
these marks of distinction, as well as from one
still less equivocal, the affinity of their lan-
gulage to that of the Greenlanders, which I
have already mentioned, we may conclude,
with some degree of confidence, that the Es-
quimaux are a race different from the reft of
the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty con-

cerning. the inhabitants of the third diftrit,

z Ellis Vov. to Hudf. B.v, p. 11. 139. De Ia Po-

therie, tcen. i. p. \-. ie ' Journ.. of a Vov. to Chur-
ch:ii River. I';.'. Tranf. ,o'.. xf. 1i9.

fitu.:ted

situated at the southern extremity of America. BOOKIV.
Thele are the famous Patagonians, who, dur-
ing two centuries and a half, have afforded a
iubject of controversy to the learned, and an
objec of wonder to the vulgar. They are
supposed to be one of the wandering tribes,
which occupy that vast, but least known region
of America, which extends from the river De
la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their
proper station is in that part of the interior
country, which lies on the banks of the river
Negro; but in the hunting season they often
roam as far as the straits which separate Tierra
del Fuego from the main-land. The first ac-
counts of this people were brought to Europe
by the companions of Magellan', who de-
fcribed them as a gigantic race, above eight
feet high, and of itrength in proportion to
their enormous size. Among several tribes of
animals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable,
may be oblerved. Some large breeds of horses
and dogs exceed the more diminutive races in
stature and strength, as far as the Patagonian
is supposed to rife above the usual standard
of the human body. But animals attain the
highest perfection of their species, only in mild
climates, or where they find the most nutritive

= Falkner's Defcriptioi of Patagonia, p. 0oz.
VOL. II. G food

BooK 'I. food in greatest abundance. It is not then in

the uncultivated waste of the Magellanic re-
gions, and among a tribe of improvident fa-
vages, that we should expet to find man,
possessing the highest honours of his race, and
distinguished by a superiority offize and vigour,
far beyond what he has reached in any other
part of the earth. The most explicit and un-
exceptionable evidence is requisite, in order to
establish a fact, repugnant to those general
principles and laws, which seem to affe& the
human frame in every other instance, and to
decide with refpe& to its nature and qualities.
Such evidence has not hitherto been produced.
Though several persons, to whose testimony
great respect is due, have visited this part of
America since the time of Magellan, and have
had interviews with the natives though some
have affirmed, that such as they saw were of
gigantic fature, and others have formed the
fame conclusion from meaforing their footsteps,
or from viewing the fkelerons of their dead;
vet their accounts vary from each other in so
many essential points, and are mingled with so
many circumstances manifestly false or fabu-
lous, as detract much from their credit. On
the other hand, tome navigators, and those
among the most eminent of their order for
di:;ernment and accuracy, have afierted that

~~~~~4 ~the

the natives of Patagonia, with whom they had BOOK IV.
intercourse, though stout and well-made, are
not of such extraordinary size as to be diftin-
guifhed from the reft of the human species b.
The existence of this gigantic race of men
seems, then, to be one of those points in
natural history, with refpec to which a cautious
inquirer will hesitate, and will chufe to suspend
his assent until more complete evidence lhall
decide, whether he ought to admit a fad,
seemingly inconsistent with what reason and
experience have discovered concerning the
structure and condition of man, in all the
various Situations in which he has been ob-
served.

IN order to form a complete idea with re- Thh;r fte

fpet to the constitution of the inhabitants of
this and the other hemisphere, we should
attend not only to the make and vigour of
their bodies, but confider what degree of health
they enjoy, and to what period of.longevity
they usually arrive. In the simplicity of the
savage itate, when man is not oppressed with
labour, or enervated by luxury, or disquieted
with care, we ate apt to imagine that his life
will flow on almost untroubled by disease or

b See NOTE XXI.

G 2 suffering,

Boo IV. suffering, until his days be terminated, in ex-

treme old age, by the gradual decays of nature.
We find, accordingly, among the Americansy
as well as among other rude people, persons,
whose decrepit and shrivelled form seems to
indicate an extraordinary length of life. But
as most of them are unacquainted with the art
of numbering, and all of them as forgetful of
what is past, as they are improvident for what
is to come, it is impossible to ascertain their
age, with any degree of precision b. It is evi-
dent, that the period of their longevity mufl
vary considerably, according to the diversity
of climates, and their different modes of sub-
fiftence. They seem, however, to be every
where exempt from many of the difrempers
which afflict polished nations. None of the
maladies, which are the immediate offspring
of luxury, ever visited them; and they have
no names in their languages by which to
dilfinguifh this numerous train of adventi-
tious evils.
.s.a. Bu-, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to susser; and his diseases,
in the savage state, though fewer in number,

L C:o Nodc. Ameic. 323. Bancroft Nat. Hifl. of
Guir.n, 33+.

are,

are, like those of the animals whom he nearly BooK IV.
resembles in his mode of life, more violent,
and more fatal. If luxury engenders and
nourifes distempers of one species, the rigour
and distresses of savage life bring on those of
another. As men, in this itate, are wonder-
fully improvident, and their means of subsist-
ence precarious, they often pass from extreme
want to exuberant plenty, according to the
viciflitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the
variety in the producions of the seasons. Their
inconliderate gluttony in the one situation, and
their severe abitinence in the other, are equally
pernicious. For, though the human conftitu-
tion may be accustomed by habit, like that of
animals of prey, to tolerate long famine, and
then to gorge voraciously, it is not a little
assetcd by such sudden and violent transitions.
'The strength and vigour of savages are, at
some Ifafons, impaired by what they ful'cr
from scarcity of food; at others, they are
afflieted with disorders arising from indigestion
and a superfluity of gross aliment. Thcl'e are
so common, that they may be confidered as
the unavoidable consequence of their mode of
subsisting, and cut off considerable numbers in
the prime of life. They are likewile extremely
fubjeEt to consumptions, to pleuretic, asthmatic,

G 3 and

BooK;IV. and paralytic difordersc, brought on by the
--' immoderate hardfliips and fatigue which they

endure in hunting and in war; or owing to
the inclemency of the seasons to which they
are continually exposed. In the savage state,
hardlhips and fatigue violently assault the con-
ftitution. In polished Societies, intemperance
undermines it. It is not easy to determine
which of them operates with most fatal effect,
or tends most to abridge human life. The
influence of the former is certainly most exten-
five. The pernicious consequences of luxury
reach only a few members in any community,
the distresses of savage life are felt by all. As
far as I can judge, after very minute inquiry,
the general period of human life is shorter
among savages, than in well-regulated and in-
duftrious societies.

OSE dreadful malady, the severest scourge,

with which, in this life, offended Heaven
chastens the indulgence of criminal desire,
seems to have been peculiar to the Americans.
By communicating it to their conquerors, they
have not only amply avenged their own wrongs,
but by adding this calamity to those which

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. De la
Potherie. ii. 37.

formerly

formerly embittered human life, they have, BooKIV.
perhaps, more than counterbalanced all the
benefits which Europe has derived from the
discovery of the New World. This distemper,
from the country in which it first raged, or
from the people by whom it was supposed to
have been spread over Europe, has been some-
times called the Neapolitan, and sometimes
the French disease. At its first appearance,
the infection was so malignant, its symptoms
so violent, its operation so rapid and fatal, as
to baffle all the efforts of medical skill. Afto-
nifhment and terror accompanied this unknown
affliction in its progress, and men began to
dread the extinction of the human race by such
a cruel visitation. Experience, and the inge-
nuity of physicians, gradually discovered reme-
dies of such virtue as to cure or mitigate the
evil. During the course of two centuries and
a half, its virulence seems to have abated con-
fiderably. At length, in the fame manner
with the leprosy, which raged in Europe for
fomc centuries, it may waste its force and dif-
appear; and in some happier age, this western
infection, like that from the East, may be
known only by description'.

c See NOTE XXIL

G 4 II AFTEI,

BoorIV. II. AFTER confidering what appears to be
Pk- -rnd peculiar in the bodily constitution of the Ame-
n':. °, ricans, our attention is naturally turned to-

wards the powers and qualities of their minds.
As the individual advances from the ignorance
and imbecillity of the infant state, to vigour
and maturity of underitanding, something
similar to this may be observed in the progress
of the species. With refpete to it, too, there
is a perid of infancy, during which several
powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all
are feeble and defective in their operation.
In the early ages of society, while the condi-
tion of man is simple and rude, his reason is
but little exercised, and his desires move within
a very rarrow sphere. Hence arise two re-
rnarkabie characteriilics of the human mind,
in this state. Its intellectual powers are ex-
tremely l;r.iied; its emotions and efforts are
few and languid. Both these diltin&tios are
conipicuous among the rudest and most unim-
proved of the American tribes, and confLitute
a striking part of their description.

I:-."e5al \' HAT, among polished nations, is called
crl=.mi:e. speculative realoning or research, is altogether

unknown in the rude state of society, and
never becomes the occupation or amusement
of the human faculties, until man be so far

improved

improved as to have secured, with certainty, BooKIV.
the means of subsistence, as well as the posses- --
sion of leisure and tranquillity. The thoughts
and attention of a savage are confined within
the finall circle of objecs, immediately con-
ducive to his preservation or enjoyment. Every
thing beyond that, escapes his observation, or
is perfctly indifferent to him. Like a mere
animal, what is before his eyes interests and
affects him; what is out of fight, or at a
dillance, makes no impression '. There are
several people in America whose limited under-
standings seem not to be capable of forming an
arrangement for futurity; neither their folici-
tude nor their foresight extend so far. They
follow blindly the impulse of the appetite
which they feel, but are entirely regardless of
diltant consequences, and even of those re-
moved in the leaf degree from immediate
apprehension. While they highly prize such
things as serve present use, or minister to pre-
li-nt enjoyment, they set no value upon those
which are not the object of some immediate
want'. When, on the approach of the even-
ing, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to go to

Ulloa Noticias Americ. 222.

* Venegas Hill. of Calif. i. 66. Supp. Church. Coll.

v. 693. Borde Defrc. des Caraibes, p. 16. Ellis Voy.
194.

reft,

BooIlV. reft, ro consideration will tempt him to fell

his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he
is sallying out to the business or pastime of the
day, he will part with it for the slightest toy
that catches his fancy'. At the close of winter,
while the impreflion of what he has suffered
from the rigour of the climate is fresh in the
mind of the North American, he sets himself
with vigour to prepare materials for erecting a
comiortable hut to protect himn against the
inclemency of the Iucceeding season but as
soon as the weather becomes mild, he forgets
what is past, abandons his work, and never
thinks of it more, until the return of cold
compels him, when too late, to resume it".

IF in concerns the molt interesting, and

seemingly the most simple, the reason of man,
while rude and destitute of culture, differs so
little from the thoughtless levity of children,
or the improvident inftina of animals, its
exertions in other directions cannot be very
considerable. The objeEts towards which rea-
son turns, and the disquisitions in which it en-
gages, must depend upon the state in which
min is placed, and are fuggelted by his ne-

: Laba: Voyages, ii. 114, il5. Tertre, ii. 385.
- Adair'e HUi. of Amer. Indians, 417.

ceftities

ceffities and desires. Disquisitions, which ap- BooKV.
pear the most necessary and important to men
in one state of society, never occur to those in
another. Among civilized nations, arithmetic,
or the art of numbering, is deemed an essential
and elementary science, and in our continent,
the invention and use of it reaches back to a
period io remote as is beyond the knowledge of
history. But among savages, who have no
property to estimate, no hoarded treasures to
count, no variety of objets or multiplicity of
ideas to enumerate, arithmetic is a superfluous
and ufclefs art. Accordingly, among tome
tribes in America it seems to be quite unknown.
There are many who cannot reckon farther than
three; and have no denomination to distinguish
any number above it". Several can proceed
as far as ten, others to twenty. When they
would convey an idea of any number beyond
thlelf, they point to the hair of their head, in-
timating that it is equal to them, or with won-
der declare it to be so great that it cannot be
rclckoncd ). Not only the Americans, but all
nations, while extremely rude, seem to be

Condam. p. 67. Stadius ap. de Bry, ix. 128.
I.rv. ;bid. zSi. Bict. 362. Lettr. Edif. 23. 314.

Dumont Louis. i. 187. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c.
-'. Iict. 3c,6. Borde, 6.

unacquainted

Boor I. unacquainted with the art of computation '

As soon, however, as they acquire such ac-
quaintance or connetion with a variety of ob-
jects, that there is frequent occalion to combine
or divide them, their knowledge of numbers
increaies, so that the fate of this art among
any people may be confidered as one standard,
by which to effimate the degree of their im-
provement. The Iroquois, in North America,
as they are much more civilized than the rude
inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay, or Guiana,
have likewise made greater advances in this
respect; though even their arithmetic does not
extend beyond a thousand, as in their petty
tranfact:ons they have no occasion for any
hi gher numb.er'. The Cherokee, a lcs -

con-

liderablc nation on the fame continent, can
reck ononly as far as a hundred, and to that
exten: have nan:'e for the leveral numbers; the
finalcr tribes in their neighbourhood can rile
no higher than ten'.

- Th- s the care with the Greenlanders, Crantz. i.
:-;. ard uwith KmchaL-:a_;aie, M. l'AbbL C'happ¢, iii.

Chariev. Nou:'. :Ta-r.c, ii. Ic:.

* Ac-r. H2 ..'.: . .i

s e ir.

In .,a.., 77. Sec NOTE
)X\-Hri

IN other respects, the exercise of the under- BooKIV.

standing among rude nations is fDill more li- NobiraC '
mited. The first ideas of every human being ides.
must be such as he receives by the senses. But,
in the mind of man, while in the savage ffate,
there ceem to be hardly any ideas but what
enter by this avenue. The objecs around him
are prefcnted to his eye. Such as may be sub-
fervicnt to his use, or can gratify any of his ap-
petites, attract his notice; he views the reft
without curiosity or attention. Satisfied with
confidering them under that simple mode, in
which they appear to him, as separate and de-
tached, he neither combines them so as to form
general clafes, nor contemplates their qualities
apart from the fubjeEt in which they inhere,
nor beflows a thought upon the operations of
his own mind concerning them. Thus, he is
unacquainted with all the ideas which have
been denominated universal, or abflra., or of
ref.ea7ion. The range of his understanding
must, of course, be very confined, and his
reasoning powers be employed merely on what
is sensible. This is so remarkably the cafe
with the ruder nations of America, that their
languages (as we shall afterwards find) have not
a word to express any thing but what is ma-
terial or corporeal. Time, space, substance, and
a thousand other terms which represent abfiract

5 and

BooKIV. and universal ideas, are altogether unknown to

them '. A naked savage, cowering near the
fire in his miserable cabbin, or stretched under
a few branches which afford him a temporary
shelter, has as little inclination as capacity for
useless speculation. His thoughts extend not
beyond what relates to animal life; and when
they are not directed towards some of its con-
cerns, his mind is totally inactive. In fitua-
tions where no extraordinary effort either of in-
genuity or labour is requisite, in order to satisfy
the simple demands of nature, the powers of
the mind are so seldom routed to any exertion,
that the rational faculties continue almost dor-
mant and unexercifed. The numerous tribes
scattered over the rich plains of South-America,
the inhabitants of some of the islands, and of
several fertile regions on the continent, come
under this description. Their vacant coun-
tenance, their staring unexpressive eye, their
liicief inattention, and total ignorance of sub-
jec-, v.hich seem to be the first which should
occupy the thoughts of rational beings, made
such i;npre;ion upon the Spaniards, when they
Frit beheld thuoe rude people, that they con-
iidered them as animals of an inferior order,
a:;d co'.ild not believe that they belonged to the

c Conr.d n. p. 54.

hulman

human speciesd. It required the authority of a BooK IV.
papal bull to counteract this opinion, and to
convince them that the Americans were capable
of the funtions, and intitled to the privileges
of humanity . Since that time, persons more
enlightened and impartial than the discoverers
or conquerors of America, have had an oppor-
tunity of contemplating the most savage of its
inhabitants, and they have been aftoniflied and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in
this condition, approaches to the brute creation.
But in feverer climates, where fubliftence can-
not be procured with the fame ease, where men
nmutt unite more closely, and at with greater
concert, neceSsity calls forth their talents, and
sharpens their invention, so that the intelligent
powers are more exercised and improved. The
North-Americans and natives of Chili, who in-
habit the temperate regions in the two great
diftrits of America, are people of cultivated
and enlarged understandings, when viewed in
comparison with some of those sCated in the
islands, or on the banks of the Maragnon and
Orinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their system of policy, as well as of war, more
complex, their arts more numerous. But, even

d llerrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. I5.
Torquem. Mon. Ind. iii. 198.

among

BoorIV. among them, the intellectual powers are ex-

' tremelv limited in their operations, and unless

when turned directly to those objects which in-
terest a savage, are held in no estimation. Both
the North-Americans and Chilefe, when not
engaged in some of the funtions belonging to
a warrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any
other subject worthy of their attention, or ca-
pable of occupying their minds'. If even among
them, reason is oi much circumscribed in its
exertions, and never arrives, in its highest at-
tainments, at the knowledge of those general
principles and maxims, which serve as the foun-
dation of science, we may conclude, that the
intellectual powers of man in the savage fRate
are destitute of their proper objeft, and cannot
acquire any considerable degree of vigour and
enlargement.

Aizref- FROxM the fame causes, the active efforts of
ton: of th-
mi-.d ft. the mind are few, and, on most occasions,
Lne Ianguid.

languid. If we examine into the motives
which rouze men to activity in civilized life,
and prompt them to persevere in fatiguing
exertions of their ingenuity or strength, we
hall find that they arise chiefly from acquired

' Lafia u, ii. z.

wants

wants and appetites. These are numerous and Book IV.
importunate, they keep the mind in perpetual
agitation, and, in order to gratify them, in-
vention must be always on the stretch, and
industry must be inceflantly employed. But
the desires of simple nature are few, ard where
a favourable climate yields almost spontaneously
what fufices them, they scarcely stir the foul,
or excite any violent emotion. Hence the
people of several tribes in America waste their
life in a listless indolence. To be free from
occupation, seems to be all the enjoyment to-
wards which they aspire. They will continue
whole days stretched out in their hammocs, or
feated on the earth, in perfect idleness, without
changing their posture, or railing their eyes
from the ground, or uttering a single word .

SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither Improvi.

the hope of future good, nor the apprehension ,t
of future evil, can surmount it. They appear
equally indifferent to both, discovering little
iolicituce, and taking no precautions to avoid
the one, or to secure the other. The cravings
of hunger may rouse them; but as they de-
vour, with little diftintion, whatever will ap-
peafc its inftinftive demands, the exertions

g Bouguer Voy. au Perou, oz,. Borde, 15.
Vi L. II. H which

'4

Bos IV. which there occasion are of short duration.

Destitute of ardour, as well as variety of desire,
they feel not the force of those powerful springs
which give vigour to the movements of the
mind, and urge the patient hand of industry
to perievere in its efforts. Man, in some
parts of America, appears in a form so rude,
that we can discover no effects of his acivity,
and the principle of understanding which
should direct it, seems hardly to be unfolded.
Like the other animals, he has no fixed refi-
dence; he has erected no habitation to shelter
him from the inclemency of the weather; he
has taken no meafures/for securing a certain
subsistence; he neither sows nor reaps; but
roams about as led in search of the plants and
fruits which the earth brings forth in fuccef-
sion; and in quest of the game which he kills
in the forests, or of the fish which he catches
in the rivers.

so. , ... THiis description, however, applies only to
x:I'ai"i; rome tribes. Man cannot continue long in

.. this state of feeble and uninformed infancy.

He was made for industry and action, and the
powers of his nature, as well as the necessity
of his condition, urge him to fulfil his destiny.
Accordin;lv, among most of the American
nati:ns, cpeci;lly those feated in rigorous

climates,

climates, some efforts are employed, and tome BOOK IV.
previous precautions are taken, for securing
fubfiftenlce. The career of regular induitry is
begun, and the laborious arm has made the
first eflays of its power. Still, however, the
improvident and llothful genius of the savage
state predominates. Even among those more
improved tribes, labour is deemed ignominious
and degrading. It is only to work of a certain
kind that a man will deign to put his hand.
The greater part is devolved entirely upon the
women. One half of the community remains
inactive, while the other is oppressed with the
multitude and variety of its occupations. Thus
their industry is partial, and the foresight which
regulates it, is no less limited. A remarkable
infrance of this occurs in the chief arrangement
with respect to their manner of living. They
depend for their fubfiflence, during one part
of the year, on fishing; during another, on
hunting; during a third, on the produce of
their agriculture. Though experience has
taught them to foresee the return of those va-
rious seasons, and to make fbme provision for
the respective exigencies of each, they either
want sagacity to proportion this provision to
their consumption, or are fb incapable of any
command over their appetites, that, from. their
inconsiderate waste, they often feel the calami-

H 2 ties

BooK IV. ties of famine as severely as the rudest of the

savage tribes. What they susser one year does
not augment their industry, or render them
more provident to prevent similar diftrelfes h
This inconsiderate thoughtlessness about futu-
rity, the effect of ignorance and the cause of
sloth, accompanies and characterizes man in
every stage of savage life '; and by a capricious
singularity in his operations, he is then least so-
licitous about supplying his wants, when the
means of satisfying them are most precarious,
and procured with the greatest difficulty.

Their ro- III. AFTER viewing the bodily constitution
clz fte. c.

of the Americans, and contemplating the
powers of their minds, we are led, in the na-
tural order of inquiry, to confider them as
united together in focietv. Hitherto our re-
searches have been confined to the operations
of understanding respecting themselves, as in-
dividuals, now they will extend to the degree
of their sensibility and afiection towards their
species.

Chirlev. N. Fr. ii. ;3S. Letr. Edif. . 298.

De:t-ip:. of N. France, Oiborn's Co!lecl ii. So. De la
Poherie, i;. 63.

B-.crof;'i Na:. Hi',. of Guiana. 326. 333.
' ce NOTE. XXIV.

THE

THE domefiic itate is the first and most BooK IV.

simple form of human aflociation. The union Donmict
of the sexes, among different animals, is of Unio"
longer or shorter duration in proportion to the
ease or difficulty of rearing their offspring.
Among those tribes where the season of infancy
is short, and the young soon acquire vigour or
agility, no permanent union is formed. Na-
ture commits the care of training up the
offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
ness, without any other assistance, is equal to
the task. But where the slate of infancy is
long and helpless, and the joint assiduity of
both parents is requisite in tending their feeble
progeny, there a more intimate connecion
takes place, and continues until the purpose of
nature be accomplifled, and the new race grow
up to full maturity. As the infancy of man is
more feeble and helpless than that of any other
animal, and he is dependent, during a much
longer period, on the care and foresight of his
parents, the union between husband and wife
came early to be confidered, not only as a so-
lemn, but as a permanent contract. A ge-
ncral fate of promiscuous intercourse between
tie il'xe, never existed but in the imagination
of poets. In the infancy of iociety, when men,
deltitutt of arts and industry, lead a hard pre-
c:uiotus life, the rearing of their progeny de-

H 3 mands

BoorIV. mands the attention and efforts of both parents;

and if their union had not been formed and
continued with this view, the race could not
have been preserved. Accordingly, in Ameri-
ca, even among the rudest tribes, a regular
union between husband and wife was universal,
and the rights of marriage were understood and
recognized. In thole dillricts where subsistence
was scanty, and the difficulty of maintaining a.
familv was great, the man confined himself to
or.e nxife. In warmer and more fertile provin-
ces, the facility of procuring food concurred
wirh the inPuence of climate, in inducing the
inhabitants to increase the number of their
wives . In some countries the marriage union
fubfi led during life; in others, the impatience
of the Anmricarns under restraint of any species,
together with their natural levity and caprice,
prompted them to dissolve it on very flight pre-
texts, and often without assigning any cause .
c-,;-:-, BuT in whatever light the Americans con-

.. fidered the obligation of this contract, either as

Lettr. Edif. 2;. 313. Lafitau Moeurs, i. 54 Lery

ap. de Br), iii. Zj. Journal de Grillet er Bechamel, p.
sj.

- Laf;itau, i. je. Jcutel Jnurn. Hiftor. 345. Lozano

Defcr. dcl Gran Chaco, 70. Hennepin Moeurs des Sau-
vages, p. 33. 3.'

perpetual,

perpetual, or only as temporary, the condition BooK IV.
of women was equally humiliating and mise-
rable. Whether man has been improved by the
progress of arts and civilization in society, is a
queltion, which, in the wantonness of difputa-
tion, has been agitated among philosophers.
That women are indebted to the refinements
of polilhed manners for a happy change in their
state, is a point which can admit of no doubt.
To despise and to degrade the female sex, is
the characteriitic of the savage itate in every
part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling
in ftrcngth and in courage, the chief marks
of pre-eminence among rude people, treats
woman, as an inferior, with disdain. The
Americans, perhaps from that coldness and in-
i'nfibility which has been confidered as peculiar
to their constitution, add neglect and harshness
to contempt. The most intelligent travellers
have been ifruck with this inattention of the
Americans to their women. It is not, as I
have already observed, by a studied display of
tenLlcrnefs and attachment, that the American
c::dcavours to gain the heart of the woman
whom he wishes to marry. Marriage itself,
instead of being an union of affection and in-
terests between equals, becomes, among them,
the unnatural conjunction of a master with his
fllve. It is the observation of an author, whose
(p):nions are deservedly of great weight, that

H 4 wherever

Boo IV. wherever wives are purchased, their condition

is extremely depressed . They become the
property and the slaves of those who buy them.
In whatever part of the globe this custom pre-
vails, the observation holds. In countries
where refinement has made some progress, wo-
men when purchased are excluded from society,
shut up in sequestered apartments, and kept
under the vigilant guard of their masters. In
ruder nations, they are degraded to the meanest
functions. Among many people of America
the marriage-contraa is properly a purchase.
The man buys his wife of her parents. Though
unacquainted with the use of money, or with
luch conmmercial transactions as take place in
more in, roved society, he knows how to give
an equivalent for any object which he desires to
poffc!s. In fomne places the suitor devotes his
!.irice for a certain time to the parents of the

:;ii whom he courts; in others, he hunts for
the:- occa:ionallv, or affifls in cultivating their
i-.is, a:_ s".-:-ing their canoes; in others, he
ofers prefenrs of such things as are deemed moit
valuable on accoint of their usefulness or rarity'.
In return for the!c, he receives his wife; and
.:is c':-::.:~ance, added to the low estimation

-:cc- lcf Hi.. of Man, i. 1S4.

t I -.r: oe-rs, .k-c. i. -6 &, &c. Char!ev. iii. 2S;,
c-. tirrera, cec. 4. lib. ix . c . D crnnt. ii. -I6.

of

of women among savages, leads him to con- BooK IV.
fider her as a female servant whom he has ac-
quired, and whom he has a title to treat as an
inferior. In all unpolifhed nations, it is true,
the funEtions in domestic ceconomy, which fall
naturally to the share of women, are so many,
that they are fubjeaed to hard labour, and mufft
bear more than their full portion of the com-
mon burden. But in America their condition
is bs peculiarly grievous, and their depression
so complete, that servitude is a name too mild
to delcribe their wretched slate. A wife,
among most tribes, is no better than a beast of
burden, deffined to every office of labour and
fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in
sloth, or spend it in amusement, the women
are condemned to incessant toil. Tasks are
impoied upon them without pity, and services
are received without complacence or gratitude P.
Every circumstance reminds women of this
mortifying inferiority. They must approach
their lords with reverence; they must regard
them as more exalted beings, and are not per-
miitted to eat in their presence q. There are

,' Tcrirc, ii. 3Sz. Borde Relat. des Moeurs des Ca-
r ibs, p. 21. Bie. 357. Condamine, p. Io. Fermin.

Guumilla, i. 153. Barrere, 164. Labat. Voy. ii.
7S. Chanvalon, 51. Tcrtre, ii. 30o.

diftrios

Boov IV. districts in America where this dominion is so

C~"^- grievous, and so fenibly felt, that some women,

in a wild emotion of maternal tendernefi, have
destroyed their female children in their infancy,
in order to deliver them from that intolerable
bondage to which they knew they were doomedr.
Thus the first institution of social life is per-
verted. That state of domeflic union towards
which nature leads the human species, in order
to soften the heart to gentleness and humanity,
is rendered so unequal, as to eftablilh a cruel
distinction between the Iexes, which forms the
one to be harsh and unfeeling, and humbles
the other to fcrvility and subjection.

Trei- o- IT is o.ing, perhaps, in some measure, to
' .':: this slate of depression, that women in rude na-

tions are far from being prolific . The vigour
of their constitution is exhausted by excefive
fatigue, and the wants and dilreffes of savage
life are so numerous, as to force them to take
various precautions in order to prevent too rapid
an increase of their progeny. Among wan-
dering tribes, or such as depend chiefly upon
hunting for subsistence, the mother cannot at-
tempt to rear a second child, until the firt has

C Gur..ila, ii. :3'. :3. Herrcr., dec. lib. be. c. 4.
Lafr.u, i .?. Char.evoix, iii. 304.

attained

attained such a degree of vigour as to be in some BooK IV.
mealure independent of her care. · From this
motive, it is the universal pracice of the
American women to suckle their children during
several years'; and as they seldom marry early,
the period of their fertility is over, before they
can finish the long but necessary attendance
upon two or three fucceflive children . Among
obme of the least polished tribes, whose industry
and foresight do not extend so far as to make
any regular provision for their own subsistence,
it is a maxim not to burden themselves with
rearing more than two children X; and no such
numerous families, as are frequent in civilised
societics, are to be found among men in the
savage state Y. When twins are born, one of
them commonly is abandoned, because the
mother is not equal to the talk of educating
both . When a mother dies while she is
nursing a child, all hope of preserving its life
fails, and it is buried together with her in the

t Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4.
u Charlev. iii. 303. Dumont Mem. fur Louifiane, ii.

270. Denys Hill. Natur. de l'Amerique, &c. ii. 365.
Charlev. Hilt. de Parag. ii. 4zz.

x Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Collet.
vi. ioS. Lett. Edif. 24. 2oo. LozanoDefcr. 92.

y Maccleur's Journal, 63.
' Lett. Edif. x. zoo. See NOTE XXV.

fame

BooKIV. fame grave'. As the parents are frequently
-' exposed to 'want by their own improvident in-

dolence, the difficulty offuftaining their children
becomes so great, that it is not uncommon to
abandon or destroy them '. Thus their expe-
rience of the difficulty of training up an infant
to maturity, amidst the hardships of savage life,
often tifles the voice of nature among the Ame-
ricans, and suppresses the strong emotions of
parental tenderness.

r --. BUT, though necessity compels the inhabit-
.-. ants of America thus to set bounds to the

increase of their families, they are not deficient
in affection and attachment to their offspring.
They feel the power of this instinct in its full
force, and as long as their progeny continue
feeble and helpless, no people exceed them in
tendsenefs and care'. But in rude nations,
the dependence of children upon their parents
is of fhorrer continuance than in polished so-
cieties. WXhen men must be trained to the
various fu.nctions of civil life by previous dif-
cipline and education, when the knowledge of

; Charlev. iii. 36S. Lett. Edif. x. zoo. P. Melch.

H'-nandez Mlemor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, Colled. Orig.
P:?. i.

b 'Veneg;s Uit. of Californ. i. S:.
Gum :-, i. :i. B:ct. 390.

6 abftrufil

abstruse sciences must be taught, and dexterity BooK IV.
in intricate arts must be acquired, before a
young man is prepared to begin his career of
action, the attentive feelings of a parent are
not confined to the years of infancy, but ex-
tend to what is more remote, the establish-
ment of his child in the world. Even then,
his solicitude does not terminate. His pro-
teEtion may till be requisite, and his wisdom
and experience still prove useful guides. Thus
a permanent connecion is formed; parental
tenderness is exercised, and filial refpe&t re-
turned, throughout the whole course of life.
But in the simplicity of the savage state, the
affection of parents, like the intin&'ive fond-
ness of animals, ceases almost entirely as soon
as their offspring attain maturity. Little in-
ftruction fits them for that mode of life to
which they are destined. The parents, as if
their duty were accomplilhed, when they have
conduced their children through the helpless
years of infancy, leave them afterwards at en-
tire liberty. They seldom advise or admonilh,
they never chide or chastise them. They susser
them to be absolute masters of their own
actions . In an American hut, a father, a

b Charley. iii. 272. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. I2z.

Lafitau, i. 6oz. Creuxii Hilt. Canad. p. 71. Fernandez,
Relac. Hill. de los Chequit. 33.

mother,

BoorIV. mother, and their posterity, live together like

persons assembled by accident, without seem-
ing to feel the obligation of the duties mutually
arising from this connection'. As filial love
is not cherished by the continuance of atten-
tion or good offices, the recollection of bene-
fits receive. in early infancy is too faint to
excite it. Conscious of their own liberty, and
impatient of restraint, the youth of America
are accustomed to act as if they were totally
independent. Their parents are not objects
of greater regard than other persons. They
treat them always with neglet, and often with
such harshness and insolence, as to fill those
who have been witneffies of their conduct with
horror'. Thus the ideas which seem to be
natural to man in his savage state, as they
result from his circumstances and condition in
that period of his progress, affect the two
capital relations in domestic life. They render
the union between husband and wife unequal.
They shorten the duration, and weaken the
force, of the connection between parents and
children.

c Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 273.
d Gumilla, i. 212. Tertre, ii. 376. Charlev. Hilt. de

N. France, iii. 309. Charlev. tIiit. de Parag. i. l15.
Lozar.o, Defcrir. del Gran Chaco, p. 68. loo, lol. Ser-
nand. Relac. Hi:to:. de ics Chequit. z46.

5 IV. FROM

IV. FROM the domeffic ifate of the Ameri- BooKIV.

cans, the transition to the consideration of their Pol.ical in-
civil government and political institutions is fitutons
natural. In every enquiry concerning the
operations of men when united together in
focietv, the first objet of attention should be
their mode offubfiftence. Accordingly as that
varies, their laws and policy mufl be different.
The inftirutions suited to the ideas and exigen-
cies of tribes, which subsist chiefly by fishing
or hunting, and which have hardly formed a
conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which must take
place when the earth is cultivated with regulat
industry, and a right of property-not only in
its productions, but in the foil itself, is com-
pletely ascertained.

ALL the people of America, now under re- Mode ns

view, belong to the former class. But though '""
they may all be comprehended under the gene-
ral denomination of savage, the advances which
they had made in the art of procuring to
themfelvcs a certain and plentiful subsistence,
were very unequal. On the vast plains of
South-America, man appears in one of the
rudest states in which he has been ever ob-
l;'rved, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes
depend entirely upon the bounty of nature

for

BoorIV. for subsistence. They discover no folicinide,

' - they employ little foresight, they scarcely

exert any industry, to secure what is necessary
for their support. The Tapayers of Brafili the
Guaxeros of Tierra-Firme, the Caiguas, the
Moxos, and several other people of Paraguay,
are unacquainted with every species of cultiva-
tion. They neither sow nor plant. Even the
culture of the manioc, of which caffada bread
is made, is an art too intricate for their inge-
nuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence.
The roots which the earth produces fponta-
neoufly, the fruits, the berries, and the feeds,
which they gather in the woods, together with
lizards and other reptiles, which multiply
amazingly with the heat of the climate in a fat
foil, moistened by frequent rains, supply them
with food during some part of the year'. At
Bj fiini. other times they subsist by fishing; and nature

seems to have indulged the laziness of those, by
the liberality with which she ministers, in this
way, to their wants. The vast rivers of South-
America abound with an infinite variety of the
most delicate fish. The lakes and marshes,

N Niechoff. Hist. of Brasil. Church. Coll. ii. 134.

Simon, Conquifla de Tierra Firme, p. 166. Techo, Ac-
count of Paraguay, &c. Church. vi 78. Letcr. Edif.
23. 384. Io. 190. Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco,
p. S:. Riba'. Hidur. de los Triumfos, &c. p. 7.

formed

formed by the annual overflowing of the waters, BdoKIV.
are filled with all the different species, where
they remain shut up, as in natural reservoirs,
for the use of the inhabitants. They swarm in
lbch flhals, that in some places they are
catched without art or industry f. In others,
the natives have discovered a method of in-
fcting the water with the juice of certain
plants, by which the fish are so intoxicated,
that they float on the surface, and are taken
with the handg. Some tribes have ingenuity
enough to preserve them without salt, by drying
or finoking them upon hurdles over a flow fireh.
The prolific quality of the rivers in South-
America induces many of the natives to resort
to their banks, and to depend almofi entirely
for nourifhnent on what their waters supply
with such profusion'. In this part of the globe,
hunting seems not to have been the first em-
ployment of men, or the firftl effort of their in-
vention and labour to obtain food. They were
fishers before they became hunters; and as the
occupations of the former do not call for equal
exertions of activity, or talents, with those of
the latter, people in that state appear to possess

f See NOTE XXVI. g See NOTE XXVII.
L Condam. 159. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lettr. Edif. 1+.
199. 2;. 28. Acugna, Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. 138.

iBarrere, Relat. de Fr. Equin. p. 155.
VOL. II. I neither

BooK V. neither the fame degree of enterprise nor of

ingenuity. The petty nations, adjacent to
the Maragnon and Orinoco, are manifestly the
most inactive and leat intelligent of all the
Americans.
Byhrucg NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers

can sustain themselves in this manner. The
greater part of the American nations, dispersed
over the forests with which their country is
covered, do not procure fubfifence with the
fame facility. For although there forests, efpe-
cially in the southern continent of America,
are stored plentifully with game k, considerable
efforts of activity and ingenuity are requisite in
pursuit of it. Neceffty incited the natives to
the one, and taught them the other. Hunting
became their principal occupation; and as it
called forth strenuous exertions of courage, of
force, and of invention, it was deemed a
function no less honourable than necessary.
This was peculiar to the men. They were
trained to it from their earliest youth. A bold
and dextrous hunter ranked next in fame to
the distinguished warrior, and an alliance with
the former is often courted in preference to

k P. Martyr, Decad. p. 324. Gumilla, ii. 4, &c.
Acugna, i. 156.

one

one with the latter'. Hardly any device, BooKIV.
which the ingenuity of man has discovered for -"
ciinnaring or destroying wild animals, was un-
known to the Americans. While engaged in
this favourite exercise, they ihake off the indo-
lence peculiar to their nature, the latent powers
and vigour of their minds are routed, and they
become a&ive, persevering, and indefatigable.
Their sagacity in finding their prey, and their
address in killing it, are equal. Their reason
and their senses being constantly directed to-
wards this one object, the former displays such
fertility of invention, and the latter acquire
such a degree of acuteness, as appear almost
incredible. They discern the footsteps of a
wild beast, which escape every other eye, and
can follow them with certainty through the
pathless forest. If they attack their game
openly, their arrow seldom errs from the
mark ; if they endeavour to circumvent it by
art, it is almost impossible to avoid their toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were
not permitted to marry, until they had given
such proofs of their skill in hunting as put it
beyond doubt that they were capable of pro-
viding for a family. Their ingenuity always

i Charlev. Hiiloire de la N. France, iii. 1 15.
" Biet. Voy. de France Equin. 357. Davies' Difcov.
of tih; River of Amaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 2z87.

I 2 on

BOorIV. on the rretch, and iharcn?;:d bv emulation,

as well as necc:v:-, has frruck out manv in-
ventions, which i-reativ facilitate success in
the chafl. The moil singular of these is the
diicovcrv of a pois!n in which they dip the
arrow-s emn1keved in h-nting. The slightest
wo'!1r.d with tho!e ei'venomed shafts is mortal.
If then c-.l'; :ierce the flin, the blood fixes
and conerals in a moment, and the strongest
anin.il 'lls motionlels to the ground. Nor
d.-cs thii pj:an, not.withlanding its violence
and f!:'1.t'c.', infc t the ficfh of the animal
vwhich it klls. Tht mav be eaten with per-
sect f set,- and retrins its native relish and
qualitie.. All the nations along the Maragnon
and O;:i.oco are acquainted with this compo-
fitior., the chief ingredient in which is the
juice e:xracted from the root of the curare,
a species of withe ". In other parts of Ame-
rica, t!he eemploy the juice of the marchenille
for th!e i'.l:e pu-pofe, ard it operates with no
eI's ftal a iv:t.-. To people pofecfred of those
ftcrets, t'.:; bv is a more destructive weapon
than the muf!et, and, in their skilful hands,
does great excut:on among the birds and
bealts which abound in the forets of America.

r G--."- i. :. . c. C.7r...m. :-S. Rccherch. Phi-

! :;. _. ir-
N- t. H ., c 'GC zan;. zSi, &c.

Bu-T

BuT the life of a hunter gradually leads man Boo.IV.

to a ifate more advanced. The chafe, even ny ,cul-
where prey is abundant, and the dexterity of ."".
the hunter much improved, afiords but an
uncertain maintenance, and at some feaf6ns it
mull be suspended altogether. If a savage
truits to his bow alone for food, he and his
fimily will be often reduced to extreme diitlefs '.
I-ardly any region of the earth furnilhes man
spontaneously with what his wants require.
In the mildell climates, and molt fertile foils,
his own indullry and foresight muii be exerted,
in io;:e degree, to secure a regular supply of
food. Their experience of this ilurmounts the
abcr:cn nce of labour natural to !firvage nations,
aind c):l-;pels them to have recourife to culture,
.s libf'diiary to huntiii. In particular lii:n.-
i'uns, i;nime finall tribes may Ell:,it by nifing,
indepenld'le't of any prodiuCionl of the eartl,
railcd byv tieir own indi.!hly. Buit tliroi.ghou
ail .iericia, we scarcely meet v'irtl any nation
o u

: bn.t;_-':,, which cioes not pr.iC'l lolmec lpecics
ofu! cuivation.

'IEI'r aricul]uTre, however, , s n-citilr ex- T'- ..; ,1

t .: ie'c nor laboriolus. As gaimi and f:!h are ,t.... .
ti:i r principal food, ail they aim at by colti- ''

Scc N o T 1 XXVlrt.

S~~~~~~~~ lt^ l

BooKIV. va:ion, is to supply any occasional defect of

these. In the southern continent of America,
the natives confined their industry to rearing a
few plants, which, in a rich foil and warm
climate, were easily trained to maturity. The
chief of there is Maize, well known in Europe
by the name of Turkey or Indian wheat, a
grain extremely prolific, of simple culture,
agreeable to the taste, and affording a strong
hearty nourishment. The second is the Manioc,
which grows to the size of a large shrub, or
small tree, and produces roots somewhat re-
fembling parsnips. After carefully squeezing
out the juice, these roots are grated down to a
fine powder, and formed into thin cakes, called
C.:;ts bread, which, though insipid to the
tiae, proves no contemptible food P. As the
juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, some
authors have celebrated the ingenuity of the
Americans, in converting a noxious plant into
rwhlbleTne rn,:irifhment. But it should rather
be co-!ide:ed as one of the desperate expe-
dients for procuring fubfitence, to which ne-
ceTr.z' reduces rude nations; or, perhaps, men
w.-re led to the uie of it by a progrefi, in which

'- ..: I:'. of Jam. Intro-. r. iS. I.abat. i. 394.

A: '.: !:.'. ind. Occid. Natur. lib. i.C. c. -. Ulloa, i.
' -. .'. L-' :: . .!.-. ir ic M:gr.ioc. .::. dcc P!r.ntcs, tornm.

there

there is nothing marvellous. One species of Boor IV.
manioc is altogether free of any poisonous '
quality, and may be eaten without any prepa-
ration but that of roasting it in the embers.
This, it is probable, was first used by the
Americans as food; and necessity having gra-
dually taught them the art of separating its
pernicious juice from the other species, they
have by experience found it to be the most
prolific as well as the most npurifhing plant of
the two '. The third is the plantain, which
though it rifes to the height of a tree, is of
such quick growth, that in less than a year it
rewards the industry of the cultivator, with its
fruit. This, when roasted, supplies the place
of bread, and is both palatable and nourish-
in '. The fourth is the polatoe, whose culture
and qualities are too well known to need any
description. The fifth is pimento, a fnall tree,
yielding a strong aromatic spice. The Ame-
ricans, who, like other inhabitants of warm
climates, delight in whatever is -hot and of
poignant flavour, deem this seasoning a necef-
lry) of life, and mingle it copiously with every
kind of food they take'

. Martvr Dccad. 301. Labat. 1. 411. Gumilla, iii.
4152. Machucha Milic. Indiana, 164. Sec NOTE XXIX.

>; .c NOT r. XXx.
(.;.!i1 a, iii. 171. Acolla, lib iv. c. 20.

I 4 SucHr

BoorIV. SucH are the various produdcions, which

were the chief obje& of cui:".re among the
hunting tribes on the conri.;.nt of Amnerica,
and with a moderate cxerti]o: of aicive and
provident industry, thc nmi :ht ihave yielded
a full supply to the wants of a numerous people.
But men, accuitomed to the fice and vagrant
lift of hunters, arc inca.pablie of regular appli-
cation to labour; and confidcr agriculture as a
secondary and inferior occupation. Accord-
ingly, the proviion for fubfiltence, ariling
from cultivation, was so limited and scanty
amrong the Americans, that, upon any acci-
dental failure of their ulbul fuccels in hunting,
they were often reduced to extreme diifrefs.

Is the ilands, the mode of subsisting was

conslderabiv diiererp. None of the large ani-
rmals which abound on the continent were
known there. Only fou'r flecies of quadru-
peds, besides a kind of f-all dumb dog, exilted
in the islands, the biggef of which did not
exceed t.e size of a rabbit . To hunt such
diminutive prey, w.s an occupation which
required no cE.ort eit'ier of tactvirv or courage.
The chief employmnci of a hunter in the if'cs
was to kill birds, which on the continent are

= Oviedo, lib. xii. in prom.

dcencd.

deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the Bb-o xIVr
purfuiit of boys '. This want of animals, as
well as their peculiar situation, led the islanders
to depend principally upon fishing for their
iubfiflenceY. Their rivers, and the lea with
which they are surrounded, supplied them with
this species of food. At tome particular sea-
ibns, turtle, crabs, and other shell-fish,
abounded in such numbers, that they could
iupport themselves with a facility in which
their indolence delighted I. At other times,
they ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious
forms . To fishing, the inhabitants of the
islands added some degree of agriculture.
Maize ', manioc, and other plants, were cul-
tivated in the fame manner as on the conti-
nent. But all the fruits of their industry, to- Theiragri-
getlher with what their foil and climate pro- iimite.7
duced 1fontaneoufly, afforded them but a
scanty maintenance. Though their demands
for food were very sparing, they hardly raised
what was sufficient for their own consumption.
If a few Spaniards fettled in any diftriA, such
a finall addition of supernumerary mouths soon

' Rib:1 liit. dc los Triumph. p. 13. De la Potherie,

: . i111. 20.

v Cviici, lib. xiii. c. i. Gomara Hilt. Gcner. c. 28.

(,iomara llilt. Gener. c. 9. Labat. ii. 221, &c.
* Oic ., ;ib. ;iii. c. 3 b See NOTE XXXI.

exhaufled

Booi IV, exhausted their scanty stores, and brought on

a famine.

Tor.O c;' Two circumifances, common to all the
'.f:.' savage nations of America, concurred with

those which I have already mentioned, not
only in rendering their agriculture imperfe&,
but in circumscribing their power in all their
operations. They had no tame animals; and
they were unacquainted with the useful metals,

T -..-! IN other parts of the globe, man, in his
*'..:-' rudest state, appears as lord of the creation,

giving law to various tribes of animals, which
he has tamed and reduced to fubjeEtion. The
Tartar follows his prey on the horse which he
has reared; or tends his numerous herds, which
iurnifh hi-n both with food and clothing; the
Arab has rendered the camel docile, and avails
hl;n :l'! of its perlevering strength; the Lap-
lan-'.ri; hs tornmed the rein-deer to be subser,
,-:er.: t his vwil; and even the people of Kam-

re-n .

t ih ave trained their dogs to labour. This

: ':r. l,!-iJ o;er the in..crior creatures is one of
'--: -.o'le' prerogatiies of man, and among
'-e -:catelt e!borrs of his w;idom and power.

:'.': h.':r iiS, h-i. do:iii.iJn is incomplete.

- s1 's a i :')

. rc., who has no fiubjects; a

;'-.~;c;-;r, 2a- tr -
l -r c, a n.l'. l mn il perforn

eC- eiy
\t/ciy

every operation by the strength of his own arm. BOOK IV.
Such was the condition of all the rude nations
in America. Their reason was so little im-
proved, or their union so incomplete, that
they seem not to have been conscious of the
superiority of their nature, and suffered all the
animal creation to retain its liberty, without
efrablifising their own authority over any one
species. Most of the animals, indeed, which
have been rendered domestic in our continent,
do not exist in the New World; but those
peculiar to it are neither so fierce, nor so for-
midable, as to have exempted them from ser-
vitude. There are some animals of the fame
ipecies in both continents. But the rein-deer,
which has been tamed and broken to the yoke
in the one hemisphere, runs wild in the other.
The biobn of America is manifestly of the fame
species with the horned cattle of the other
hemrifphcre'. These, even among the rudest
nations in our continent, have been rendered
domellic; and in consequence of his dominion
over th-m, man can accomplish works of
labour with greater facility, and has made a
vani addition to his means of subsistence. The
inh.lbit..nts of many regions in the New World,
nwih.re the bison abounds, might have derived

c Buffon, Artic. Bifcn.

the

BoorIV. the fame advantages from it. It is not of a na-

ture so indocile, but that it might have been
trained to be as subservient to man as our cattled.
But a savage, in that uncultivated HIate wherein
the Americans were discovered, is the enemy
of the other animals, not their superior. He
waftes and destroys, but knows not how to mul-
tip] or to govern them

THIs, perhaps, is the most notable diflinction

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and Ne\J
Worlds, and a high pre-eninence of civilized
men above such as continue rude. The greatest
operations of man in changing and improving
the face of nature, as well as his moil confider-
able efforts in cultivating the .irah, are accon-
plifhed by means of the aid which he receives
from the animals whom he has tamed and em-
ploys in labour. It is by th-ir strength that he
fubdu.s the irubborn foil, and converts the de-
fert or marlh into a fruiful rield. But man, in
his civilized 2 'e, is b accuifomed to the fcr-
vice of the don:.eiic an.:-:-ls, that he ftldoln
reflects upan the va;i' i'ne!:ts vhiich he derives
from it. If we were to iu;;ioe him even when

d Nc_:-. Decicu;e;; ; .- I-{2-.-ee , p. 17:. Ka.in. .

= P'_-.n Hi'". N^:. ':. c. II' 2 .r. e..
ct Polt. c.,

E:1'_ ...;:.n. ,dr: gu:. d k, i d.ux Inde , vi. 3-.

IT; ot

most improved, to be deprived of their useful BooKIV.
miniltry, his empire over nature must in some -v
measure cease, and he would remain a feeble
animal, at a loss how to subsist, and incapable
of attemipting luch arduous undertakings as their
aflitance enables him to execute with ease.

IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion Want of

the fulful

of man over the animal creation, or his ac- metals.
quiring the use of metals, has contributed most
to extend his power. The xera of this import-
ant dilcovery is unknown, and in our hemi-
iphere very remote. It is only by tradition, or
by digging up some rude initruments of our
forefathers, that we learn that mankind were
originally unacquainted with the use of metals,
and endeavoured to supply the want of them by
employing flints, shells, bones, and other hard
fiubltances, for the fame purposes which metals
serve among polished nations. Nature com-
pletes the formation of some metals. Gold,
iilvcr, and copper, are found in their perfect
itate, in the clefts of rocks, in the fides of
mountains, or the channels of rivers. There
were accordingly the metals first known, and
firlt applied to ule. But iron, the most ier-
viceable of all, and to which man is most in-
debted, is never dilfovered in its perfect form;
its grols and stubborn ore must feel twice the

force

Boo.vr. force of fire, and go through two laborious pro-
-'- - cesses, before it become fit for use. Man was

long acquainted with the other metals, before
he acquired the art of fabricating iron, or at-
tained such ingenuity as to perfect an invention,
to which he was indebted for those instruments
wherewith he subdues the earth, and commands
all its inhabitants. But in this, as well as in
many other refpeas, the inferiority of the
Americans was conspicuous. All the savage
tribes, scattered over the continent and islands,
were totally unacquainted with the metals which
their foil produces in great abundance, if we
except some trifling quantity of gold, which
they picked up in the torrents that descended
from their mountains, and formed into orna-
ments. Their devices to supply this want of
the serviceable metals, were extremely rude and
awkward. The most simple operation was to
them an undertaking of immense difficulty and
labour. To fell a tree with no other inltru-
menrs than hatchets of itone, was employment
for a month f. To form a canoe into shape,
and to hollow it, consumed years; and it fre-
quently began to rot before they were able to
finish it E. Their operations in agriculture were

f Gumilla, iii. 196.
E Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 22.

6 equally

equally flow and defecive. In a country BoorIV.
covered with woods of the hardest timber, the
clearing of a small field destined for culture re-
quired the united efforts of a tribe, and was a
work of much time and great toil. This was
the business of the men, and their indolence
was satisfied with performing it in a very
slovenly manner. The labour of cultivation
was left to the women, who, after digging, or
rather stirring the field, with wooden mattocks,
and stakes hardened in the fire, rowed or planted
it; but were more indebted for the increase to
the fertility of the foil, than to their own rude
industry h.

AGRICULTURE, even when the strength of

man is seconded by that of the animals which
he has fubjeaed to the yoke, and his power
augmented by the use of the various instruments
with which the discovery of metals has furnished
him, is still a work of great labour; and it is
with the sweat of his brow that he renders the
earth fertile. It is not wonderful, then, that
people destitute of both there advantages should
have made so little progress in cultivation, that
they must be confidered as depending for sub-

b Gumilla, ill. 166, &c. Lcttr, Edif. xii. to.

filtence

BooKIV. fitence on fiihing and hunting, rather than on
"- the fruits of their own labour.
Po':cin~- FROM this description of the mode of sub-

ron:'o * sifting among the rude American tribes, the

form and genius of their political innfitutions
mav be deduced, and we are enabled to trace
various circumstances of diftinfion between
them and more civilized nations.

:. v:.m;d i. THEY were divided into finall independent
¢i'.5, communities. While hunting is the chief

source of subsistence, a vats extent of territory
is requisite for supporting a finall number of
people. In proportion as men multiply and
unite, the wild animals, on which they prey,
diminiih, or fly at a greater distance from the
haunts of their enemy. The increase of a so-
ciert in this ilate is limited by its own nature,
and the members of it mufi either disperse, like
the game which they pursue, or fall upon some
better method of procuring food, than by hunt-
ing. Beasts of prey are by nature folitarv and
unlbcial, they go not forth to the chafe in
herds, but delight in those recesses of the forest
where they can roam and destroy undisturbed.
A nation of hunters resembles them both in oc-
cupation and in genius. They cannot form

into

into large communities, because it would be BOOKIV.
impossible to find subsistence, and they muff
drive to a distance every rival who may en-
croach on thole domains, which they confider
as their own. This was the state of all the
American tribes, the numbers in each were
finall, though scattered over vast countries;
they were far removed from one another, and
engaged in perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip'.
In America, the word nation is not of the fame
import as in other parts of the globe. It is ap-
plied to small societies, not exceeding, perhaps;
two or three hundred persons, but occupying
provinces larger than tome kingdoms in Eu-
rope. The country of Guiana, though of
larger extent than the kingdom of France, and
divided among a great number of nations, did
not contain above twenty-five thousand inha-
bitants k. In the provinces which border on the
Orinoco, one may travel several hundred miles
in different directions, without finding. a single
hut, or observing the footsteps of a human
creature'. In North-America, where the cli-
mate is more rigorous, and the foil less fertile,
the desolation is still greater. There, vast

i Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 62. Fernan-

dez, Relac. Hilf. de los Chiquit. 162.

k Voyages de Marchais, is'. 353.
V Gumilla, ii. io.
VOL. II. K journeys

Boo; v. journeys of some hundred leagues have been

-y made through uninhabited plains and forests".

As long as hunting continues to be the chief
employment of man to which he trusts for sub-
fiftence, he can hardly be said to have occupied
the earth'.

A-"-- -_. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are
,;lh nhe strangers to the idea of property. As the ani-
;dea of [To-
^y°. f ' mals on which the hunter feeds are not bred

under his infpe~ion, nor nourfied by his care,
he can claim no right to them, while they run
wild in the forest. Where game is so plentiful
that it may be catched with little trouble, men
never dream of appropriating what is of small
value, or of easy acquisition. Where it is so
rare, that the labour or danger of the chafe re-
quires the united efforts of a tribe, or village,
what is killed is a common flock, belonging
equally to all, who, by their skill or their cou-
rage, have contributed to the success of the ex-
curfion. The forest, or hunting-grounds, are
deemed the property of the tribe, from which it
has a title to exclude every rival nation. But

= M. Fabnr, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lafiaaj, ii.

179. Boffu, Travels through Louisiana, i. iii. See
NOTE XXXII.
? SeC NOTE XXXIII.

no

no individual arrogates a right to any distrit'os Boor IV.
these, in preference to his fellow-citizens. They
belong alike to all; and thither, as to a general
and undivided store, all repair in quest of
fufteri/nce. The fame principles by which they
regulate their chief occupation, extend to that
which is subordinate. Even agriculture has not
introduced among them a complete idea of pro-
perty. As the men hunt, the women labour
together, and after they have lhared the toils of
the seed-time, they enjoy the harveft-in com-
mon . Among some tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public
granary, and divided among them, at stated
times, according to their wants P. Among
others, though they lay up separate stores, they
do not acquire such an exclulive right of pro-
perty, that they can enjoy superfluity, -while
those around them susser want . Thus the
difin&ions arising from the inequality of pof-
sessions are unknown. - The terms rich or poor
enter not into their language, and being ftran-
gers to property, they are unacquainted with
what is the great object of laws and policy, as

0 Dr. Ferguson's Essay, 125.
P Gumilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hil of N. Carol. 327.
See NOTE XXXIV.

q Denys, His. Natur. ii. 92', 393.

K a well

BooK 1V. well as the chief motive which induced mankind

to establish the various arrangements of regular

government '.

Hgh Je-c'i 3. PEOPLE in this state retain a high sense of
. --' equality and independence. Wherever the idea
p';'".c of property is not established, there can be no

distinction among men, but what arises from
personal qualities. These can be conlpicuous
only on such occasions as call them forth into
exertion. In times of danger, or in affairs of
intricacy, the wisdom and experience of age are
consulted, and prescribe the measures which
ought to be parfued. When a tribe of savages
takes the field against the enemies of their coun-
try, the warrior of inoft approved courage leads
the youth to the combat'. If they go forth in
a body to the chafe, the molt expert and adven-
turous hunter is foremost, and direts their
motions. But during seasons of tranquillity
and inaction, when there is no occasion to dif-
play those talents, all pre-eminence ceases. Every
circumstance indicates, that all the members of
the community are on a level. They are
clothed iin the fame simple garb. They feed on

P. Mar-r, Decad. p. 4g. Veneg. HIil. of Californ.

i. 66. Lery, Navig. in Braiil, c. 17.

, Acoila, Hi:i. lib. vi. c. 19. Staiaius, Hill. Brail, lib.
ii. c. I . De BS.-. iii. p. i o. iiet. 361.

the

the fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture BooK IV.
are exacly t imilar. No diftination can arise
from the inequality of poffeflions. Whatever
forms dependence on one part, or confiitutes
superiority on the other, is unknown. All are
freemen, all feel themselves to be such, and
assert with firnnefs the rights which belong to
that condition'. This sentiment of independ-
ence is imprinted so deeply in their nature,
that no change of condition can.eradicate it and
bend their minds to servitude. Accustomed to
be abfblute masters of their own conduct, they
disdain to execute the orders of another, and,
having never known controul, will not submit
to corrci'on u. Many of the Americans, when
they found that they were treated as slaves by
the Spaniards, died of grief; many destroyed
themselves in despair'.

4. AMONG people in this tfate, government Senrenf

can aliTmle little authority, and the sense of ci- fbo'ln^aer.
vil subordination must remain very imperfect. t.e
While the idea of property is unknown, or in-
co:pletely conceived; while the spontaneous

' Lahat. vi. 124. Brickell, Hill. of Carol. 310.
u See NOTE XXXV.

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquilt. de la

'lorida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138. Benzo Hii.
Nov. Orb. lib. iv. c. 25.

K 3 productions

BooK IV. productions of the earth, as well as the fruits of

industry, are confidered as belonging to the
public stock, there can hardly be any such sub-
ject of difference or discussion among the mem-
bers of the fame community, as will require
the hand of authority to interpose in order to
adjust it. Where the right of separate and ex-
clufive peffeffion is not introduced, the great
objec of law and jurifdiaion does not exist.
When called into the field, either in their own
defence, or to invade the territories of their
enemies, when engaged in the toil and dangers
of the chafe, the members of a tribe perceive
that they are part of a political body. They
are conscious of their own connection with the
companions in conjunction with whom they act;
and they follow and reverence such as excel in
conduct and valour. But, during the intervals
between such common efforts, they are scarcely
conscious of the ties of political union". No
visible form of government is eftabliihed. The
names of miagijfraie and subjei are not in use.
Every one seems to enjoy his natural independ-
ence aimoft entire. If a scheme of public
utility be proposed, the members of the com-
munity are left at liberty to chufe whether they

v Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco, 93. Melendcz
Tefcro- Veriadercr, ii. 23. See NOTE XXXVI.

will

will assist or not in carrying it into execution. BooKIV.
No statute imposes any service as a duty, no
compullbry laws oblige them to perform it.
All their resolutions are voluntary, and sow
from the impulse of their own mindsz. The
first ftep towards effablifhing a public jurif-
diation has not been taken in those rude focie-
ties. The right of revenge is left in private
handsa: If violence is committed, or blood is
shed, the community does not assume the power
either of inflicting or of moderating the punilh-
ment. It belongs to the family and friends of
the person injured or slain to avenge the wrong,
or to accept of the reparation offered by the ag-
greiror. If the elders interpose, it is to advise,
not to decide, and it is seldom their counsels
are listened to; for as it is deemed pufillani-
mous to susser an offender to escape with impu-
nity, resentment is implacable and everlasting"
The objet of government among savages is
rather foreign than domeffic. They do not
aim at maintaining interior order and police by
public regulations, or the exertions of any per-
manent authority, but labour to preserve such
union among the members of their tribe, that

Charlev. Hist. Nov. France, iii. 266. 268.
llrrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.

b Charlev. Iilt. N. France, iii. 271, z72. Lafit. i.
41G. Caflani Hill, de Nuevo Reyno de Granada, zz6.

K 4 they

BooK IV. they may watch the motions of their enemies,

and a6t againIt them with concert and vigour,

Towt SUCH was the form of political order efta-
.,r,,t;oD bliihed among the greater part of the Ameri-

can nations. In this state were almolt all the
tribes, spread over the vast provinces extending
eastward of the Mifl.sippi, fro:n the mouth of
the St. Laurence to the confines of Florida. In
a limilar condition were the people of Brasil,
the inhabitants of Chili, and ifveral tribes in
Paraguay and Guiana, and in the countries
which stretch from the mouth of the Orinoco to
the peninsula of Yucatan. Among such an in-
finite number of petty afrociations, there may
be peculiarities which constitute a diftintion,
and mark the various degrees of their civiliza-
tion and improvement. But an attempt to
trace and enumerate these would be vain, as
they have not been observed by perolns, capable
of discerning the minute and delicate circum-
itances, which serve to discriminate nations re-
fembling one another in their general character
and features. The description which 1 have
given will apply, with little variation, to the
policy of every people in America, which has
added tome degree of agriculture to fishing and
hunting.

2 RUDE

RUDE and imperfeEt as those institutions may- BooK IV.

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced '
in their political progress. Among all those
petty nations which trusted for subsistence en-
tirely to fishing and hunting without any species.
of cultivation, the union was so incomplete, and
their lense of mutual dependence so. feeble, that
hardly any appearance of government or order
can be discerned in their proceedings. Their
wants are few, their obje&s of pursuit simple,
they form into separate tribes, and at together,
fiom inftint, habit, or conveniency, rather
than from any formal concert and association.
To this class belong the Californians, several of
the finall nations in the extensive country of
Paraguay, rome of the people on the banks of
the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalene,
in the new kingdom of Granada b.

BUT though among there lafl-mentioned Smeirre-

gular p-

tribes there was hardly any fladow of regular paraics.
government, and even among those which I firit
defci-ibed, its authority is slender and confined
within narrow bounds, there were rome places
in America where it was carried far beyond the
degree which teems natural to rude nations. In

V'enegas, i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Tccho Hil.

of P:irag. Churchill, vi. 78. Hilt. Gen. dcs Voyages,
xl. 74.

surveying

Boos IV. surveying the political operations of man, either

~'- in his savage or civilized state, we discover fin-

gular and eccentric institutions, which start as
it were from their station, and fly off so wide
that we labour in vain to bring them within
the general laws of any system, or to account
for them by those principles which influence
other communities in a similar situation. Some
instances of this occur among those people of
America, whom I have included under the
common denomination of savage. These are
so curious and important that I shall describe
them, and attempt to explain their origin.

P.-.;-',--y IN the New WTorld, as well as in other parts
:'--;r-:. of the globe, cold or temperate countries ap-

' pear to be the favourite feat of freedom and in-

dependence. There the mind, like the body,'
is firm and vigorous. Conscious of their own
dignity, and capable of the greatest efforts in
aiTerring it, men aspire to independence, and
their stubborn fpirirs stoop with reluftance to
the yoke of fervirude. In warmer climates, by
whose influence the whole frame is so much
enervated, that present pleasure is the supreme
f'lici:v, and mere repose is enjoyment, men ac-
quiislc, almost without a Rtruggle, in the do-
m:nnion of a fiiperior. Accordingly, if we pro-
cced frc:r. nor;: to louth along the continent of

America,

America, we shall find' the power of those vefld. BOOK IV.
with authority gradually increaring, and'lthe. "-'
spirit of the people becoming more tame and
passive. In Florida, the authority of the fa--
chems, caziques, or chiefs, was not'only per-
manent, but hereditary. They were diflRn-'
guifhed by peculiar ornaments, they enjoyed
prerogatives of various kinds, and were treated
by their subje&s with thartreverence, which,
people accufromed to fubjeHibn, pay to a
mater c. Among the Natchez, a powerful Among th
tribe now extinc, formerly situated on thee' Nh",h'
banks of the Mifliffippi, a difference of rank:
took place, with which the northern tribes were
altogether unacquainted. Some families were'
reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary dignity.
The body of the people was confidered as vile;
and formed only for subjection. This diftinc-
tion was marked by appellations which irrti-
mated the high elevation of the one itate, and
the ignominious depression of the other. The
former were called Refpealabe; the latter, the
Stinkards. The great Chief, in whom the fu-
preme authority was vested, is reputed to be a
being of superior nature, the brother of the

c Cardenas y Cano Enfayo Chronol. a la Hilt. de Flo-

rida, p. 46. Le Moyne de Morgues Icones Floridx. Ap.
de Br!. p. I. 4, &c. Charlev. Hill. N. France, iii. 467;
468.

Sun,

Boo IV. Sun, the sole object of their worship. They

.---- approach him with religious veneration, and

honour him as the representative of their deity.
His will is a law, to which all submit with im-
plicit obedience. The lives of his fubjecs are
so absolutely at his disposal, that if any one has
incurred his displeasure, the offender comes
with profound humility and offers him his head.
Nor does the dominion of the Chiefs end with
their lives; their principal officers, their fa-
vourite wives, together with many domestics
of inferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs,
that they may be. attended in the next world by
the fame persons who served them in this; and
such is the reverence in which they are held,
that those victims welcome death with exulta-
tion, deeming it a recompcnce of their fidelity
and a mark of diftinc&ion, to be felefted to ac-
company their deceased mailer1. Thus a per-
sect despotism, with its full train of superstition,
arrogance, and cruelty, is established among
the Natchez, and by a singular fatality, that
people has rafted of the worst calamities incident
to polished nations, though they themselves are
not far advanced beyond the tribes around them
in civility and improvement. In Hispaniola,

i Dumont Memoir. HiL. fur Louifiane, i. I7;. Charler.
Hl.;. N. France, iii. 4.9, &c. Lettr. Edif. 20. lo6.

~I ~I I. ~Cuba,

Cuba,

Cuba, and the larger islands, their caziques BooK IV.
or chiefs pofleffed extensive power. The dig- In th
nity was tranfinitted by hereditary right from ifands.
father to son. Its honours and prerogatives
were considerable. Their fubjets paid great
refpetl to the caziques, and executed their
orders without hesitation or' reserve . They
were diftinguiihed by peculiar ornaments, and
in order to preserve or augment the veneration
of the people, they had the address to call in
the aid of superstition to :uphold their autho-
rity. They delivered their mandates as the
oracles of heaven, and pretended to poffefs'the
power of regulating the seasons, and of dif-
pensing rain or sunshine, according as their
fiubjects flood in need of them.

IN tome parts of the continent, the power of I,. Bogot.

the caziques seems to have been as extensive
as in the isles. In Bogota, which is now a
province of the new kingdom -of Granada,
there was fettled a nation, more considerable
in number and more improved in the various
arts of life, than any in America except the
Mexicans and Peruvians. The people of Bo-
gota subsisted chiefly by agriculture. The

Hlerrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. c. 44. p. 88.
Life of Columb. ch. 32.

idea

BooITV. idea of property was introduced, among theim

' and its rights secured by laws, handed down

by tradition, and observed with great care'.
They lived in large towns. They were clothed
in a decent manner, and their houses may be
termed commodious, when compared with
those of the small tribes around them. The
effecs of this uncommon civilization were con-
fpicuous. Government had assumed a regular
form. A jurifdition was established, which
took cognizance of different crimes, and pu-
nifhed them with rigour. A diltinction of
ranks was known; their chief, to whom the
Spaniards gave the title of monarch, and who
merited that name on account of his splendor
as weil as power, reigned with absolute autho-
rity. He was attended by officers of various
conditions; he never appeared in public with-
out a numerous retinue; he was carried in a
fort of palanquin with much pomp, and har-
bingers went before him to sweep the road
and strew it with flowers. This uncommon
pomp was supported by presents or taxes re-
ceived from his fubjets, to whom their prince
was such an objeEt of veneration, that none of
them presumed to look him directly in the

f Piedrahita tHi. de lao ConquL del N. Reyno de
Gran. p. 45.

face,

face, or ever approached him but with an BooKIV.
averted countenance . There.were other tribes *'" '
on the iame continent, among which, though
far le's advanced than the people of Bogota in
their progress towards refinement, the freedom
and independence, natural to man in his savage
state, was much abridged, and their caziques
had assumed extensive authority.

IT is not easy to point out the circum- Caur, of

fiances, or to discover the causes which con- iLr,,ap'E
tributed to introduce and eftablihf among each """'
of those people a form of government so dif-
ferent from that of the tribes around them,
and so repugnant to the genius of rude nations.
If the persons who had an opportunity of ob-
serving them in their original state, had been
more attentive and more discerning, we might
have received information from their con-
querors sufficient to guide us in this inquiry.
If the tranfacrions of people, unacquainted
with the use of letters, were not involved in
impenetrable obscurity, we might have derived
some information from this dQomeftic source.
But as nothing fatisfaQtory can be gathered,
either from the accounts of the Spaniards, or
from their own traditions, we must have re-

g Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 2. lib. v. c. 56. Piedrahita,
c. 5. P. 2, &c. Gomara Hist. c. 7z.

L course

BooK IV. course to conjeftures, in order to explain the

- irregular appearances in the political state of

the people whom I have mentioned. As all
those tribes which had loft their native liberty
and independence were feated in the Torrid
Zone, or in countries approaching to it, the
climate may be supposed to have had some
influence in forming their minds to that fervi-
tude, which seems to be the destiny of man in
those regions of the globe. But though the
influence of climate, more powerful than that
of any other natural cause, is not to be over-
looked; that alone cannot be admitted as a
solution of the point in question. The opera-
tions of men are so complex, that we muff
not attribute the form which they affumc, to
the force of a single principle or cause. Al-
though despotism be confined in America to
the Torrid Zone, and to the warm regions
bordering upon it, I have already observed
that these countries contain various tribes, some
of which possess an high degree of freedom,
and others are altogether unacquainted with
the restraints of government. The indolence
and timidity peculiar to the inhabitants of the
islands, rendered them so incapable of the fen-
timents or efforts necessary for maintaining
independence, that there is no occalion to
search for any other cause of their tame sub-

mission

mifflon to the will of a superior. The sub- BoK IV.
jection of the Natchez, and of the people of
Bogota, seems to have been the consequence
of a difference in their state from that of the
other Americans. They were fettled nations,
residing constantly in one place. Hunting.was
not the chief occupation of the former,.and
the latter seem hardly to have trusted to it for
any part of their subsistence. Both'had made
such progress in agriculture and arts, that the
idea of property was introduced in tome degree
in the one community, and fully established
in the other. Among people in this state,
avarice and ambition have acquired objects,
and have begun to exert their power; views
of interest allure the selfish; the desire of pre-
eminence excites the enterprising; dominion
is courted by both; and pafions unknown to
man in his savage state prompt the interested
and ambitious to encroach on the rights of
their fellow-citizens. Motives, with which
rude nations are equally unacquainted, induce
the people to submit tamely to the usurped
authority of their superiors. But even among
nations in this state, the spirit of fubjets could
not have been rendered so obsequious, or the
power of rulers so unbounded, without the
intervention of superstition. By its fatal in-
fluence, the human mind, in every stage of

VOL. II. L its

BooKIV. its progress, is depressed, and its nativevigour

and independence subdued. Whoever can
acquire the direction of this formidable engine,
is secure of dominion over his species. Un-
fortunately for the people whose inflitutions
are the subject of inquiry, this power was in
the hands of their chiefs. The caziques of the
isles could put what responses they pleased into
the mouths of their Cemnis or gods; and it was
by their interposition, and in their name, that
they imposed any tribute or burden on their
people h. The great chief of the Natchez was
the principal minister as well as the reprefen-
Eative of the Sun, their deity. The respect
which the people of Bogota paid to their mo-
narchs, was inspired by religion, and the heir
apparent of the kingdom was educated in the
innermost recess of their principal temple,
under such austere discipline, and with such
peculiar rites, as tended to fill his fubjets with
high sentiments concerning the sanctity of his
character, and the dignity of his ifation'. Thus
fuperllition, which, in the rudest period of
society, is either altogether unknown, or waifes
its force in childish unmeaning practices, had
acquired such an ascendant over those people
of Aimerica, who had made rome little pro-

rter-e, dec. i. lib. iii. c. ;. i Piedrahita, p. 27.

greds

grefs towards refinement, that it became the BooxIV.
chief infirument of bending their minds to an '
untimely servitude, and fubjeded them, in the
beginning of their political career, to a de-
fpotifin hardly less rigorous, than that which
awaits nations in the last stage of their corrup-
tion and decline.

V. AFTER examining the political inftitu- Thir art

tions of the rude nations in America, the next
object of attention is their art of war, or their
provision for public security and defence; The
Iinall tribes dispersed over America' are not
only independent and unconneted, but en-
gaged in perpetual hoflilities with one ano-
ther . Though mostly firangers to the idea
of separate property vested in any individual,
the rudest of the American nations are well
acquainted with the rights of each community
to its own domains. This right they hold to
be perfet and exclusive, entitling the possessor
to oppose the encroachment of neighbouring
tribes. As it is of the utmost consequence to
prevent them from deffroying or disturbing
the game in their hunting grounds, they guard
this national property with a jealous attention.
But as their territories are extensive, and the

k Ribas Hit. de los Triump. p. 9.

L 2 ' boundaries

BooKIV. boundaries of them not exactly ascertained,

innumerable subjects of dispute arise, which
itldom terminate without bloodshed. Even
in this simple and primitive state of society,
interefp is a source ofdifcord, and often prompts
savage tribes to take arms, in order to repel
or punish such as encroach on the forests or
plains, to which they trust for subsistence.

Tbt~c -z- BUT interest is not either the moit frequent
g.n. io or the most powerful motive of the incessant

hostilities among rude nations. These must
be imputed to the passion of revenge, which
rages with such violence in the breast of savages,
that eagerness to gratify it may be confidered as
the diitinguifhing characteristic of men in their
uncivilized state. Circumstances of powerful
influence, both in the interior government of
rude tribes, and in their external operations
against foreign enemies, concur in cherishing
and adding strength to a passion fatal to the
general tranquillity. When the right of re-
dressing his own wrongs is left in the hands of
every individual, injuries are felt with exqui-
fre lenfibility, and vengeance exerciled with
ulr.rlenting rancour. No time can obliterate
tnc memory of an offence, and it is fldom
that :: can be expiated but bv the blood of the
offender. In carrving on their public '.art,

i :1_ c

savage nations are influenced by the fame ideas, BOOK IV.
and animated with the fame spirit, as in pro- From the
fecuting private vengeance. In fiall coinmu- fpitit of

or.n~~~~~~ D vengeance.

nities, every man is touched with the injury
or affront offered to the body of which he is a
member, as if it were a personal attack upon
his own honour or safety. The desire of re-
venge is communicated from breast to breast,
and loon kindles into rage.. As feeble societies
can take the field only in small parties, each
warrior is conscious of the importance of his
own arm, and feels that to it is committed a
considerable portion of the public vengeance.
War, which between exteniive kingdoms is
carried on with little animosity, is prosecuted
by fmlall tribes with all the rancour of a private
quarrel. The resentment of nations is as im-
placable as that of individuals. It may be Hence the

ferocity ,f

dissembled or suppressed, but is never extin- their ars,
guifled; and often, when leaf expe&ed or
dreaded, it burits out with redoubled fury'.
When polished nations have obtained the glory
of victory, or have acquired an addition of
territory, they may terminate a war with
honour. But savages are not satisfied until

I Boucher Hilt. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Charlcv.

Hilt. de N. France, iii. 215, 251. Lery ap de Bry, iii.
204. Creux. Hill. Canad. p. 72. Lo7ano Defcr. del
iran Chaco, 95. Hennep. Mvoeurs des Sauv, 4o.

L 3 they

Boa IV. they extirpate the community, which is the
'--' obje&t of their rage. They fight not to con-

quer, but to destroy. If they engage in hofti-
lities, it is with a resolution never to fee the
face of the enemy in peace, but to prosecute
the quarrel with immortal enmity ". The
desire of vengeance is the firfl, and almost the
only principle, which a savage instils into the
minds of his children n. This grows up with
him as he advances in life; and as his attention
is directed to few objects, it acquires a degree
of force unknown among men whose paflions
are dissipated and weakened by the variety of
their occupations and purluits. The desire of
vengeance, which takes poffeflion of the heart
of savages, resembles the inftinfive rage of
an animal, rather than the passion of a man.
It turns, with undifcerning fury, even against
inanimate objects. If hurt accidentally by a
stone, they often seize it in a transport of anger,
ana endeavour to wreak their vengeance upon
ito. If itruck with an arrow in battle, they
will tear it from the wound, break and bite it

3 Char.le: .

' N. Fr. iii. 251. Colden, i. 1o8. ii.
15. ECarrere, p. 1o. 1 73.

' harlev. Hii. . Fr. iii. 326. Lery ap de Bry, iii.
a; . Lozano Hili. de Parag. i. 14+.

° I cr. ap de Bry, iii. 10o.

with

with their teeth, and dash it on the groundP. BooKIV.
With reipe&t to their enemies) the rage of
vengeance knows no bounds. When under
the dominion of this paftion, manbecomes the
most cruel of all animals. He neither pities,
nor forgives, nor spares.

THE force of this pafllion is so well under-

flood by the Americans themselves, that they
always apply to it, in order to excite their
people to take arms. If the elders of any
tribe attempt to rouze their youth from sloth,
if a chief wiffes to allure a band of- warriors to
follow him in invading an enemy's country,
the mort persuasive topics of their martial elo-
quence are drawn from revenge. " The bones
of our countrymen," fay they, " lie unco-
vered; their bloody bed -has not been waihed
clean. Their spirits cry against us; they muRf
be appeased. Let us go and devour the people
by whom they were slain. Sit no longer in-
acaive upon your mats; lift the hatchet, con-
sole the spirits of the dead, and tell them that
they shall be avenged q."

P Lery ap De Bry, iii. 208. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi
c. 8.

q Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 216, 217. Lery ap de
Bry, iii. 204.

L 4 ANIMATED

Bonc~IV. AjIM.tATED with such exhortations, the youth

J fnihatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise
P?""-', the song of war, and burn with impatience to

embrue their hands in the blood of their ene-
mies. Private chiefs often assemble small
parties, and invade a hostile tribe, without
confuiting the rulers of the community. A
tingle warrior, prompted by caprice or revenge,
will rake the field alone, and march several
hundred miles to surprise and cut off a ftrag-
-ging enemy'. The exploits of a noted war-
rior, in such folitarv excursions, often form
the chief part of the history of an American
campaign'; and their elders connive at such
irregular rallies, as they tend to cherish a mar-
tial tpirit, and accustom their people to enter-
priie and danger '. But when a war is national,
and undertaken by public authority, the deli-
berations are formal and flow. The elders
assemble, they deliver their opinions in foleinn
IFeeches, they weigh with maturity the nature
of the enterprise, and balance its beneficial or
disadvantageous consequences with no incon-
fiderable portion of political discernment or
fagacitv. Their pricies anti foothiavers are
consulted, and fomerimes they ask the advice

'See NOTE XXXVII 'Sce NOTE XXXVIII.
' i:: , i. i_. Lerv ap de Bry, 21i. Hennepin
Mzeu rC.}c' S:-v. 41. Lai.au, u. 169.

ever

even of their women". If the determination BaK IV.
be for war, they prepare for it with much. -
ceremony. A leader offers to condut the ex-
pedition, and is accepted. But .no man is
constrained to follow him; the resolution of
the community to commence hotilities, im-
poses no obligation upon any member to take
part in the war. Each individual is still mailer
of his own condut,. and his engagement in the
firvice is perfecly voluntary

THE maxims by which they regulate their Mode of

military operations, though extremely different w^ar.'" o°
from those which take place among more ci-
vilized and populous nations, are well suited to
their own political state, and the nature of the
country in which they at. They never take
the field in numerous bodies, as it would re-
quire a greater effort of foresight and industry,
than is ufial among savages, to provide for
their iubfiftence, during a march of some
hundred miles through dreary forests, or dur-
ing a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.
Their armies are not encumbered with baggage
or military stores. Each warrior, besides his
arms, carries a mat and a small bag of pounded

1 Charlev. His. N. Fr. iii. t21. 268. Biet. 367. 380.
Chiarley. Hilt. N, Fr. 217, zl8.

maize,

BoosIV. maize, and with these is completely equipped

CcY*" for any service. While at a distance from the

enemies frontier, they disperse through the
woods, and support themselves with the game
which they kill, or the fish which they catch.
As they approach nearer to the territories of
the nation, which they intend to attack, they
collec^t their troops, and advance with greater
caution. Even then they proceed wholly by
frratagem and ambuscade. They place not
their glory in attacking their enemies with
open force. To surprise and delfroy is the
greatert merit of a commander, and the highest
pride of his followers. War and hunting are
their only occupations, and they conduct both
with the fame spirit and the lame arts. They
follow the track of their enemies through the
forest. They endeavour to discover their
haunts, they lurk in some thicket near to there,
and with the patience of a sportsman lying in
wait for game, will continue in their station
day after day, until they can rush upon their
prey when most secure, and least able to refitl
them. If they meet no straggling party of the
enemy, they advance towards their villages,
but with such solicitude to conceal their own
approach, that they of:en creep on their hands
and feet through the woods, and paint their
skins of the fame colour with the withered

leaves,

leaves, in order to avoid dete&ion . If so BOOK V.
fortunate as to remain unobserved, they let -"
on fire the enemies huts in the dead of night,
and massacre the inhabitants, as they fly naked
and defenceless from the flames. If they hope
to effeat a retreat without being pursued, they
carry off some prisoners, whom they reserve
for a more dreadful fate. But if, notwith-
llanding all their address and precautions, they
find that their motions are discovered, that the
enemy has taken the alarm, and is prepared to
oppol' them, they usually deem it mos pru-
dent to retire. They regard it as extreme folly
to meet an enemy who is on his guard, upon
equal terms, or to give battle in an open
field. The most distinguished success is a dif-
grace to a leader, if purchased with any con-
fiderable loss of his followers ; and they never
boast of a vicory if tained with the blood of
their own countrymen'. To fall in battle,
instead of being reckoned an honourable death,
is a misfortune which fubjets the memory
of a warrior to the imputation of rashness or
imprudence b.

Y Charley. HifR. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Hennip. Moeurs

des Sauv. p. 59.

* See NOTE XXXIX.
a Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 238. 307. Biet. 381.

Lafitau Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 248.
D Charlev. iii. 376. See NOTE XL,

3 THIS

Boo IV. THIS system of war was universal in America,
Not ,in and the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed
to, '....c through all its different regions and climates,
of cUCo .'.

display more craft than boldness in carrying on
their hostilities. Struck with this condu&c, so
opposite to the ideas and maxims of Euro-
peans, several authors contend that it flows
from a feeble and daftardlv spirit peculiar to
the Americans, which is incapable of any gene-
rous or manly exertion '. But when we reflec
that many of thefr tribes, on occasions which
call for extraordinary efforts, not only defend
themselves with obitinate resolution, but attack
their enemies with the most daring courage,
and that they polclfs fortitude of mind fupe-
rior to the sense of danger or the fear of death,
we mull ascribe their habitual caution to
some other cause than confsitutional timi-
ditv 1. The number of men in each tribe is
ib small, the difficulty of rearing new members,
amidst the hardships and dangers of savage
life, so great, that the life of a citizen is ex-
tremely precious, and the preservation of it
becomes a capital object in their policy. Had
the point of honour been the fame among the

Recberches Philof. fur les Americ. I. Ii. Voyage
d: Ml-ch. iv. 410.

L-.-.:.' Sloeurs des Sauv. ii. 248, 249. Chariev. N.
Fr. iii. 3:-.

feeble

feeble American tribes, as among the powerful Boor IV.
nations of Europe, had they been taught to
court fame or viEtory in contempt of.danger
and death, they must have been ruined by
maxims so ill adapted to their condition. But
wherever their communities are more populous,
lo that they can a& with considerable force,
and can sustain the loss of several of their
members, without being sensibly weakened,
the military operations of the Americans more
nearly resemble those of other nations. The
Brafilians, as well as the tribes situated upon
the banks of the river De la Plata, often take
the field in such numerous bodies, as deserve
the name of armies'. They defy their enemies.
to the combat, engage. in regular battles, and
maintain the conflit with that desperate fero-.
city, which is natural to men, who, having
no idea of war but that of exterminating their
enemies, never give or take quarter . In the
powerful empires of Mexico and Peru, great
armies were aflembled, frequent battles were
fought, and the theory as well as practice of
war were different from what took place in
those petty societies which assume the name of
nations.

Fabri VcriW. Deftrip. IDe Jix ap de Bri; vii. p. 42.
' Sue NOTE XTI.

Bur

Boor IV. BcT though vigilarce and attention are the
in-t . qualities chiefl requisite, where the obje&
.-'r.':- of war is to deceive and to surprise; and though

the Americans, when acting singly, display an
amazing degree of address in concealing their
own motions, and in discovering those of an
enemy, vet it is remarkable that, when they
take the field in parties, they can seldom be
brought to observe the precautions most efren-
tial to their own security. Such is the diffi-
culty- of accustoming savages to fub6idination,
or to aft in concert; such is their'irhpatience
under refraint, and such their caprice and
presumption, thar it is rarely they can be
brought to conform themselves to the counsels
and direcions of their leaders. They never
fation centinels around the place where they
reft at night, and after marching some hundred
miles to surprise an enemy, are often surprised
themselves, and cut off, while funk in as pro-
found sleep as if they were nor within reach of
danger F.

If, notwithstanding this negligence and fe-

curitv, which often frultrare their most artful
flhemes, shey catch the enemy unprepared,

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237. Lerr. Edif. 17. 30S.
2c. 13. L:i.L Moe-ur, u. 247. Lahontan, ii. 1 6.

they

they rush upon them with the utmost ferocity, BooirV.
and tearing off the scalps of all those who fall' '- -'
victims to their rage h, they carry home those
strange trophies in triumph. These they pre-
serve as monuments, not only of their own
prowess, but of the vengeance which their
arm has infli&ed upon the people who were
obje&s of public resentment .. They are still
more solicitous to seize prisoners. During
their retreat, if they hope to effe& it unmo-
lefted, these are commonly exempt from any
insult, and treated with some degree of huma-
nity, though guarded with the most ftrist at-
tention.

BUT after this temporary suspension, their Treatnent

rage rekindles with new fury. As soon as they
approach their own frontier, tome of their
number are dispatched to inform their country-
men with refpe&t to the luccefs of the expedi-
tion. Then the prisoners begin to feel the
wretchedness of their condition. The women
of the village, together with the youth who
have not attained to the age of bearing arms,
assemble, and forming themselves into. two
lines, through which the prisoners 4nuft pass,
beat and bruise them with flicks or stones in a

See N O T E XLII. Lafitau Moeurs, ii. 2z6.

cruel

BoorlK . cruel manner'. After this first gratification

of their rage against their enemies, follow
lamentations for the loss of fuclh of their own
countrymen as have fallen in the service, ac-
companied with words and actions which seem
to exprels the utmoit anguish and grief. But,
in a moment, upon a signal given, their tears
cease; they pals, with a sudden and unaccount-
able transition, from the depths of sorrow to
tramfports of joy; and begin to celebrate their
viCoi y with all the wild exultation of a barba-
rous triumph . The fate of the prisoners re-
mains fill undecided. The old men delibe-
rate concerning it. Some are destined to be
tortured to death, in order to satiate the re-
venge of the conqutrors; llme to replace the
mcn.;ers iwhich the comm;unity has loft in that
or four;cr wars. Thle who are reserved for
this milder fa-e, arc Ild to the huts of those
whole frien.ds have been killed. The women
im.cet them a2 the Coor, and if they receive
thc.l, :!heir ii.fifrings are at an end. They
are adiprj d into the family, and, according
to their p:;-.-.fe, arc :r;.:ted upon the mat of the
deceased. The, afi.lct:n his na-me, they hold
the n-'. rank, are trcatrud thcnceforw\ard with

t sI

-'- -

r. n. i. .all

C,;:'- !i: N. r:' r.
; . ;;i. z I ....;i u Moeurs, ii. 264.

all

all the tenderness due to a father, a brother, a BooK IV.
husband, or a friend. But if, either from
caprice, or an unrelenting desire of revenge,
the women of any farmily refuse to accept of
the prisoner who is offered to them, his doom
is fixed. No power can then save him from
torture and death.

WHILE their lot is in furpenfe, the prisoners Theirlndif-

fcrence con.

themselves appear altogether unconcerned cerning
about what may befal them. They talk, they t""cirate,
eat, they sleep, as if they were perfectly at
eaie, and no danger impending. When the
fatal sentence is intimated to them, they re-
ceive it with an unaltered countenance, raise
their death-fong, and prepare to susser like
men. Their conquerors assemble as to a so- and fortri
lemn festival, resolved to put the fortitude of [dod"r
the captive to the utmost proof. A scene en-
sues, the bare description of which is enough
to chill the heart with horror, wherever men
have been accuflomed, by milder institutions,
to refpeet their species, and to melt into ten-
dernels at the fight of human sufferings. The
prisoners are tied naked to a flake, but so as
to be at liberty to move around it. All who
are present, men, women, and children, rufll
upon them like furies. Every species of ror-

Voi. II. M ture

BoOKIV. ture is applied that the rancour of revenge can

invent. Some burn their limbs with red-hot
irons, some mangle their bodies with knives,
o:hers tear their flesh from their bones, pluck
out their nails by the roots, and rend and twif
their sinews. They vie with one another in
refinements of torture. Nothing sets bounds
to their rage, but the dread of abridging the
duration of their vengeance by hastening the
dc h of the fuffcrers; and such is their cruel
ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoiding in-
duftrioufy to hurt any vital part, they often
prolong this scene of anguish for several days.
In spite of all that they susser, the victims
con:inue to chant their death-fong with a firm
voice, they boat of their own exploits, they
in;ult their tormentors for their want of skill in
avrnginlg their friends and relations, they warn
t:ihe. of the vengeance which awaits them, on
account of their death, and excite their ferocity
by the most provoking reproaches and threats.
To display undaunted fortitude in such dreadful
firua:ions, is the noblest triumph of a warrior.
To avoid the trial by a voluntary death, or to
:rink; under it, is deemed infamous and
cowardly. If any one betray symptoms of timi-
di:y, his tormentors often dispatch him at once
with contempt, as unworthy of being treated

like

like a man m. Animated with those ideas, they BooK IV.
endure, without a groan, what it seems almost
impofible that human nature should sustain.
They appear to be not only insensible of pain,
but to court it. " Forbear, said an aged chief
of the Iroquois, when his insults had provoked
one of his tormentors to wound him with a
knife, forbear these stabs of your knife, and
rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your
allies, from beyond the lea, may learn by my
example to susser like men"." This magnani-
mity, of which there are frequent instances
among the American warriors, instead of ex-
citing admiration, or calling forth sympathy,
exasperates the fierce spirits of their torturers to
frefl a&s of cruelty °. Weary at length of
contending'with men, whose constancy of mind
they cannot vanquish, some chief in a rage puts
a period to their sufferings, by dispatching them
with his dagger or club P.

Tilrs barbarous scene is often succeeded by Sometimes

ca their

one no less shocking. As it is impossible to ap- prifonory.

m De la Potherie, ii. 237. iii. 48.

Colden, His. of Five Nations, i. zoo.

° Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
P Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 243, &C. 385. Lafitau

Moeurs, ii. 265. Crcuxij Hist. Canad. p. 73. Hennep.
Mocurs des Sauv. p. 64, &c. Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tertre,
ii. 40o. De la Potherie, ii. z2, &c.

M 2 pease

Boo. IV. peale the fell spirit of revenge which rages irt

the heart of a savage, this frequently prompts
the Americans to devour those unhappy persons,
who have been the victims of their cruelty. In
the ancient world, tradition has preserved the
memory of barbarous nations of cannibals, who
fed on human flesh. But in every part of the
New World, there were people to whom this
custom was familiar. It prevailed in the south-
ern continent 1, in several of the ifands , and
in various districts of North-America'. Even
in those parts, where circumstances, with which
we are unacquainted, had in a great measure
abolished this practice, it seems formerly to
have been ol well known, that it is incorporated
into the idiom of their language. Among the
Iroquois, the phrase by which they express their
resolution of making war againit an enemy is,
" Let us go and eat that nation." If they so-
licit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they in-
vite it to " eat broth made of the flesh of their

Stadius ap De Brv, iii. z12. Lery, ibid. 2lo. Bier.

3;?, Lettr. Ed:. 23. ;i1. Pifo, 8. Condam. S4. 97.
Ribas, Hi;i. de los Triumph. 473.

Lifi' of CoIumb. 9. :.D .

... .l Tertre, ii.

Dumront, Mem. i. z4. Char l.. : N. Fr. i. z59,
ii. i4. iii. 21. De _i ro:herir, :::. 5o.

" cncnues."

"enemies'." Nor, was the practice peculiar BooK IV.
to rude unpoliflhed tribes, the principle from
which it took rife, is so deeply rooted in the
minds of' the Americans, that it subsisted in
Mexico, one of the civilized empires in tlhe
New World, and relics of it may be discovered
among the more mild inhabitants of Peru. It
was not scarcity of food, as some authors ima-
gine, and the importunate cravings of hunger,
which forced the Americans to those horrid re-
pafls on their fellow-creatures. Human flesh
was never used as common food in any country,
and the various relations concerning people,
who reckoned it among the stated means of
l'bfiftence, flow from the credulity and mif-
takes of travellers. The rancour of revenge
first prompted men to this barbarous action .
The fiercest tribes devoured none but prisoners
taken in war, or such as they regarded as ene-
mies". Women and children who were not the
objects of enmity, if not cut off in the fury of
their first inroad into an hostile country, seldom

t Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 2o8, 2c9. Lettr. Edif. 23.
p. :7-. De la Potherie, ii. 298. See N OT' E XLIII,

: ict. 3S3. Blanco, Conversion de Piritu, p. zS.
iarncroft, Nat. Hil. of Guiana, p. 259, &c.

See NOTE XLIV.

M 3 fuffcred

BooK IV. suffered by the deliberate effecs of their re-

venge .

THE people of South-America gratify their

revenge in a manner somewhat different, but
with no less unrelenting rancour. There, pri-
foners, after meeting at their first entrance with
the fame rough reception as among the North-
Americans , are not only exempt from injury,
but treated with the greatest kindness. They
are fearted and caressed, and some beautiful
young women are appointed to attend and so-
lace them. It is not easy to account for this
part of their conduct, unless we impute it to a.
refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem
fludious to attach the captives to life, by sup-
plying them with every enjoyment that can ren-
der it agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed.
On a day appointed, the victorious tribe assem-
bles, the prisoner is brought forth with great
solemnity, he views the preparations for the fa-
crifice with as much indifference, as if he him-
feli were not the viaim, and meeting his fate
with undaunted firmness, is dispatched with a
single blow. The moment he falls, the women

* Bier. S3:. Bandini, Vi:a di Arnerico, 84. Tertre,
4c;. Fermin, Decrip. de Surin. i. 5q.

Stadius ap de B:r, iii. p. 40. 123.

seize

seize the body, and dress it for the feait. They BOOK IV.
belinear their children with the blood, in order C"
to kindle in their bosoms a hatred of their ene-
mies, which is never extinguished, and all join
in feeding upon the flesh with amazing greedi-
ness and exultation . To devour the body of
a slaughtered enemy, they deem the most com-
plete and exquisite gratification of revenge.
Wherever this practice prevails, captives never
escape death, but they are not tortured with the
fame cruelty as among tribes which are less ac-
customed to such horrid feasts b

As the constancy of every American warrior

may be put to such severe proof, the great ob-
jet of education and discipline in the New
W¥orld is to form the mind to sustain it. When
nations carry on war with open force, defy their
enemies to the combat, and vanquish them by
the superiority of their skill or courage, Ioldiers
are trained to be active, vigorous, and enter-
prifing. But in America, where the genius and
maxims of war are extremely different, passive
fortitude is the quality in highest estimation.
Accordingly, it is early the study of the Ameri-
cans to acquire a talent, which will enable them

Stadius ap De Bry, iii. 128, &c. Lery, ibid. !o..
See NOTE XLV.

M 4 to

Boo Il. to behave like men, when their resolution ihall

be put to the proof. As the youth of other
nations exercise themfclves in feats of activity
and force, those of America vie with one another
in exhibitions of their patience under sufferings.
They harden their nerves by those voluntary
trials, and gradually accustom themselves to
endure the sharpest pain, without complaining.
A boy and girl will bind their naked arms to-
gether, and place a burning coal between them,
in order to try who first discovers such impa-
tience as to shake it off'. All the trials, cufto-
r:an- in America, when a youth is admitted
into the class of warriors, or when a warrior is
promoted to the dignity of captain or chief, are
accommodated to this idea of manliness. They
are r.o, difplavs of valour, but of patience;
they ar= not exhibitions of their ability to
o5c.-n, but of their capacity to luffer. Among
the tribcs on the banks of the Orinoco, if a
war:. o: aspires to the rank of captain, his pro-
bation begins with a long fast, more rigid than
any ever obfcrved by the most abstemious her-
mir. At the close of this, the chiefs assemble,
each gives him three lafnes with a large whip,
applied so vigorously, that his body is alinolt
f-aed, and if he betrays the least symptom of

, Charev. Hi.1. N. F. iii. 307.

X~~~I ~ impatience

impatience or even sensibility, he is disgraced BooK IV.
for ever, and rejeaed as unworthy of the
honour. After some interval, the constancy of
the candidate is proved by a more excruciating
trial. He is laid in a hammoc with his hands
bound fast, and an innumerable multitude of
venomous ants, whose bite occasions exquisite
pain, and produces a violent inflammation, are
thrown upon him. The judges of his merit
stand around the hammoc, and, while these
cruel infects fasten upon the most sensible parts
of his body, a sigh, a groan, an involuntary
motion expressive of what he suffers, would ex-
clude him from the dignity which he is ambi-
tious to obtain. Even after this evidence of
his fortitude, it is not deemed to be completely
ascertained, but must stand another tef more
dreadful than any he has hitherto undergone.
He is again suspended in his hamnmoc, and co-
vered with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of
stinking herbs is kindled underneath, so as he
may feel its heat, and be involved in smoke.
Though scorched and almost suffocated, he
must continue to endure with the fame patient
insensibility. Many perish in this rude essay of
their firmness and courage, but such as go
through it with applause, receive the ensigns of
their new dignity with much solemnity, and are
ever after regarded as leaders of approved refo-

lution,

BoorT . Iution, whose behaviour, in the most trying
" . situations, will do honour to their countryd. In

North-America, the previous trial of a warrior
is neither so formal, nor so severe. Though
even there, before a youth is permitted to bear
arms, his patience and fortitude are proved by
blows, by fire, and by insults, more intolerable
to a haughty spirit than both .

THE amazing steadiness, with which the

Americans endure the most exquisite torments,
has induced tome authors to suppose that, from
the peculiar feebleness of their frame, their fen-
filbilir is not so acute as that of other people;
as women, and persons of a relaxed habit, are
obfen ed to be Icis affected with pain than ro-
bufi men, whofc nerves are more firmly braced.
But the constitution of the Americans is not so
different, in its texture, from that of the reft of
the human species, as to account for this di-
verfit- in their behaviour. It flows from a
principle of honour, instilled early and culti-
vated with such care, as to inspire man in his
rudest state with an heroic magnanimity, to
which philofophv hath endeavoured, in vain, to
form him, when more highly improved and

d G:! miil, ii. :36, &c. Biet. 376, &c.
e Ch:r!ev. Hi.L N. Fr. iii. zi9.

polished.

polished. This invincible constancy he has BooK IV.
been taught to confider as the chief diltintion '
of man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his condu&, and the ,
pafrions which take possession of his heart, are
few. They operate of course with more decisive
cffet, than when the mind is crowded with a
multiplicity of objects, or diftraced by the va-
riety of its pursuits; and when every motive
that acts with any force in forming the senti-
ments of a savage, prompts him to susser with
dignity, he will bear what might seem to be im-
poflible for human patience to sustain. But
wherever the fortitude of the Americans is not
routed to exertion by their ideas of honour,
their feelings of pain are the fame with those
of the reft of mankind '. Nor is that patience
under sufferings for which the Americans have
been so justly celebrated, an universal attain-
ment. The constancy of many of the victims
is overcome by the agonies of torture. Their
weakneis andlamentations complete the triumph
of their enemies, and rfleec disgrace upon their
country 1.

' See NOTE XLVI.
Charlcv. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 248. 385. De la Potherie,

:;i.~ 4s.THE

THE

BoocIV. THE perpetual hostilities carried on among
-w;,, by the American tribes are productive of very fatal
,^-,,- effects. As their imperfect industry does not

supply them with any superfluous store of pro-
visions, even in seasons of tranquillity, when
the irruption of an eremy desolates their culti-
vated lands, or disturbs them in their hunting
excursions, such a calamity reduces a commu-
nity, naturally unprovident and destitute of re-
sources, to extreme want. All the people of
the diftric that is invaded, are frequently forced
to take refuge in woods or mountains, which
can afford them no fubfiltcnce, and where many
of them perish. Notwithstanding their excessive
caution in conducting their military operations,
and the solicitude of every leader to preserve
the lives of his followers, as the rude tribes in
America seldom enjoy any interval of peace,
the loss of men among them is considerable in
proportion to the degree of population. Thus
famine and the sword combine in thinning
their numbers. All their communities are
feeble, and nothing now remains of fcveral
nations, which were once considerable, but the
name '.

Char!er. Hi;t. N. Fr. iii. 20z, :03. 429. Gumilla,
. :2-, &c.

SENSIBLE

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are BooiIV.

tribes which endeavour to recruit their national Re-csr
force when exhausted, by adopting prisoners tbhi" .."
taken in war, and by this expedient prevent adptng
their total extinction. The practice, however,
is not universally received. Resentment operates
more powerfully among savages, than confider-
ations of policy. Far the greater part of their
captives was anciently sacrificed to their ven-
geance, and it is only since their numbers began
to decline fast, that they have adopted milder
maxims. But such as they do naturalize, re-
nounce for ever their native tribe, and assume
the manners as well as paflions of the people by
whom they are adopted', so entirely, that they
often join them in expeditions against their own
countrymen. Such a sudden transition, and so
repugnant to one of the most powerful instincts
implanted by nature, would be deemed strange
among many people; but, among the members
of finall communities, where national enmity is
violent and deep-rooted, it has the appearance
of being still more unaccountable. It seems,
however, to result naturally fiom the principles
upon which war is carried on in America.
When nations aim at exterminating their ene-

Charlev. Hil. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lafit. ii. 308.

mies,

BoOKIV. mies, no exchange of prisoners can ever take

place. From the moment one is made a pri-
soner, his country and his friends confider him
as dead . He has incurred indelible disgrace by
suffering himself to be surprised or to be taken
by an enemy; and were he to return home,
after such a llain upon his honour, his nearest
relations would not receive or even acknow-
ledge that they knew him . Some tribes were
ifill more rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the
infamy which he had brought on his country
was expiated, by putting him instantly to
death =. As the unfortunate captive is thus an
outcast from his own country, and the ties which
bound him to it are irreparably broken, he feels
lecs reluctance in forming a new connection with
people, who, as an evidence of their friendly
sentiments, not only deliver him from a cruel
death, but offer to admit him to all the rights
of a fellow-citizen. The perfet similarity of
manners among lavage nations facilitates and
completes the union, and induces a captive to
transfer not only his allegiance, but his assec-
tion, to the community into the bosom of which
he is received.

See N O T E XLVII.
Li:rcnt. ii. 1S5, iS6.
I er.era, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16. p. 1;3.

BUT
4

BUT though war be the chief occupation of BooIKV.

men in their rude state, and to.excel in it, their Thf-
highest diftintion and pride, their inferiority is riority il
always manifest when they engage in competi- lfhed ...-
tion with polilhed nations. Detittute of that
foresight which discerns and provides for remote
events, fSrangers to the union and mutual con-
fidence requisite in forming any e5tenfive plan.
of operations, and incapable of the iubordina-
tion no less requisite in carrying into execution
such plans, savage nations may aftoniih a difci-
plined enemy by their valour, but seldom prove
formidable to him by their condu&, and when-
ever the contest is of long continuance, must
yield to superior art". The empires of Peru
and Mexico, though their progress in civiliza-
tion, when measured by the European or Asia-
tic standards, was inconsiderable, acquired such
an ascendency over the rude tribes around them,
that they subjected most of them with great fa-
cility to their power. When the people of Eu-
rope over-ran the various provinces of America,
this superiority was still more conspicuous.
Neither the courage nor number of the natives
could repel a handful of invaders. The aliena-
tion and enmity, prevalent among barbarians,
prevented them from uniting in any common

See NOTE XLVIII.

scheme

BooKIV. scheme of defence, and while each tribe fought

separately, all were subdued.
TbhXrts. VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted

with the use of metals, hardly merit any atten-
tion on their own account, but are worthy of
some notice, as far as they serve to display the
genius and manners of a people. The first dif-
trefs a savage must feel, will arise from the
Dr.ind manner in which his body is affected, by the

. . .. heat, or cold, or moiiture, of the climate under

which he lives; and his firif care will be, to
provide some covering for his own defence. In
the warmer and more mild climates of America,
none of the rude tribes were cloihed. To mofl
of them Nature had not even suggested any
idea of impropriety in being altogether unco-
vered d. As under a mild climate there was
little need of any defence from the injuries of
the air, and their extreme indolence shunned
everv species of labour to which it was not urged
by absolute necefity, all the inhabitants of the
isles, and a considerable part of the people on
the continent, remained in this state of naked
simplicity. Others were satisfied with some
flight covering, such as decency required. But

' Lery Navigat. ap De Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Co-
lumbus, c. 24 Venegas HiKt of Californ. p. 7o.

though

though naked, they were not unadorned. They Booi V.
dressed their hair in many different forms. They
fastened bits of gold, or shells, or shining (tones,
in their ears, their noses, and cheeks'. They
stained their skins with a great variety of figures3
and they spent much time, and submitted to
great pain, in ornamenting their persons in this
fantastic manner. Vanity, however, which
finds endless occupation for ingenuity and in-
vention, in nations where dress has become a
complex and intricate art, is circumscribed
within so narrow bounds, and confined to so few
articles among naked savages, that they are not
satisfied with those simple decorations, and have
a wonderful propensity to alter the natural form
of their bodies. This practice was universal
among the rudef' of the American tribes. Their
operations for that purpose begin as soon as an
infant is borrn. By comprefling the bones of
the flcull, while still boft and flexible, some
flatten the crown of their heads; iome squeeze
them into the shape of a cone; others mould
them as much as possible into a square figure';

' Lcry ap De Bry, iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes. 20.
22j.

Ovicdo Hia. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage

de Labat. ii. 7z. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197,
&c. Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Law-
I;n's Vey. to Carolina, p. 33.

VOL. II. N and

Boo IV. and they often endanger the lives of their

vr posterity by their violent and absurd efforts to

derange the plan of Nature, or to improve upon
her designs. But in all their attempts either to
adorn or to new-model their persons, it seems
to have been less the object of the Americans
to please, or to appear beautiful, than to give
an air of dignity and terror to their aspect.
Their attention to dress had more reference to
war than to gallantry. The difference in rank
and estimation between the two sexes was so
great, as extinguished, in some measure, their
solicitude to appear mutually amiable. The
man deemed it beneath him to adorn his per-
son, for the fake of one on whom he was ac-
customed to look down as a slave. It was when
the warrior had in view to enter the council of
his nation, or to take the field against its ene-
mies, that he assumed his choicest ornaments,
and decked his person with the nicest care g.
The decorations of the women were few and
simple; whatever was precious or splendid was
reserved for the men. In leveral tribes the
women were obliged to spend a considerable
prrt of their time every day in adorning and
Fair. ing their hulbarnds, and could bestow little

- V:er's Vcvage, p. 14I. Lery ap De Bry, iii.
i-. Cha:e\v. Hi;l. N. Fraa. iii. zi6. 22z.

attention

attcntionuponornamentingthemfelves. Among BooKWIV.
a race of men so haughty as to despise, or so
cold as to negle&t them, the women naturally
became careless and slovenly, and the love of
finery and shew, which has been deemed their
favourite passion, was confined chiefly to the
other sex h. To deck his person was the diftinc-
tion of a warrior, as well as one of his most
fcrious occupations'. In one part of their dress,
which, at first fight, appears the moss singular
and capricious, the Americans have discovered
considerable sagacity in providing against the
chief inconveniencies of their climates which is
often sultry and moist to excess. All the dif-
ferent tribes, which remain unclothed, are ac-
customed to anoint and rub their bodies with
the grease of animals, with viscous gums, and
with oils of different kinds. By this they check
that profuse perspiration, which, in the torrid
zone, waftes the vigour of the frame, and
abridges the period of human life. By this
too, they provide a defence against the extreme
meoifure during the rainy season k. They like-

' Charley. Hill. de la Nouv. France, iii. 278. 327. La-

fitiu, ii. 53. Kaln's Voyage, iii. 273. Lery ap De
Bry, iii. 169, 70o. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hilt.
de los Triumph. &-c. 472.

i Sce NOT'IE XLIX.
k Sec NOTE L.

N 2 wife,

Boo IV. wife, at certain seasons, temper paint of dif-

ferent colours with those unctuous substances,
and bedaub themselves plentifully with that
composition. Sheathed with this impenetrable
varnish, their ikins are not only protected from
the penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all the
innumerable tribes of infects have an antipathy
to the ;frell or taste of that mixture, they are
delivered from their teazing persecution, which
amidic forefis and marshes, especially in the
warmer regions, must have been altogether in-
tolerable in their state of nakedness '.
Hb::a- THE next object to dress that will engage the

attention of a savage, is to prepare omne habi-
tation which may afford him flelter bv day, and
a retreat at night. Whatever is conneced with
his ideas of personal dignity, whatever bears any
reference to his military character, the savage
warrior deems an objeEt of importance. What-
ever relates only to peaceable and inactive life,
he views with perfect indifference.' Hence,
though finically attentive to dress, he is little
lolicitous about the elegance or d;fpofition of
his habitation. Savage nations, far from that
state of improvement, in which the mode of

I ab.;. ii. ,, Gumilia, i. 19D. 0c2. Bancroft Nat.
I ::. cf G a.n, 'l. :3c.

living
" c~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c

living is confidered as a mark of diffinftion, and BOOK IV.
unacquainted with those wants, which require
a variety of accommodation, regulate the con-
ftruction of their houses according to their li-
mited ideas of necessity. Some of the Ameri-
can tribes were so extremely rude, and had ad-
vanced so little beyond the primeval simplicity
of nature, that they had no houses at all. Dur-
ing the day, they take shelter from the scorching
rays of the iun under thick trees; at night they
form a shed with their branches and leaves ".
In the rainy season they retire into covers,
formed by the hand of Nature, or hollowed out
by their own industry '. Others, who have no
fixed abode, and roam through the forests in
quest of game, sojourn in temporary huts, which
they ereft with little labour, and abandon with-
out any concern. The inhabitants of those vast
plains, which are deluged by the overflowing
of rivers during the heavy rains that fall pe-
riodically between the tropics, raise houses upon
piles fastened in the ground, or place them
among the boughs of trees, and are thus safe
amidst that wide extended inundation which

m See NOTE LI.
n Lettres Edif. v. 273. Venegas Hist. of Califor. i.

76. Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 55. Lettres
Edif. ii. 176. Gumilla, i. 383. Bancroft Nat. His. of
Guiana, 277.

N 3 surrounds

Boor i. surrounds them . Such were the first ef'ays of

t' he rudefi Americans towards providing them-
feives with habitations. But even among tribes
which are more improved, and whose refi-
dence is become altogether fixed, the ftruaure
of their houses is extremely mean and simple.
They are wretched huts, sometimes of an
oblong and Sometimes of a circular form, in-
tended merely for shelter, with no view to ele-
gance, and little attention to conveniencv. The
doors are so low, that it is necessary to bend or
to creep on the hands and feet in order to enter
them. They are without windows, and have
a large hole in the middle of the roof, to con-
vev out the smoke. To follow travellers in
other minute circumstances of their description,
i, nc,: on!v beneath the dignity of history, but
v'cuuid be tfreign to the obict of my researches.
Ore circumftancc merits attention, as it is fin-
C'j. -, and illuilratcs the character of the peo-
plc. Some of their houcfs are so large as to
contain accommodation for fourscore or a hun-
cre pecrfns. Tlief are built for the reception
c disferent famiiies, . hich dwell together under
t: i:.;ri e roof:, an, or~.i around a common
::.-., :.::hlc su-:r.::-e '.::lcnts, or any kind

o ';: ::.a1, i. 225. Herrera, LCC. I. lib. ix. c. 6.
( * .. . '.:-.-r.-r, 3. C.

'* ' 'c O T - !1.

of

of screen or partition between the spaces which BooK IV.
they refpetively occupy. As soon as men have -
acquired diftinc ideas of property; or when
they are so much attached to their females, as
to watch them with care and jealousy; families
of course divide and fetde in separate houses,
where they can secure and guard whatever they
wish to preserve. This singular mode of habi-
tation may therefore be confidered not only as
the effeAt of that community of goods which
!ulbilfted among the several people in America,
but as a proof of inattention and indifference
towards their women. If they had not been
accustomed to perse& equality, such an ar-
rangement could not have taken place. If their
fenlibility had been apt to have taken alarm,
they would not have trusted the virtue of their
women amidst the temptations and opportuni-
ties of such a promiscuous intercourse. At the
lame time, the perpetual concord which reigns
in habitations where so many families are crowded
together, is lurprifing, and affords a striking
evidence that they mutt be people of either a
very gentle, or of a very phlegmatic temper,
who, in fiich a situation, are unacquainted with
animosity, brawling, and discord '.

q Journ. de Grillet & Bechamcl dans la Goyane, p. 65.

L:;F.t.u iMoeurs, ii. 4. Torquem. Monarq. i. 247. Jour-
nal Ill. de Joutal, 217. Lery Hiit. Brasil, ap De Bry,
i. . ;S. l.oza7 Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 67.

N 4 AFTER

Boo.mW. AFTER making some provision. for his dress
i.--- and habitation, a ravage will perceive the ne-

cefity of preparing proper arms with which to
affaulr or repel an enenmy. This, accordingly,
has early exercised the ingenuity and invention
of all rude nations. The firfR offensive weapons
were doubtless such as chance presented, and
the first efforts of art to improve upon there,
were extremely aukward and simple. Clubs
made of some heavy wood, stakes hardened in
the fire, lances whose heads were armed with
flint or the bones of some animal, are weapons
known to the rudest nations. All there, how-
ever, were of uef only in close encounter. But
men iifhed to annoy their enemies while at a
distance, ard the bow and arrow is the most
early invention for this purpose. This weapon
is in the hands of people, whose advances in
improvement are extremely inconsiderable, and
is familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of
the globe. It is remarkable, however, that
orme tribes in America were so destitute of art
and ingenuity, that they had not attained to.the
dilcovery of this simple invention %, and seem
rt have been unacquainted with the use of any
niiiive weapon. The fling, though in its coh-
Plrut:icn not more complex than the bow, and
a.;..on, many nations of equal antiquity, was

rPir-2':::- Corq. del Nuevo Reyno, 9. 2.

little

little known to the-people-of Northr-Ameriea P, Boor-IV.
or the islands, but appears to have-been:ufedlhy
a few tribes in the.fouthern.co rentii ..T 'he,
people in fome.provinces of Chili, andilthofeof
Patagonia,. towards'-the southern .extrerniy of
America, use a:weapon peculiar to themselves.,
They faiten stones about the size of a fifbto each.
end of a leather thongof eight feet:in length,
and swinging these round their heads; throw
them with such dexterity that they seldom miss
the object at which.they aim'.

AMONG people who had hardly any occupa- Their d-

tion but war or hunting, the chief exertions of icl ",.c
their invention', as well as industry, were.
naturally directed towards these objets. With
relpeEt to every thing else, their wants and'
desires were so limited, that their invention
was not upon the itretch. As their food and
habitations are perfectly simple, their domestic
utensils are few and rude. Some of the southern
tribes had discovered the art of forming vessels
of earthen ware, and baking them in the fun,
so as they could endure the fire. In North

P Naufi. de Alv. Nun Cabeca de vaca, c. x. p. 12.
s Picdrah. p. 16. See NOTE LIII.
. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Colle&. iii. 8z.

Falkner's Defcrip. of Patagon. p. 130.
' See NOTE LIV.

America,

Boor IV. America, they hollowed a piece of hard wood
D--is'e' into the form of a kettle, and filling it with
ain fid. water, brought it to boil by throwing red-hot

stones into it'. These vessels they used in
preparing part of their provisions; and this
may be conlidered as a flep towards refinement
and luxury, for men in their rudest state were
not acquainted with any method of dressing
their Xvictuals, but by roasting them on the
fire; and among several tribes in America,
this is the only species of cookery yet known °.

co-<-l-- But the malter-piece of art, among the savages
'cain ' of America, is the construction of their canoes.

An Elkimaux, shut up in his boat of whale-
bone, covered with the skins of feals, can
brave chat stormy ocean, on which the barren-
nels of his country compels him to depend for
the chief part of his subsistence '. The people
of Canada venture upon their rivers and lakes,
in boazs made of the bark of trees, and so light
that two men can carry them, wherever ihal-
lows or cataracts obstruct the navigation'. In
these frail vefiels they undertake and accom-
plibh long vovages . The inhabitants of the
iiles and of the southern continent form their

C:-.r'evh. Hilt. of N. Fr. iii. 332.
c., NOT? LV. r:'is Vo;-. 133.
. ' c G IT LVI. La;.:3 u eurs, &c. ii. :13.

6 canoes

canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large tree, BooK'IV.
with infinite labour, and though iin appearance '
extremely aukward and unwieldy, they paddle
and fleer them with such dexterity, that Euro-
peans well acquainted with all the improve-
nents in the science of navigation, have been
aflonilhed at the rapidity of their motion, and
the quickness of their evolutions. Their pi-
irogu's, or war-boats, are so large as to carry
forty or fifty men; their canoes employed in
ii;hing and in short voyages are less capacious b.
The furm as well as materials of all these
various ipecies of vessels is well adapted to the
lirvice fbr which they are destined; and the
more minutely they are examined, the mecha-
nilin of their fruLture, as well as neatness of
their fabric, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards industry Lizleier

anion ' the Americans, one striking quality in th'a'vpply
their ciaradter is conspicuous. They apply to to iabo'r.
work v.i:iout ardour, carry it on with little
.:-:;vir., and, like children, are easily diverted
i:n.:. it. Even in operations which seem the
; .)t interelting, and where the most powerful
:ioti;'s urge them to vigorous exertions, they
iabour with a languid listlessness. Their work

b Labat Voyages, ii. 9l, &c. 131.

advances

Boo. IV. advances under their hand with such slowness,

that an eye-witness compares it to the imper-
ceptible progress of vegetation . They will
spend so many years in forming a canoe, that
it often begins to rot with age before they
finish it. They will susser one part of a roof
to decay and perifli, before they complete the
other'. The flightef manual operation con-
fumes a vast length of time, and what in po-
lifljed nations would hardly be an effort of in-
duifry, is among savages an arduous undertak-
ing. This slowness of the Americans in exe-
cuting works of every kind may be imputed
to various causes. Among savages, who do
not depend for subsistence upon the efforts of
regular induftrv, time is of so little import-
ance, that they set no value upon it; and pro-
vided they can finish a design, they never
regard how long they are employed about it.
The tools which they employ are so aukward
and defecive, that every work in which they
engage must necessarily be tedious. The hand
of the mott induttrious and skilful artist, were
it furnished with no better infrrument than a
stone hatchet, a shell, or the bone of some
animal, could hardly perfect the most simple
work. It is by length of labour, that he must
c G':r.iila, li. z27. e Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 2Z.

endeavour

endeavour to supply his defect of power. But, BboKIV.
above all, the cold phlegmatic temper peculiar
to the Americans renders their operations lan-
guid. It is almiot impossible to rouze them
from that habitual indolence in which they are
funk; and unless when engaged in war or
hunting, they seem incapable of exerting any
vigorous effort. Their ardour of application
is not so great as to call forth that inventive
spirit which suggests expedients for facilitating
and abridging labour. They will return to a
task day after day, but all their methods of
executing it are tedious and opetofee. Even
since the Europeans have communicated to
them the knowledge of their instruments, and
taught them to imitate their arts, the peculiar
genius of the Americans is conspicuous in every
attempt they make. They may be patient and
assiduous in labour, they can copy with a ser-
vile and minute accuracy, but discover little
invention, and no talents for dispatch. In
spite of inftnrtion and example, the spirit of
the race predominates; their motions are natu-
rally tardy, and it is vain to urge them to
quicken their pace. Among the Spaniards in
America, the work of an Indian is a phrase by
which they describe any thing, in the execution

See N 0 T E LVII.

of

BooK IV. of which an immense time has been employed,

and much labour waited f.

Th-irreli- VII. No circumfrance respecting rude na-
"n1' tions has been the object of greater curiosity

than their religious tenets and rites; and none,
perhaps, has been so imperfectly underitood,

Pc-,ir, or represented with so little fidelity. Priests
l MtDSi'- and mifiionaries are the persons who have had
""''y the best opportunities of carrying on this in-

quiry, among the molf uncivilized of the
American tribes. Their minds, engrossed by
the dotrines of their own religion, and habi-
tuated to its institutions, are apt to discover
something which resembles those objecs of
their veneration, in the opinions and rites of
every people. Whatever they contemplate,
they view through one medium, and draw and
accommodate it to their own system. They
ftudv to reconcile the institutions, which fall
under their observation, to their own creed,
nor to explain them according to the rude
notions of the people themielves. They ascribe
to them ideas which thev are incapable of form-
ing, and luppofe them to be acquainted with
principles and facts, which it is impoflible
that thev should know. Hence, tome mifiona-

\ b-'-; e- : U:1;oa, i. 3 3., Le:!r. Edif. &c. 15. 318.

ries

rics have been induced to believe, that even 1BdoaKt-
among the moss barbarous nations.in America,
they had .discovered traces, no lets distinct
than amazing, of their acquaintance with the
sublime mysteries and peculiar institutions of
Christianity. From their own interpretation
of certain exprefifons and ceremonies, they
concluded that these people had Ibme know-
ledge of the doctrine of the Trinity, of the
incarnation of the Son of God, of his expiatory
facrilice, of the virtue of the cross, and of the
effcacy of the sacraments g. In such unintelli-
gent and credulous guides as these, we can
place little confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choiceof con-

dufors, with the greatest care, we muff not
follow them with implicit faith. An inquiry
into the religious notions of rude nations is in-
volved in peculiar intricacies, and we must
often pause in order to Ieparate the sacs which
our informers relate, from the reasonings with
which they are accompanied, or the theories
which they build upon them. Several pious
writers, more attentive to the importance of the
subjeR than to the condition of the people

g Venegas, i. 88. 92. Torquemada, ii. 445. Garcia
Crigen. 122. llerrera, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. 5. lib.

~v~. ~c.7 ~.whoe

whose

Boo IV. whose sentiments they were endeavouring to

T discover, have bestowed much unprofitable

labour in researches of this nature .
Confi-e. to THERE are two fundamental doEtrines, upon

which the whole li'fem of religion, as far as
it can be discovered by the light of nature, is
established. The one refpe&s the being of a
God, the other the immortality of the foul.
To discover the ideas of the uncultivated na-
tions under our review with regard to those
important points, is not only an objet of
curiosity, but may afford inftrudion. To there
two articles I shall confine my researches, leav-
ing Subordinate opinions, and the detail of
local superstitions, to more minute inquirers.

Trhe W-. Whoever has had any opportunity of examin-
of Go-. .

ing into the religious opinions of persons in
the inferior ranks of life, even in the most en-
lightened and civilized nations, will find that
their fvftem of belief is derived from initruc-
tion, not discovered by inquiry. That nume-
rous part of the human species, whole lot is
labour, whose principal and almolf sole occu-
pation is to iecure subsistence, views the ar-
rangement and operations of nature with little
reflection, andi. as neither leisure nor capacity

' SNc OTE L V!.

£or

for entering irito that path of refined and intri- BooK IV.
cate speculation which.conduts to the -knibov-
ledge of the principles of natural:religion..-' In
the early and most rude periods of savage life,
filch disquisitions are altogether uniknown.
When the intellefulal powers are jtlft begin-
ning to unfold, and their first feeble erertions are
directed towards a few objects of primary necef-
fily and use; when the faculties of the mind are
so limited, as not to have formed abftrat or
general ideas; when language is so barren, as
to be destitute of names to distinguish any
thing that is not perceived by some of the
lenfms; it is preposterous to expect that man
should be capable of tracing with accuracy the
relation between cause and effet; or to sup-
pose that he should rife from the contempla-
tion of the one to the knowledge of the other,
and form just conceptions of a Deity, as the
Creator and Governor of the universe. The idea
of creation is lb familiar wherever the mind
is enlarged by science, and illuminated with
revelation, that we seldom reflet how pro-
found and abstruse this idea is, or confider
what progress man muff have made in obfer-
vation and research, before he could arrive at
any knowledge of this elementary principle in
ri ligion. Accordingly, several tribes have
b-.n discovered in America, which have no

VOL. II. 0 idea

BooeIV. idea whatever of a Supreme Being, and io

rites of religious worlhip. Inattentive to that
magnificent fpesacle of beauty and order pre-
sented to their view, unaccustomed to refiect
either upon what they themselves are, or to
inquire who is the author of their existence,
men, in their savage state, pass their days like
the animals round them, without knowledge
or veneration of any superior power. They
have not in their languages any name for the
Deity, nor have the motl accurate observers
been able to discoser any prafcice or institution
which seemed to imply that they recognised
his authority, or were solicitous to obtain his
favour'. It is only among men in the most
uncultivated state of nature, and while their
intelleclual faculties are so feeble and limited
as hardly to elevate them above the irrational
creation, that we discover this total infenfibi-
lity to the impressions of any invisible power.

Biet, 539. Ler: ap de Bry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff.

Church. Col. ii. 132. Lettr. Edif. 2. 1i7. Id. 12, i3.
Venegas, i. S7. Lozano Defcript. del Grand Chaco, 59.
Fernand. Miflion. de Chiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii. 156.
Rochefort Hitt. des Antilles, p. 468. Margrave Hist. in
Append. dr Chilienfibus, :85. Uiioa Notic. Americ.
335, &c. Barrere, 2iS, 219. Harcourt Vo-.. to Guiana.
Pu-ch. Pilgr. iv. p. I2-3. Account of Brasil, by a Portu-
guee. Ibid .

p. 29. Jones's Journal, p. 59. See
NOTE LIX.

But

But the human mind, formed for religion, B9oslV;
ioon opens to the reception of ideas, which
are defLined, when corrected and refined, to
be the great source of confulation amidst the
calamities of life. Among some of the Ame-
rican tribes, frill in the infancy of improve-
ment, we discern apprehensions of some invi-
fibie and powerful beings. These apprehen-
lions are originally indistinct and perplexed,
and leem to be fuggel-ed rather by the dread
of impending evils, than to flow from gratitude
fur bleflings received. While Nature holds
on her courle with uniform and unditurbed
regularity, men enjoy the benefits resulting
firom it, without inquiring concerning its
cause. But every deviation from this regular
courife rouzes and astonishes them. When
they behold events to which they are not ac-
customed, they search for the reasons of them
with eager curiosity. Their understanding is
unable to penetrate into these; but imagina-
tion, a more forward and ardent faculty of the
mind, decides without hesitation. It ascribes
the extraordinary occurrences in nature to the
influence of invisible beings, and supposes that
the thunder, the hurricane, and the earth-
qu ake, are effecs of their interposition. Some
fich confused notion of spiritual or invisible
power, superintending over those natural cala-

0 2 mities

BooK IV. mities which frequently desolate the earth, and

terrify its inhabitants, may be traced among
many rude nations k. But besides this, the
disasters and dangers of savage life are so
many, and men often find themlelves in fitua-
tions so formidable, that the mind, sensible of
its own weakness, has no resource but in the
guidance and protecuon of wildom and power
superior to what is human. Deje'ted with
calamities which oppress him, and exposed to
dangers which he cannot repel, the savage no
longer relics upon himself; he feels his own
impotence, and fees no profreL of being ex-
tricated, but bv the interpolition of some in-
visible arm. Hence, in all unenlightened
nations, the first rites or practices which bear
any reicmb!2nce to acts of religion, have it
for their obicet to avert evils which men susser
or dread. The clra;-

e:s or Okkis of the North

Americans were amulets or charms, which they
imagined to be of such virtue, as to preserve
the perfonrs who repoled confidence in them
from every difaifrous event, or they were con-
fidered as tutelarv fpirirs, whose aid they might
implore in circumfii ances of distress'. The
Cimis of the ifnanders were reputed by them the

See NOTE LX.

s Chare:-'. N, Fr. iii. -.: , &c. Creuxii Hit. Canad.

p. ,
S c, 5.

authors

authors of every calamity that afflits the hu- Boo iV.
man race; they were represented under the
most frightful forms, and religious homage
was paid to them with no other view than to
appease these furious deities". Even among
those tribes whose religious system was more
enlarged, and who had formed some concep-
tion of benevolent beings delighted with con-
ferring benefits, as well as of malicious powers
prone to inflict evil; superstition still appears
as the offspring of fear, and all its efforts were
employed to avert calamities. They were per-
fuaded that their good deities, prompted by
the beneficence of their nature, would bestow
every blessing in their power, without folicita-
tion or acknowledgment; and their only
anxiety was to soothe and deprecate the wrath
of the powers whom they regarded as the ene-
mies of mankind .

SUCH were the imperfelt conceptions of the

greater part of the Americans with refpe& to
tice interpositions of invisible agents, and such,
almIoft universally, was the mean and illiberal

". Oviedo, lib. iii. c. I. p. I I. P. Martyr, decad.
p. o10, &C.

'Icrtre, ii. 365. Borde, p. 14. State of Virginia,

by a NItive, book iii. p. 32, 31. Dumont, i. 165. Ban-
ci.efi Nat. Hill. of Guiana, 309.

0 3 objeft

BOOK IV. objrc of their superstitions. Were we to trace

' back the ideas of other nations to that rude

iLate in which history first presents them to our
view, we should discover a surprising refem-
biance in their tenets and practices; and should
be convinced, that, in similar circumstances,
the faculties of the human mind hold nearly
the fame course in their progress, and arrive
at almost the fame conclusions. The impref-
sions of fear are conspicuous in all the lfftems
of iuperftition formed in this situation. And
:he mouf exalted notions of men rife no higher
than to a perplexed apprehension of certain
being;, whole power, though supernatural, is
l;.-ii.cd as well as partial.

-- : :c BIr, among other tribes, which have been
r'- longer united, or have made greater progrrls

in ;mprovement, we discern some feeble point-
-, towards more lull and adequate concep-
i;ons of the power that presides in nature.
They icem to perceive that there mull be fume
univers'l cause to whom all things are indebted
for their being. If we may judge by some of
their exprefflons, they appear to acknowledge
. divine power as the maker of the world, and
it.: di!o.-cr of all evenrs. They denominate
'!:: t-. G-sat Spirit C. But these ideas arc

' -..'-'. 'i Ft. iii. 33'. Sj.ar., V'oy. du Pa;: dcs
:- .c-.. ::'..

fLin;

fitint and confused, and when they attempt to BooKIV;
explain them, it is manifest, that among them
the word spirit has a meaning very different
from that in which we employ it, and that they
have no conception of any deity but what is
corporeal. They believe their gods to be of
the human form, though of a nature more ex-
cellent than man, and retail such wild inco-
herent fables concerning their funcions and
operations, as are altogether unworthy of a
place in hiflory. Even among these tribes,
there is no established form of public worship;
there are no temples erected in honour of their
deities; and no ministers peculiarly consecrated
to their service. They have the knowledge,
however, of several superstitious ceremonies
iind practices handed down to them by tradi-
tion, and to these they have recourse with a
childish credulity, when rouzed by any emer-
gence from their usual insensibility, and ex-
cited to acknowledge the power, and to im-
plore the protection of superior beings P.

'FFE tribe of the Natchez, and the people SyRem of

of Bogota had advanced beyond the other un- theNatcb"z.
cultivated nations of America in their ideas of
rcligion, as well as in their political inftitu-

P Charlev . N. Fr. iii. 315. Colden, i. 17.

0 4 tions;

BocIV.- tions; and it is no less difficult to explain the
Lz ,cause of this distinction than of that which we

have already confidered. The Sun was the
chief objea of religious worship among the
Natchez. In their temples, which were con-
ftrucied with tome magnificence, and decorated
with various ornaments, according to their
mode of architecture, they preserved a perpe-
tual fire, as the purest emblem of their divi-
nity. Ministers were appointed to watch and
feed this sacred flame. The first function of
the great chief of the nation, every morning,
was an act of obeisance to the Sun; and fefti-
vals returned at stated seasons which were cele-
brated by the whole community with solemn
bu: unbloody rites . This is the most refined
:pecies of fuperfition known in America, and,
perhaps, one of the most natural as well as
molt reducing. The Sun is the apparent source
of the joy, fertility, and life, difiufed through
nature, and while the human mind, in its
earl- essays towards inquiry, contemplates and
admires his universal and animnating energy,
its admiration is apt to itop inort at what is
;viible, withou; reaching to eri unfccn cause;
a.- pays that a'jrat'on to the moit glorious

n:i. 3-'nr.:ii w-ork of Go., which is due only

-t :-'- . :. T;", &c. C a'".:a ' N. Fr. iii. 417, &c.

to

to him who formed it. As fire is the purest BooKIV.
and most active of the elements, and in some
of its qualities and effects resembles the Sun,
it was, not improperly, chosen to be the em-
blem of his powerful operation. The ancient
Persians, a people far superior, in every respect,
to that rude tribe whose rites I am describing,
founded their religious fyftelrron similar prin-
ciples, and established a form of public wor-
!hip, leis gross and exceptionable than that of
an) people destitute of guidance from revela-
tion. This surprising co-incidence in senti-
ment between two nations, in such different
Itates of improvement, is one of the many fin-
gular and unaccountable circumstances which
uocLur in the history of human affairs.

AMBoNG the people of Bogota, the Sun and

Miloon were, likewise, the chiefobje&s of vene-
ration. Their fyltem of religion was more
rcgular and complete, though less pure, than
that of the Natchez. They had temples, altars,
prici-s, sacrifices, and that long train of cere-
monies, which superstition introduces wherever
fich has fully eftablifledi her dominion over the
minds of men. But the rites of their worship
were cruel and bloody. They offered human
victims to their deities, and many of their
pi:;'tii:LS nearly resembled the barbarous infti-

6 rutions

EOOK l. tutions of the Mexicans, the genius of which

we shall have an opportunity of confidering
more attentively in its proper place'.

Ta;i- ie-, WITH respect to the other great doctrine of
5, ....- religion, concerning the immortality of the
t,:y'; : :h foul, the sentiments of the Americans were

more united: the human mind, even when
least improved and invigorated by culture,
shrinks from the thoughts of dissolution, and
looks forward with hope and expectation to a
flare of future existence. This sentiment, re-
fulting from a secret consciousness of its own
dignity, from an inftinclive longing after im-
mortality, is universal, and may be deemed
natural. Upon this, are founded the most
exalte-l hopes of man in his highest fate of
improvement; nor has nature withheld from
Jlim this soothing consolation, in the most early
and rude period of his progress. We can trace
this on:nion from one extremity of America to
the other. In some regions more faint and
obscure, in others more perfectly developed,
b:t no where unknown. The most uncivilized
of its savage tribes do not apprehend death as
tie extinction of being. All entertain hopes

r Piedrah:a, Co.q. del N. Resno, p. 17. I errera,
-c. . h.7. v. ct. of

of

of a future and more happy slate, where they BooxIV.
lhall be for ever exempt from the calamities
which embitter human life in its present con-
dition. This they figure as a delightful coun-
try, blessed with perpetual spring, whose forests
abound with gaime, wilhof rivers swarm with
fish, where famine is never felt, and uninter-
rupted plenty ihall be enjoyed without labour
or toil. But as men, in forming their .firt im-
perfecr ideas concerning the invisible world,
iippol: that there they shall continue to feel:
the fame desires, and to be engaged in the
It;li occupations; they naturally ascribe emi-.
nence and diftintion, in that state, to the
fa.lme qualities and talents'which are here the,
obijec of their esteem. The Americans, ac-
cor lingly, allotted the highest place, in their
counntry of spirits, to the skilful hunter, to the
adventurous and successful warrior, and to such
as had tortured the greatest number of cap-
tives, and devoured their flesh . These no- inuce then
tions were so prevalent, that they gave rife to :'n,b &',
an univcrlfal cuftorn, which is, at once, the "ith the
fIrongr!t evidence that the Americans believe
in a luture slate, and the befl illustration of
wh,.at they expect there. As they imagine, that

Lecry ap de Bry, iii. 22z. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 351,
..'. De :l Potherie, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5.

the

Boorn v. the dead begin their career anew in the world
'"L-" whither they are gone, that their friends may

not enter upon it defenceless and unprovided,
they bury with them their bow, their arrows,
and other weapons uled in hunting or war;
they deposit in their tombs the skins or stuffs
of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, domestic utensils, and what-
ever is reckoned among the necessaries in their
simple mode of life'. In some provinces, up-
on the decease of a'cazique or chief, a certain
number of his wives, of his favourites, and of
his saves, were put to death, and interred to-
geher with him, that he might appear with
the fame dignity in his future station, and be
waited upon by the fame attendants °. This
persuasion is so deep-rooted, that many of the
deceased person's retainers offer themselves as
voluntary victims, and court the privilege of
accompanying their departed master, as an
high distinction. It has been found difficult,

t Chro.ica de Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288.

Creux. Hil. Canad. p. 9. Rochefort. Hist. des Antilles,
56S. Bie, 391. De la Potherie, ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco,
Converf. de Piritu, p. 3;.

i Dumnont, Louifiane, i. zo0, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3.

Go..ora. Hist. Gen. c. 28. P. Mart. decad. 304. Char-
lcF-. . F. iii. 421. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P.
.'T.: :.:-r H-rnn-cz, Memor. de Chiriqui. Ccil. Orig,
Pk--;, i. Ch;rn. dc Cieca de Leon, c. 33.

on

on some occasions, to set bounds to this en- Boos IV.
thufiafm of affectionate duty, and to reduce '"
the train of a favourite leader to such a number
ns the tribe could afford to spare'.

AMhiON the Americans, as well as other un- Superiftion

co,,ncOed

civilized nations, many of the rites and ob- with do..
fervances which bear some resemblance to ats tion.
of religion, have no connection with devotion,
but proceed from a fond desire of prying into
f:turity. The human mind is most apt to
feel, and to discover this vain curiosity, when
its own powers are most feeble and uninformed.
Astonished with occurrences, of which it is
unable to comprehend the cause, it naturally
fancies that there is something mysterious and
wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at events,
of which it cannot discern the issue or the con-
lcquences, it has recourse to other means of
discovering them, than the exercise of its own
fi.gacitv. Wherever superstition is so efta-
blilhed as to form a regular fyflem, this desire
of penetrating into the secrets of futurity is
connected with it. Divination becomes a reli-
gious act. Priests, as the ministers of Heaven,
pretend to deliver its oracles to men. They
arc the only soothsayers, augurs, and magi-

x See NOTE LXI.

cians,

Boor IV. cians, who profess the sacred and important
T-' . art ofdifclofing what is hid from other eyes.

This d--.r- BUT, among rude nations, who pay no
=.n' c- veneration to any superintending power, and
t- rphfi- who have no eirabliiied rites or minivers of

religion, their curiosity to discover what is
future and unknown is cherished by a different
principle, and derives strength from another
alliance. As the difeaies of men, in the savage
slate, are like those of the animal creation, few
but extremely violent, their impatience under
what they susser, and ollicitude for the reco-
very of health, soon inspired them with extra-
ordinary reverence for inch as pretended to
understand the nature of their maladies, or to
prelerve them from their sudden and fatal
effects. Thefc ignorant pretenders, however,
were such utter strangers to the structure of the
human frame, as to be equally unacquainted
with the causes of its disorder>, and the manner
in hich they will terminate. Superstition,
mingled frequently with some portion of craft,
supplied what they wanted in iticnce. They
imputed the origin of difc..lcs to ilpernatural
influence, and prescribcd or perfornmed a variety
of myllerious ri:cs, which they gave out to be
cf power sufficient to remove the mollt danger-
ous and inveterate maladies. The credulity

and

and love of the marvellous, natural to uhin- BOOK IV.
formed men, favoured the deception, and pre- '-
pared them to be the dupes of those impotfors.
Among savages, their first physicians are a
kind of conjurers or wizards, who boast that
they know what is past, and can foretell what
is to come. Incantations, sorcery, and mum-
meries of diverse kinds, no less strange than
frivolous, are the means which they employ to
expel the imaginary causes of malignityY;
and, relying upon the efficacy of there, they
predic with confidence what will be the fate
of their deluded patients. Thus superstition
in its earliest form flowed from the fblicitude
of man to be delivered from present distress,
not from his dread of evils awaiting him in a
future life, and was originally ingrafted on
medicine, not on religion. One of the first,
and most intelligent historians of America was
struck with this alliance between the art of
divination and that ofphyfic, among the people
of Hispaniola . But this was not peculiar to
them. The Alexis, the Piayas, the Autmoins,
or whatever was the diftinguifling name of
their diviners and charmers in other parts of
America, were all the physicians of their re-

y P. Melch. Hernandez, Memorial de Cheriqui. Col-
}e2. Orig. Pap. i.

Oviedo, lib, v. c. i.

fpective

Boo-IV. ipe&ive tribes, in the fame manner as the
'- i -Bubitos of Hifpanioia. As their fun&tion led

them to apply to the human mind when en-
feebled by sickness, and as they found it, in
that season of dejection, prone to be alarmed
with imaginary fears, or amused with vain
hopes, they eaily induced it to rely with im-
plicit confidence on tilc virtue of their Ipells,
and the certainty of their predictions.

Cra2j'vy WHHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of
iti:id. supernatural power and dif, crn.ment in one

instance, they have a propenliry to admit it in
others. The Americans did not long suppose
the efficacy of conjuration to be confined to
one subjec. They had recour;c to it in every
firuation of danger or diflrefs. When the
events of war were peculiarly disastrous, when
they met with unforeifcn disappointments in
hunting, when inundations or drought threat-
ened their crops with deltruction, they called
upon their conjurers to begin their incanta-
tions, in order to discover the causes of those
calamities, or to foretell what would be thcir

Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 4. Oiborne, Coll. ii.

S86c Dumont, i. 169, &c. Ch,*i:r.. '. Nr. iii. 561.
36., &c. Lawson, N. Carol. :1i. R;bas, Triumrph.
p. 17. Bie;, 336. Dc la Potileie, ii. 35, &c.

i.";:C.

ifrue b. Their confidence in this delusive art BOOKIV.
gradually increased, and manifested itself in all
the occurrences of life. When involved in
any difficulty, or about to enter upon any
rranfiaction of moment, every individual regu-
larly consulted the forcerer, depended upon his
inftrustions to extricate him from the former,
and to direct his conduct in the latter. Even
among the rudest tribes in America, fuperfti-
tion appears in this form, and divination is an
art in high esteem. Long before man had
acquired such knowledge of a deity as inspires
reverence and leads to adoration, we observe
him stretching out a presumptuous hand to
draw aside that veil with which providence
kindly conceals its purposes from human know-
ledge; and we find him labouring, with fruit-
less anxiety, to penetrate into the mysteries of
the divine administration. To discern, and to
worship a superintending power, is an evidence
of the enlargement and maturity of the human
understanding; a vain desire of prying into
futurity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof
of its weakness.

FROM this weakness, proceeded likewise, the
aithl of the Americans in dreams, their obfer-

b Charier. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumont, i. 173. Fernand.
Re'rc. de los Chiquit. p. 40. I.ozano, 84. Margrave. z79.

XOL. II. P vation

Sno. TV vation of omens, their attention to the chirp-

" ' ing of birds and the cries of animals, all which

they suppose to be indications of future events,
and if any one of there prognostics is deemed
unfavourable, they instantly abandon the pur-
suit of those measures on which they are most
eagerly bent
eo-'.-d YVIII. BUT if we would form a complete

idea of the uncultivated nations of America,
we must not pass unobserved some singular
customs, which, though universal and charac-
teritic, could not be reduced, with propriety,
to anv of the articles into which I have divided
my inquiry concerning their manners.
Tr.c... AMONG savages, in every part of the globe,

the love of dancing is a favourite passion. As
a great part of their time languishes away in
indolence, without any occupation to rouze or
intercfi them, they delight universally in a
pastime which calls forth the afEive powers of
their nature into exercise. The Spaniards,
whnhen they Irit visited America, were afto-
r.i:;. a.: the fondness of the natives for dancing,
and beheld with wonder a people, cold and

c C T:'.-. N. Fr. iii. 262. 3; . Stadius, ap de Bry,

ii:. 1::. Creuxij, Hifi. Canad. 84. Techo, Hil. of
r-S:. Church. Coll. vi. 3-. De la Potheric, iii. 6.

unani-

unanimated in most of their other pursuits, BOOL IV.
kindle into life, and exert themselves with
ardour, as often as this favourite amusement
recurred. Among them, indeed, dancing
ought not to be denominated an amusement.
It is a serious and important occupation, which
mingles in every occurrence of public or pri-

atec life. If any intercourse be neceffarv be-
tween two American tribes, the ambassadors
of the one approach in a solemn dance, and
present the calumet or emblem of peace; the
jachems of the other receive it with the fame
ceremony . If war is denounced against an
enemy, it is by a dance, expressive of the
refentlnent which they feel, and of the ven-
geance which they meditateb. If the wrath
of their gods is to be appeared, or their bene-
ficence to be celebrated; if they rejoice at the
birth of a child, or mourn the death of a
friend', they have dances appropriated to each
of these situations, and suited to the different
lentiments with which they are then animated.
If a person is indisposed, a dance is prescribed
as the most effectual means of restoring him to

a De la Potherie Hit. ii. 17, &c. Charley. N. Fr. iii.

211. 297. La Hontan. i. loo. 137. Hennepin. Decou.
149, &c.

b Charley. N. Fr. iii. 298. Lafitau, i. 523.
Joutel, 3+3. Gomara, Hilt. Gen. c. 196.

P 2 health;

BooKIr. health; and if he himself cannot endure the

Lr- -fatigue of such an exercise, the physician or

conjurer performs it in his name, as if the
virtue of his activity could be transferred to his
patient d

ALL their dances are imitations of some

astion; and though the music by which they
are regulated, is extremely simple and tiresome
to the ear by its dull monotony, some of their
dances appear wonderfully expressive and ani-
mated. The war dance is, perhaps, the most
striking. It is the representation of a complete
American campaign. The departure of the
warriors from their village, their march into the
enemy's country, the caution with which they
encamp, the address with which they station
tome of their party in ambush, the manner of
surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the scalping of those who are slain,
the seizing of prisoners, the triumphant return
of the conquerors, and the torture of the
vi&ims, are fucceliively exhibited. The per-
formers enter with such enthusiastic ardour into
their several parts, their gestures, their coun-
tenance, their voice are so wild and so well

Der.., Iii;L. Na;. it9. Brickk;;, 372. De la Po-
&eriee, ii. .da

adapted

adapted to their various situations, that Euro- BooiIV.
peans can hardly believe it to be a mimic scene,
or view it without emotions of fear and hor-
ror .

BUT however expressive some of the Ameri-

can dances may be, there is one circumstance
in them remarkable, and conne&ed with the
characer of the race. The songs, the dances,
the amusements of other nations, expressive of
the sentiments which animate their hearts, are
often adapted to display or excite that sensibility
which mutually attaches the sexes. Among
some people, such is the ardour of this paflion,
that love is almost the sole objec of festivity and
joy; and as rude nations are strangers to deli-
cacy, and unaccustomed to disguise any emo-
tion of their minds, their dances are often ex-
tremely wanton and indecent. Such is the Ca-
lenda, of which the natives of Africa are so
passionately fond '; and such the feats of the
dancing girls, which the Asiatics contemplate
with to much avidity of desire. But, among
the Americans, more cold and indifferent to

De !a Potherie, ii. 116. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 297.
Lani.ta, i. 523.

Adanfon, Vov. to Senegal, p. iii. 287. Labat, Voy-

agec, iv. 463. Sloane, Hist. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48.
Formin. Defcript. de Surin. i. p. 139.

P 3 their

Boos IV. their females, from causes which I have already
'"'J explained, the paflon of love mingles but little

with their festivals and pafimes. Their songs
and dances are noftly solemn and martial, they
are conneced with some of the serious and im-
portant affairs of life ', and having no relation
to love or gallantry, are seldom common to the
two sexes, but executed by the men and women
apart g. If, on tome occasions, the women are
permitted to join in the feltival, the character
of the entertainment is rill the fame, and no
movement or geture is expressive of attach-
ment, or encourages familiarity h.
p.,,, t-f Ax- immoderate love of play, especially at

g gamres of hazard, which seems to be natural to

all people unaccufiomed to the occupations of
regular industry, is likewise universal among
the Americans. The fame causes, which so
often prompt persons at their ease in civilized
life to have recourse to this pastime, render it
the delight of the savage. The former are in-

f Defcrip. of N. Frar.ce. Osborne, Coil. ii. 883.

Charcv. N. Fr. iii. 84.

r Wafer's Account of Iithmus, &c. i69. Lery ap de

Bry, iii. 77. Lozano, Hill de Parag. i. i49. Herrera,
dec. 2. I:b. vii. c. S. dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See NOTE
LXII.

Barrere, Fr. Equin. p. 191.

dependent

dependent of labour, the latter do not feel the BooKIV.
necclity of it, and as both are unemployed,
they run with transport to whatever is of power
to stir and agitate their minds. Hence the
Americans, who at other times are so indifferent,
fb phlegmatic, so silent, and so disinterested, as
loon as they engage in play become rapacious,
impatient, noisy, and almost frantic with eager-
ness. Their furs, their domeflic utensils, their
clothes, their arms, are staked at the gaming-
table, and when all is loft, high as their lense
of independence is, in a wild emotion of despair
or of hope, they will often risk their perolnal
liberty upon a tingle cast'. Among ieveral
tribes, such gaming parties frequently recur,
and become their most acceptable entertainment
at every great festival. Superstition, which is
apt to take hold of those paflions which are moit
vigorous, frequently lends its aid to confirm
and strengthen this favourite inclination. Their
conjurers are accustomed to prescribe a solemn
match at play, as one of the most efficacious
methods of appealing their gods, or of refloring
the sick to health .

FROM causes similar to those which render and fr

them fond of play, the Americans are extremely d"i'kng.

i Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c.
Ribas, Triumf. 13. Brickell, 335.

k Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262.

P 4 addicted

BooKIV. addicted to drunkenness. It seems to have
t"-'" been one of the first exertions of human in,

genuity to discover some composition of an in-
toxicaring quality and there is hardly any na-
tion so rude, or so destitute of invention, as not
to have succeeded in this fatal research, The
most barbarous of the American tribes have
been so unfortunate as to attain this art; and
even those which are so deficient in knowledgeo
as to be unacquainted with the method of giving
an inebriating strength to liquors by fermenta-
tion, can accomplish the fame end by other
means. The people of the islands, of North
America, and of California, used, for this pur-
pole, the smoke of tobacco, drawn up with a
certain in;lrument into the nostrils, the fumes
of which a!cending to the brain, they felt all
the transports and frenzy of intoxication ". In
almost every other part of the New World, the
natives po1ikldcd the art of extracting an intoxi-
cating liquor from maize or the manioc root,
the fame substances which they convert into
bread. The operation by which they effect
:.:s, nearl- resfmbles the common one of
i.e'A.ing, but with this difTrrence, that in place
'- eit, they uef a nauseous infusion of a certain

- .ie c, 1::!. ap Ram2un . iii. 113. 'cnegas, i. 68.
N-. -'r.ag Cabcca de Vaca, cap. :6. See NOTE

quantity

quantity of maize or manioc chewed by their BooKIV
women. The saliva excites a vigorous'fermen.- -v
tation, and in a few days the liquor becomes fit
for drinking. It is nor difagreeabie tothe taste,
and when swallowed in large quantities, is of
an intoxicating quality". This is the general
beverage of the Americans, which they diftin-
guith by various names, and for which they feel
inch a violent and insatiable desire, as it is not
ealy either to conceive or describe. Among
polifned nations, where a succession of various
functions and amusements keeps the mind in
continual occupation, the desire for itrong
drink is regulated, in a great measure, by the
climate, and increases or diminishes according
to the variations of its temperature. In warm
regions, the delicate and sensible frame of the
inhabitants does not require the stimulation of
fermented liquors. In colder countries, the
conititution of the natives, more robust and
more sluggish, stands in need of generous li-
quors to quicken and animate it. But among
iavages, the desire of Something that is of power
to intoxicate, is in every situation the fame.
All the people of America, if we except tome
imn.ll tribes near the Straits of Magellan,
whthler natives of the torrid zone, or inha-

"Sadius ap de Bry, iii. i1i. Lerv, ibid. 175.

bitants

BooelV. bitants of its more temperate regions, or placed
t--' "
by a harder fate in the revere climates towards

its northern or southern extremity, appear to be
equally under the dominion of this appetite O.
Such a similarity of talte, among people in such
different situations, muit be ascribed to the in-
fluence of some moral cause, and cannot be con-
fidered as the effec of any phvfical or conflitu-
tional want. While engaged in war or in the
chafe, the savage is often in the most interesting
situations, and all the powers of his nature are
rouzed to the most vigorous exertions. But
those animating scenes are succeeded by long
intervals of repose, during which the warrior
meets with nothing that he deems of sufficient
dignity or importance to merit his attention.
He languishes and mopes in this season of in-
dolence. The pollture of his body is an em-
blem of the slate of his mind. In one climate,
cowering over the fire in his cabin; in another,
stretched under the shade of some tree, he dotes
away his time in sleep, or in an unthinking
joyless inactivity, not far removed from it. As
flrong liquors awake him from this torpid state,
give a brisker motion to his spirits, and enliven

Giu.-il'a, i. :;7. Lc7-3rn Dc:c..p. d- Gran Chaco,

; c. Ic:. R:ba. S. '. oa.0i. :j 4 ;. :. archai;, i\.
435. i c.carc.ez Mi.cn. de ]as Chiquet. . : Brrcre,
p. ti . Bi:.coConverf. de Piri:, 31.

hin

him more thoroughly than either dancing or BOK IV.
gaming, his love of them is excessive. A fa- t'-
vage, when not engaged in action', is a pensive
melancholy animal; but as soon as he taftes, or
has a prospect of tafting, the intoxicating
draught, he becomes gay and frolicfomeP.
Whatever be the occasion, or pretext, on which
the Americans assemble, the meeting always
terminates in a debauch. Many of their fefti-
vals have no other objet, and they welcome
the return of them with transports of joy. As
they are not accustomed to restrain any appetite,
they set no bounds to this. The riot often con-
tinues without intermission several days; and
whatever may be the fatal effets of their excess,
they never cease from drinking as long as one
drop of liquor remains. The persons ofgreateft
eminence, the most distinguished warriors, and
the chiefs most renowned for their wisdom, have
no greater command of themselves than the
most obscure member of the community. Their
eagerness for present enjoyment renders them
blind to its fatal consequences; and those very
men, who, in other situations, seem to possess
a force of mind more than human, are in this
instance inferior to children in foresight, as well
as consideration, and mere Haves of brutal ap-

P Melendez Tefores Verdad. iii. 369.

petite.

Boot V. petite . When their passions, naturally ifrong,

are heightened and inflamed by drink, they are
guilty of the moss enormous outrages, and the
feltivi'r seldom concludes without deeds of vio-
lence, or bloodshed'.

BtRr, amidst this wild debauch, there is one

circumstance remarkable; the women, in most
of the American tribes, are not permitted to
partake of it'. Their province is to prepare
the liquor, to serve it about to the guests, and
to take care of their husbands and friends, when
their reason is overpowered. This exclusion
of the women from an enjoyment so highly va-
lued by savages, may be justly confidered as a
mark of their inferiority, and as an additional
evidence of that contempt with which they were
treated in the New World. The people of
North America, when first discovered, were
not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their in-
terest to supply them with spirituous liquors,
drunkenncfs soon became as universal among
them as among their countrymen to the south;
and their women having acquired this new taste,

RiJa. , 9. -'I!oa, i. 338.
Le:r. E-if. ii. i-S. Torquemada Mond. Ind. i. 3;;.
* Si N O E LXIV.

indulge

indulge it with as little decency and moderation BooKIV.
as the men '

IT were endless to enumerate all the detached Put odeath

the aged

customs which have excited the wonder of tra- and i,-
vellers in America; but I cannot omit one b
teemingly as singular as any that has been men-
tioned. When their parents and other relations
become old, or labour under any distemper
which their slender knowledge of the healing
art cannot remove, they cut short their days
with a violent hand, in order to be relieved
from the burden of supporting and tending
them. This practice prevailed among the
ruder tribes in every part of the continent, from
Hudson's Bay to the river De la Plata; and
however ihocking it may be to those sentiments
of tenderness and attachment, which, in ci-
vilized life, we are apt to confider as congenial
with our frame, the condition of man in the fa-
vage state leads and reconciles him to it. The
fame hardflips and difficulty of procuring sub-
fiftence, which deter savages, in some cafes,
from rearing their children, prompt them to
destroy the aged and infirm. The declining
state of the one is as helpless as the infancy of
the other. The former are no less unable than

t Hutchinson, Hill. of Maffachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii.
az;. Sagard, 146.

the

BoorcI. the latter to perform the functions that belong

to a warrior or hunter, or to endure those va-
rious dittreffes in which savages are so often in-
volved, by their own want of foresight and in-
duftry. Their relations feel this, and incapable
of attending to the wants or weaknesses of
others, their impatience under an additional
burden prompts them to extinguish that life
which they find it difficult to sustain. This is
not regarded as a deed of cruelty, but as an at
of mercy. An American, broken with years
and infirmities, conscious that he can no longer
depend on the aid of those around him, places
himself contentedly in his grave; and it is by
the hands of his children or nearest relations
that the thong is pulled, or the blow inflicted,
which releases him for ever from the sorrows of
life .
c.....l IX. AFTER contemplatingtherudeAmerican

' .f tribes in such various lights, after taking a view
er. of their cufltomsi and manners from so many

diEcrenrt ita:ions, nothing remains but to form
a general estimate of their character, compared
·wi:i that of more polished nations. A human
being, as he comes originally from the hand of

- CalT2ni Hil de N. Reyno de Gran. p. 3oo. Pifo, p.
C. E;lii V\o- . 151. Gumilla, i. 33.

5 nature,

nature, is every where the fame. At his first BooK IV.
appearance in the state of infancy, whether it -'v-J
be among the rudest savages, or in the most ci-
vilized society, we can discern no quality which
marks any diflinstion or superiority. The ca-
p:city of improvement seems to be the lame}
and the talents he may afterwards acquire, as
well as the virtues he may be rendered capable
of exercising, depend, ina great measure, upon
the state of society in which he is placed. To
this state his mind naturally accommodates it-
!elf, and from it receives discipline and culture.
In proportion to the wants which it accustoms
a human being to feel, and the functions in
which there engage him, his intellectual powers
are called forth. According to the connections
which it establishes between him and the reft of
his species, the affetions of his heart are
exerted. It is only by attending to this great
principle, that we can discover what is the cha-
rafter of man in every different period of his
progress.

IF we apply it to savage life, and measure intellcaua

the attainments of the human mind in that ftatae poeI,
by this standard, we shall find, according to an
observation which I have already made, that the
intellectual powers of man must be extremely
limited in their operations. They are confined

within

Boo IV. within the narrow sphere of what he deems ne-

' ceffary for supplying his own wants. Whatever

has not some relation to these, neither attracts
his attention, nor is the object of his inquiries.
.But however narrow the bounds may be within
which the knowledge of a savage is circum-
fcribed, he possesses thoroughly that small por-
tion which he has attained. It was not com-
municated to him by formal inffru&tion; he
does not attend to it as a matter of mere fpecu-
lation and curiofitv; it is the result of his own
observation, the fruit of his own experience,
and accommodated to his condition and exi-
gencies. While employed in the aftive occu-
pations of war or hunting, he often finds him-
self in difficult and perilous situations, from
which the efforts of his own sagacity mufi ex-
tricate him. HIe is frequently engaged in mea-
fures where every ftep depends upon his own
ability to decide, where he muff rely solely upon
his own penetration to discern the dangers to
which he is exposed, and upon his own wisdom
in providing against them.

Poliral As the talents of individuals are exercised
;cnt-,. and improved by such exertions, much politi-

cal wisdom is said to be difplaved in conducting
the affairs of their finall communities. The
council of old men in an American tribe, de-

6 liberating

liberating upon its interests, and determining BpoKIV.
with respect to peace or war, has been compared .
to the senate in more polished republics. The
proceedings of the former, we are told, are
often no less formal and sagacious than those of
the latter. Great political wisdom is exhibited
in pondering the various measures prppofed,
and in balancing their probable advantages,
a.aint the evils of which they may be pro-
d!ijlive. Much address and eloquence are em-
ployed by the leaders, who aspire at acquiring
fiich confidence with their countrymen, as to
have an alcendant in those assemblies". But,
among savage tribes, the field for displaying
political talents cannot be extensive. Where
the idea of private property is incomplete, and
no criminal jurifdicion is eftablifled, there is
hardly any filction of internal government to
exerciic. Wlhere there is no commerce, and
fcaiccly any intcrcourfe among separate tribes;
where enmity is implacable, and hoffilities are
carried on almolt without intermission; there
will be few points of public concern to adjust
with their neighbous; and that department of
their alfairs which may be denominated foreign,
c.nn!lot be so intricate as to require any refined
policy in conducting it. Where individuals are

Charley. N. Fr. iii. 269, &c.
VOL. II. Q_ so

BoorT n. so thoughtless and improvident as seldom to

take effecrual precautions for felf-prelfrvation,
i: is vain to expect that public measures and
deliberations will be regulated by the contem-
plation of remote events. It is the genius of
favaCes to aft from the impulse of prelent
pa.Tion. They have neither foresight nor tem-
per to form complicated arrangements with
respect to their future conduct. The confulta-
tions of the Americans, indeed, are so frequent,
and their negociations are so manyy, and so
lon protracted, as to give their proceedings
an extraordinary alipct of wisdom. But this is
not owing so much to the depth of their
schemes, as to the coldness and phlegm of their
temper, which render them flow in determin-
ing:. If we except the celebrated league, that
united the Five Nations in Canada into a fe-
deral republic, which ihall be confidered in its
proper place, we can dickern few such traces of
poitical wii'om, among the rude American
tribes, as difcovcr any great degree of foresight
or exent of inritc!-:tu! abilities. Even among
them, we ih11al find public lmealurcs more fre-
quentl- directed by the impetuous ferocity of
their youth, than regu;ated by the experience
and wifido.: of their old men.

Tr S- NOTL LXV.
= C;i.-:.. N. 1F-. i.i. :;'.

As

As the condition of man in the savage slate BoorK V.

is unfavourable to the progress of the under- Dnreeof
H:a:nding, it has a tendency likewise, in some af'ttion.
reIlpects, to check the exercise of affection, and
to render the heart contracted. The ftrongeit
feeling in the mind of a Iavage is a sense of his
own independence. He has sacrificed ol finall
:a portion of his natural liberty by becoming a
mmu.iber of society, that he remains, in a great
degree, the sole master of his own actions". He
oi':en tal;es his resolutions alone, without con-
i'iltinr, or feeling any conncCtion with the per-
ibns :roulnd him. In many of his operations,
hc lfrands as much detached from the reft of his
fpecics, as if he had formed no union with
them. Conscious how little he depends upon
other men, he is apt to view them with a care-
lcs indifference. Even the force of his mind
contri;butes to increase this unconcern, and as
he looks not beyond himfll f in deliberating with
respect to the part which he should a&C, his so-
lici;t-de about the confcquenccs of it seldom
extends farther. He purtiles his own career,
and indulges his own fancy, without inquiring
or regarding whether what he does be agreeable
or ot'enfive to others, whether they may derive
benefir, or receive hurt from it. Hence the

- Fcrr-nn:lcz Mifion. de los Chiquit. 33.

Q_2 ungovern-

BooK IV. uno-overnable caprice of savages, their impa-

" t. nce under any species of restraint, their ina-

bilitv to fuppreis or moderate any inclination,
the scorn or neglect with which they receive ad-
vice, thecir high estimation of themselves, and
their contempt of other men. Among them,
the pride of independence produces almoil the
fame effects with interefrcdnefs in a more ad-
vanced state of focietr, it refers every thing to
a man hinielf, and renders the gratification of
his own wishes, the measure and end of con-
Si.--:.:. -, To the lame cau;. ma- be imputed the hard-

r:~:: nefi of heart, and innfibili:y, remarkable in
al! ivaige nations. Their minds, rouzed only
by frrong emotions, are little susceptible of
Cern:'., delicate, or tender arfections b. Their
;:nin is ib incomplete, that each individual ats
as if he reain.e. al! his natural rights entire and
u..ii-.iled. If a favour is conferred upon
him, or an-,- bene-cial fervic; is performed on
his accoju:', he receives i with much fatisfac-
;;is, bccause it coni.'biutcs to his enjoyment;
b'.it tis ienti:nre:t exte nd nort beyond himself,

e: excl:s no ien; . of chbliztiuo:, he neither feels

N- -'-' : .-:.:. .
.. 'S.T- ix\'.

lI'ven

F.ven among persons the most closely con- BooKIV.
necled, there is little correspondence or ex-
change of those good offices which strengthen
attachment, mollify the heart, aud sweeten the
intercourse of life. Their high ideas of inde-
pendence nourish a fullen reserve, which keeps
them at a distance from each other. The
nearest relations are mutually afraid to make
any demand, or to solicit any service', left it
should be confidered by the other as imposing
:i burden, or laying a restraint upon his will.

I HAVE already remarked the influence of this i,,rn,;-i.

hard unfeeling temper upon domeRic life, with li'Y
refpea to the connection between husband and
wife, as well as that between parents and chil-
dren. Its effects are no less conspicuous, in
the performance of those mutual offices of ten-
dernefs which the infirmities of our nature fie-
quently exact. Among some tribes, when any
of their number are seized with a distemper,
they are generally abandoned by all around
them, who, careless of their recovery, fly in
the utmolt consternation from the supposed
danger of infecion'. But even where they are

d C Ia Potherie, iii. 28.

.c tre de P. Cataneo ap Muratori Chrillian, i. 309.

T'r.t', ii. 41o. Lozano, ioo. Herrera, dec. 4. lib.
viii. c. g. dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Falkner's Dcfcript. ofl'a-
t.:p ii, 98.

cQ 3 not

EooKIV. not thus deferred, the cold indifference with

*wh ch they are attended can afford them little
consolation. No look of -ympathv, no Ioothing
expressions, no orfcious services contribute to
alleviate or to make thel forget their sus-
ferings r. Thcir nearest relations will often re-
li;e to iubmi: to the imailcft inconveniency,
or to part wlih the least trifle, however much it
may tend to their accommodation or relief.
So little is the breast of a savage susceptible of
those fentiients which pronmt men to that
ieeling atten ion v.-.ch mitigates diitreft, that,
in tome provinces of America, the Spaniards
have found it necefiar.'- to infrce the common
c.u::es of h.n.an:ity bv pofi:ive laws, and to
o:'.ge 'u:.r.:.ds and vn-ives, parents and chil-
dcrn, u...cr i.ver- pcn.!-.e i , to take care of
ec'. c::;er during their ici.nes% h. The lame
harnhnnels of te:mper is i*iil more conlpicuous in
the:r trea en: of t e animal creation. Prior
to -.-eir in:ercourfe v;ith the people of Europe,
:t-c Ncr:. ;-Americans had ifome tame dogs,

w .ch .:ccoimpn.a:e:i them in their hunting cx-

c'.:. ios, and served. h:-m w itl ali the ardour
:. ::; 5-!irV _.'.:r - :.* 1:Z i-'cC:is. But, instcad

- . :.- , , - . .

c (; . .. . . .;.

IL.
c [.

,-,__.".:_ -r',_
_-_ x.._..L_~~~~~

of that fond attachment, which the hunter na- BooKIV.
turally feels towards those useful companions of '
his toils, they requite their services with ne-
glec, seldom feed, and never caress them '. In
other provinces, the Americans have become
acquainted with the domestic animals of Eu-
rope, and avail themselves of their service; but
it is universally observed that they always treat
themi harshly k, and never employ any method
e:thier for breaking or managing them, but
force and cruelty. In every part of the deport-
mcnt of man in his savage state, whether to-
wa:-s his equals of the human species, or to-
wards the animals below him, we recognize the
fame character, and trace the operations of a
mind intent on its own gratifications, and re-

igularcd by its own caprice, with little attention
o; i'nfiibility to the sentiments and feelings of
thie bings around him.

AFTER explaining how unfavourable the fa- Tacitur.

vae rtate is to the cultivation of the under- ""i'
itanding, and to the improvement of the heart,
I mlould not have thought it necessary to men-
tion what may be deemed its lesser defects, if
the charater of nations as well as of indivi-
dlt!lis, were not often more distinctly marked

i C::.:-. e r. Fr. iii. I 9. 337.
L .:a, No.ic. American. 312.

(by4 by

Boor I'. by circumstances apparently trivial, than by

those of greater moment. A savage, frequently
placed in situations of danger and distress, de-
pending on hiinfelf alone, and wrapt up in his
own thoughts and fchcmes, is a serious melan-
choly animal. His attention to others is small.
The range of his own ideas is narrow. Ience
that taciturnity which is so difigitino to men
accu'jomed to the open intercourse of sbcial
corverfation. 'When not engaged in ation, the
Americans often fit whole days in one poiture,
without opening their lips'. WVhcn they go
forth to war, or to the chace, they uiually
march in a line at so;me dilance from one
another, and without c:;chag:r a word. The
iame profound silence is obc;-rcd when thcy
row teoether in a canoe `. It is o:1'.' when they
are animated by intoxc:.J i;:;.crs, o rouzed
bv :he solirt. of te fciL; ..i an dace, that they
become z :-.; a:.l convcr.. ' L'.
C:^ -'. To the f-me c:'.::fs mav b; imputed the re-

:':e. c-nr.: -,' ith v. ;i.': ' the'. iO.'. and exe-
c::c ;: fc.r c.':::. *r:,, .ho are not ha-
,b:-::::-d to a i.:

al co:- .'-;;;icE;ton of their
ov':: flnt:men;s an- :.i.s, are apt to be so

disru sis; l,

dinif:iitufil, as to place little confidence in BooKIV.
others, and to have recourse to an insidious '
crait, in accomplishing their own purposes.
In civilized life, those persons, who, by their
fitcation, have but a few objects of pursuit on
which their minds incefantly dwell, are molf
rc-markable for low artifice in carrying on their
little proje&s. Among savages, whose views
are cqually confined, and their attention no less
ip:'rl;cring, those circumstances must operate
frill more powerfully, and gradually accustom
them to a disingenuous flbtlety in all their
traninla.ions. The force of this is increased by
habits which they acquire in carrying on the
tw.o molt interesting operations wherein they
arc englaged. Withl them war is a fyltem of
crafr, in which they trust for success to ftratagemn
more than to open force, and have their inven-
tion continually on the firetch to circumvent
and iurprife their enemies. As hunters, it is
their constant object to ensnare, in order that
they may destroy. Accordingly, art and cun-
ning have been universally observcd as diftin-
gu(ini0ng charateriftics of all savages. The
people of the rude tribes of America are rc-
mari-a;ble for their address and duplicity. Im-
penetrably fccret in forming their meafiures,
thevy iurti-e them with a patient undeviating
attention, and there is no refinemcnt of diimiu-

J lation

Lric ;l\. lation which thcv cannot employ, in order to

j in.iure success. The natives of Peru were en-

saged above thi;:. ycars, in concerting the
plan of their infurre"tion, under the vice-
royalty of the marquis de Villa-Garcia; and
though communicated to a great number of
all differen: ranks, no indication of it ever
transpired during that long period; no man
betrayed his trull, or by an unguarded look,
or rzflh word, gave riic to any fifpicion of
wuhat was intended . The dissimulation and
craft of individuals is no less remarkable than
t at of nations. hen let upon deceiving,
they v.rap thc:l.:elves up so artificially, that it
is imnpolt.ble to penetrate in:o their intentions,
or to detie their designs -.
v.r:.:. BBu- if there be defets or vices p eculiar to

the iava-e Itate, there are, likewiie, virtues
which it infpircs, a:d; good quaiitits, to the
i- .::-: excrcfe otf uwl'ch .t is f'ricnd'l. The bonds

of ioc;etv .-: ;3 ic -e upnon the members of the
mnor r...: A',r-..-...: t. t:bes, thaththey hardly
f.cl an .-. ..:'. IIt:ne te th iprit of inde-
,--..:'-:-:, u.':: .' i, the pride of a iavage, and

u\..::: ::- c.':cr sh the unaiicnable prcro-

gativc

gative of man. Incapable of controul, and BooK IV.
dildaining to acknowledge any superior, his
mind, though limited in its powers, and erring
in many of its pursuits, acquires such elevation
by che consciousness of its own freedom, that
he aas on some occasions with aftonifiing
force, and perseverance, and dignity.

As independence nouriffes this high spirit Fortitude.

am'ong savages, the perpetual wars in which
they are engaged call it forth into action.
Such long intervals of tranquillity as are fre-
quent in polilhed societies, are unknown in
the savage ifate. Their enmities, as I have
ol'crveicd, are implacable and immortal. The
vilour of the youth is never allowed to rust in
inaction. The hatchet is always in their hand,
:'ihier otr attack or defence. Even in their
hul'nting excursions, they mufct be on their guard

igailn: ll furprilf fi-om the hostile tribes, by

v\iicIh they are furlrounded. Accustomed to
continual alarms, they grow familiar with
danger; courage becomes an habitual virtue,
rci;;ltig:, naturally fi-om their situation, ;r.d
ltrengthlnedl by constant exertions. The mode
(of di!ila!iving fortiuLde nm: not be the fame in
finall and rude comuni litics, as in more pow-
erful and civ!ized itares. Their fyffem of
war, and flindard of valour :ay be formed

upon

Boor I'. upon different principles, but in no fitation

I'' does the human mind rife more superior to

the sense of danger, or the dread of death, than
in its most fimp!e and uncultivated state.
A;':-.-.t -. ANOTHER vir:ue remarkable among savages,

is att Lach;en to the coimmu nity of which they
are members. Frno the nature of their poli-
tical union, one might expect this tie to be
extremrely feeble. But there are circumstances
which render the influence, even of their loose
mode ofanfoci :ion, very powerful. The Ame-
rican tribes are lenal; combined againil their
n eigh-bours, in prosecution of ancient enmities,
or in avcninng recent injurics, their interests
and oper: ions are neither numerous nor com-
plex. Theie are objccts, which the unculti-
va:ed underftancding of a lavagc can compre-
hend. His heart is capable of forming con-
ner-ions, which are lb li:t!e diffuscd. lIe
a:Tets wit.'h w-ar.::h to public mealilres, dictated
b,- pT.con;, si:T.!ar to thof which; in-uence
'is own con-i-:. Hence the ardour with

h-;;chn i'i:'u.;'s un.der:ake the mofR periious

crv.zce, -whn :2e commnunit- deems it nccef-
.-'. icnc- tr--'r fierce and deep-rooted an-

:-:.-.' ; h ,:blic enemies. Hence their
: -.- :, ; .::or of their tribe, and tha:
'-. c c: :z.;.:.:::-.-, whi:.h pronmp-ts them to

b,'-a .'c

brave danger that it may triumph, and to en- BooKIV.
dure the most exquisite torments, without a
groan, that it may not be disgraced.

THUS, in every situation where a human Satisfaa;on

w,th their

being can be placed, even the most unfavour- own c.'i-
able, there are virtues which peculiarly belong ti'"
to it; there are affections which it calls forth;
there is a species of happiness which it yields.
Nature, with most beneficent intention, con-
ciliates and forms the mind to its condition,
the ideas and wishes of man extend not beyond
that state of society to which he is habituated.
What it presents as objects of contemplation
or enjoyment, fills and satisfies his mind, and
he can hardly conceive any other mode of life
to be pleasant or even tolerable. The Tartar,
:ccuftomed to roam over extensive plains, and
to fubfifl on the produt of his herds, impre-
cates upon his enemy, as the greatest of all
curfcs, that he may be condemned to reside in
one place, and to be nourilhed with the top
of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of
their own pursuits, and satisfied with their own
lot, are equally unable to comprehend the
intention or utility of the various accommoda-
tions, which, in more polished society, are
cdec;ued clTential to the comfort of life. Far
from complaining of their own situation, or

viewing

BoozIn . v:''i::i tha: of menn in a more improved state

i.h alm;i at;ioi or envy, they regard them-
I'.s as the i.nari of excellence, as beings
the be'- e.-r :!c, as well .s the most perfectly
q::al.cd, tr e:_: o. real ha!pineis. Unac-
cuso:red to a'y re.t.raint u[on their will or
t':. z.;'on- , tae, - behold vitlh amazement the
irn,?...i!litv of r :-ik, and the subordination
vcc:h .l;;e place in civilized life, and confider
the: vol:nrarv fub':ni'on of one man to ano-
ther, as a renun:ia:ion, no less bale than un-
-ccountable, of the irft distinction of huma-
i-v. V\oid of foresight, as well as free from
care h-.elves, and delighted with that state
of ir.dolent Iecuritv, they wonder at the anxious
reca'.:ror.s, the unceasing induitrv, and corr-
p'!ica:ed arr..ngements of Europeans, in guard-
ing a ;in. distant evils, or providing for
fiurre .'nts, an. c::.la:mn against their pre-
p.F'o.ou!s si'. , n t; :s imultiuplving the
troubles, a:.d increasing the labour of life .
This p:-;etfe:.:cc of tc:r own manners is con-
iPcuoOLt on ce Cry occsion. Even the names,
by which the var;ous rations w;ih to be diftin-
gui:lied, arc aifun.ed ifrom tidis idea of their
owvn prc-em;inence. The appellation which
Tie iroquois i.-e to :th'.n!elves is, the chief of

¢ Ch_:.... : .

y , i.
y :S. L S:na",a- ii. 97.

?I/. i*. Caraibe, the original name of the fierce Book IV.
inhabitants of the windward islands, signifies the '
.warl'ke people q. The Cherokee, from an idea
of their own superiority, call the Europeans
i'cibings, or the accursed race, and aflume to
themlIelves the name of The beloved people .
The fame principle regulated the notions of
t'e other Americans concerning the Europeans;
tfr although, at firRt, they were filled with
nnonifiment at their arts, and with dread of
their power, they soon came to abate their
cliimation of men, whose maxims of life were
lb ditierent from their own. Hence they
called them the froth of the sea, men without
father or mother. They supposed, that either
they h1ad no country of their own, and there-
fore invaded that which belonged to others'
or, that, being destitute of the necessaries of
life at home, they were obliged to roam over
the ocean, in order to rob such as were more
amply provided.

1ME,, thus satisfied with their condition, are

far from any inclination to relinquish their own
habits, or to adopt those of civilized life. The
tranuition is too violent to be suddenly made.

: Collen, i. 3. q Rochefort Hill. des Antilles, 455.

Ar ailr, Hill. of Amer. Indians, p. 32.
: Bcnzun. Hilt. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21.

Even

BooK IV. Even where endeavours have been uied to

- we n a savage from his own customs, and to
r nder the accommodations of polifred society
fa:iliar to hi:n; even where he has been al-
lowed to taste of those pleasures, and has been
honoured wi't those dillin.tions, which are
the chi.f objects of our dclre, he droops and
lanu-::hdes under the restraint of laws and forms,
he ifizes the firi opportunity of breaking loose
fr.c; thie:., and rtcurns with transport to the
ibrc': or the wild, where he can enjoy a careless
and uncontrouled freedom .

THUS I have finilhed a laborious delineation

of the character and manners of the uncivilized
tribes fcartered over the vafi continent of Ame-
rica. In this, I aspire not at rivalling the
great matlers who have painted and adorned
favaze life, either in boldnels of dcfign, or in
the Elow and beauty of their colouring. I am
s.i- sid v. :h. the more humble merit of having

eried \\i.h p.tient indiuiry, in viewing my

i,-:c-- in many various lights, and in collect-
ini from tihe most accurate obiervcrs such de-
rac;:- and ofcen minute fiatures, as might
enbe me to exhibit a pi':rait that rclembles

: C.--.i. I~ i E rrc
:I

BEFORE I close this part of my work, one BooK IV.

oblervation more is necessary, in order tojuftify Genal
the conclusions which I have formed, or to ,aruteeeto
prevent the mistakes into which such as exa- t'i inquisy&
nine them may fall. In contemplating the
inhabitants of a country ib widely extended as
America, great attention fllould be paid to the
diversity of climates under which they are
placed. The influence of this I have pointed
out with refpeEt to several important particu-
lars, which have been the object of research;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it
ought not to be overlooked. The provinces
of America are of such different temperament,
that this alone is sufficient to constitute a dif-
tintion between their inhabitants. In every
part of the earth where man exiffs, the power
of climate operates, with decisive influence,
upon his condition and character. In those
countries which approach near to the extremes
of heat or cold, this influence is so conspicuous
as to itrike every eye. Whether we confider
man merely as an animal, or as a being en-
dowed with rational powers which fit him for
activity and speculation, we shall find that he
has uniformly attained the greatest perfection
of which his nature is capable, in the tempe-
rate regions of the globe. There his conltitu-
tion is most vigorous, his organs most acute,

VOL. II. R and

BooEIV. and his form most beautiful. There, too, he
<^'' possesses a superior extent of capacity, greater

fertility of imagination, more enterprising
courage, and a fenfibiliry of heart which gives
birth to passions, not only ardent, but perse-
vering. In this favourite situation he has dif-
played the utmost efforts of his genius, in
literature, in policy, in commerce, in war, and
in all the arts which improve or embellish
life D.

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt

inoft sensibly by rude nations, and produces
greater effects than in societies more highly
polilhed. The talents of civilized men are
continually exerted in rendering their condi-
tion more comfortable; and by their ingenuity
and inventions, they can, in a great mealure,
supply the defecis, and guard against the in-
conveniences, of any climate. But the impro-
vident savage is afected by every circumstance
peculiar to his situation. He takes no pre-
caution either to mitirare or to improve it.
Like a plant, or an animal, he is formed by
the climate under which he is placed, and feels
; -e fuli force of its ifiltuence.

IDr Se."gu$'.r' E;al.: on the Hii:. of Civil Society,

.-
, C.-. I.

IN

IN surveying the rude nations of America, BooKIV.

this natural distinction between the inhabitants ."'
of the temperate and torrid zones is very re-
markable. They may, accordingly, be divided
into two great classes. The one comprehends
all the North-Americans, from the river St.
Laurence to the Gulf of Mexico, together
with the people of Chili, and a few fma'U tribes
towards the extremity of the southern conti-
nent. To the other belong all the inhabitants
of the islands, and those fettled in the various
provinces which extend from the isthmus of
Darien almost to the southern confines ofBrafil,
along the east fide of the Andes. In the
former, the human species appears manifestly
to be more perse&. The natives are more
robust, more ascive, more intelligent, and
more courageous. They possess, in the molf
eminent degree, that force of mind, and love
of independence, which I have pointed out as
the chief virtues of man in his savage state.
They have defended their liberty with perse-
vering fortitude against the Europeans, who
subdued the other rude nations of America
with the greatest ease. The natives of the
temperate zone are the only people in the New
World who are indebted for their freedom to
their own valour. The North-Americans,
though long encompassed by three formidable

R 2 European

BooT IV. European powers, still retain part of their

r -original poffefTions, and continue to exist as

independent nations. The people of Chili,
though early invaded, still maintain a gallant
conteit with the Spaniards, and have set bounds
to their encroachments; whereas, in the warmer
regirns, men are more feeble in their frame,
less vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of a
gentle but dastardly spirit, more enslaved by
pleasure and funk in indolence. Accordingly,
it is in the torrid zone that the Europeans have
most completely established their dominion
over America; the most fertile and desirable
provinces in it are fibjeAed to their yoke;
and if several tribes there frill enjoy independ-
ence, it is either because they have never been
attacked by an enemy already satiated with
conquest, and possessed of larger territories
than he was able to occupy, or because they
have been saved from oppression by their re-
mote and inaccessible Situation.

Co.sPIcuous as this diflinction may appear

between the inhabitants of those different re-
gions, it is nor, however, universal. Moral
and political causes, as I have formerly ob-
served, affect the disposition and character of
individuals as well as nations, fiill more power-
fully than the influence of climate. There are,

accord-

accordingly, some tribes, in various parts of Bool IV.
the torrid zone, possessed of courage,-high
spirit, and the love of independence, in a de-
gree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little ac-
quainted with the history of those people, to
be able to trace the several circumstances in
their progress and situation, to which they are
indebted for this remarkable pre-eminence.
The fadc, nevertheless, is certain. As early
as the first voyage of Columbus, he received
information that several of the islands were
inhabited by the Caribbees, a fierce race of
men, nowise resembling their feeble and timid
neighbours. In his second expedition to the
New World, he found this information to be
jiift, and was himself a witness of their intrepid
valour Y. The fame characer they have main-
tained invariably in all subsequent contests
with the people of our continentY; and, even
in our own times, we have seen them make a
gallant hand in defence of the last territory
which the rapacity of the Europeans had left
in their poffefion". Some nations in Brasil
were no less eminent for vigour of mind, and

Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. See NOTE LXVII.

Y Rochefort HiRf. des Antilles, 53 1.
; See NOTE LXVIII.

R 3 bravery

BaooIV. bravery in war'. The people of the isthmus
L - of Darien boldly met the Spaniards in the

field, and frequently repelled those formidable
invaders '. Other instances might be pro-
duced. It is not by attending to any single
cause or principle, however powerful and ex-
tensive its influence may appear, that we can
explain the actions, or account for the cha-
rafer, of men. Even the law of climate,
more universal, perhaps, in its operation than
any that assets the human species, cannot be
applied, in judging of their condu-t, without
many exceptions.

a Lery ap ie Br, iii. 2c:. &c.
1IHrrIe-., dec. i. !ib. x. c. 1,, .c, ; dec, pafftnr

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V.

T I E
H I S T 0 R Y

o f
0 F : ......
A M E R I C A.

BOO K V.

HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he Boor V.
found the armament destined to attempt ',
the conquest of that rich country which he Preprations

of Velasquez
had discovered, almost complete. Not only for invading

New Spain.

ambition, but avarice, had urged Velasquez
to haften his preparations and having such a
prospect of gratifying both, he had advanced
considerable funms out of his private fortune
towards defraying the expence. At the fame
time, he exerted his influence as governor, in
engaging the most distinguished persons in
the colony to undertake the service'. At a
time when the spirit of the Spanish nation was
adventurous to excess, a number of soldiers,
eager to embark in any daring enterprise, soon

a See NOTE LXIX.

R 4 appeared.

Bcor V. appeared. But it was not so easy to find a
-,;:~ person qualified to take the command in an

expedition of so much importance; and the
charater of Velasquez, who had the right of
nomination, greacly increased the difficulty of
the choice. Though of most alpiring ambi-
tion, and not destitute of talents for govern-
ment, he posse.ed neither luch courage, nor
luch vigour and activity of mind, as to under-
take in person the conduct of the armament
which he was preparing. In this embarrassing
f:tuation, he formed the chimerical scheme not
only of achieving great exploits by a deputy,
but of ficuring to himself the glory of con-
quelit which were to be made by another. In
the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at
reconciling contraditicons. He was Solicitous
to chufe a commarder of intrepid resolution,
and of iuperior abilities, because he knew these
to be requisite in order to ensure success; but,
at the lame time, from the jealousy natural to
little Ilinds, he wished this person to be of a
:pirit ;i tame and obsequious, as to be entirely
dependant on his will. But when he came to
apply those ideas in forming an opinion con-
cerning the several officers who occurred to
his thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with
the command, he soon perceived that it was
inmpo.i:b!e to find such incompatible qualities

united

united in one character. Such as were diftin- Boor V.
guifhed for courage and talents were too high- ,5s,
fpiriced to be passive instruments in his hand.
Those who appeared more gentle and tra&able,
were destitute of capacity, and unequal to the
charge. This augmented his perplexity and
his fears. He deliberated long, and with much
bolicitude, and was still wavering in his choice,
when Amador de Lares, the royal treasurer in
Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own secretary,
the two persons in whom he chiefly confided,
were encouraged by this irresolution to propose
a new candidate, and they supported their re-
commendation with such assiduity and address,
that, no less fatally for Velasquez than happily
for their country, it proved successful b.

THE man whom.they pointed out to him Heappoinu

Cortes coar-,

was Fernando Cortes. He was born at Me- mrndcr.
dellin, a finall town in Estremadura, in the year
one thousand four hundred and eighty-five, and
dcscended from a family of noble blood, but
of very moderate fortune. Being originally
deflined by his parents to the study of law, as
the mofft likely method of bettering his con-
dition, he was sent early to the university of
Salamanca, where he imbibed tome tin&ure of

b B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomara Cron. c. 7. Herrera, dec.
S. lib. iii. c. i .

learning.

Boor V. learning. But he was loon disgusted with an
L.~l academic life, which did not suit his ardent

and restless genius, and retired to Medellin,
where he gave himself up entirely to acRive
sports and martial exercises. At this period
of life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing,
and so dissipated, that his father was glad to
comply with his inclination, and fend him
abroad as an adventurer in arms. There were
in that age two conspicuous theatres, on which
such of the Spanifi youth as courted military
glory might display their valour; one in Italy,
under the command of the Great Captain; the
other in the New World. Cortes preferred
the formier, but was prevented by indisposition
from enbharking with a reinforcement of troops
sent to Naples. Upon this disappointment he
turned ilis views towards America, whither he
wal zllured by the prospect of the advantages
which he mnight derive fromn the patronage of
Ovan:do', the governor of Hispaniola, who was
his kinsman. When he landed at St. Domingo
;n one thousand five hundred and four, his re-
ception was such as equalled his most sanguine
hopes, and he was employed by the governor
in several honourable and lucrative stations.
These, however, did not satisfy his ambition;
and in th, sear one thoti':nd five hundred and.

: <.- NOTE IYXX.

eleven,

eleven, he obtained permiflion to accompany BOOK V.
Diego Velasquez in his expedition to Cuba. ,158.
In this service he diflinguifhed himself so
much, that, notwithstanding foime violent con-
tefls with Velasquez, occasioned by trivial
events, unworthy of remembrance, he was at
length taken into favour, and received an
ample concession of lands and of Indians, the
recompence usually bestowed upon adventurers
in the New World ,

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto acted in

high command, he had displayed such qualities
in several scenes of difficulty and danger, as
raised universal expecation, and turned the
eves of his countrymen towards him, as one
capable of performing great things. The tur-
bulence of youth, as soon as he found objets
and occupations suited to the ardour of his
mind, gradually subsided, and fettled into a
habit of regular indefatigable activity. The
impetuoCity of his temper, when he came to a&
with his equals, insensibly abated, by being
kept under restraint, and mellowed into a cor-
dial soldierly frankness. These qualities were
accompanied with calm prudence in concerting
his schemes, with persevering vigour in exe-

d Gomara Cron. c. i, z, 3.

cutlng

BooK V. cuting them, and with what is peculiar to fu-
-Is. periorgenius, the art of gaining the confidence

and governing the minds of men. To all
which were added the inferior accomplishments
that itrike the vulgar, and command their
respect; a graceful person, a winning aspet,
extraordinary address in martial exercises, and
a constitution of such vigour as to be capable
of enduring any fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velaf-

quez by his two confidents, he flattered himself
that he had at length found what he had hitherto
fought in vain, a man wi;h talents for conm-
mand, but not an objec' of jcaloufy. Neither
the rank nor the fortune of Cortes, as he ima-
gined, were such Lhat he could aspire at inde-
pendence. He had reason to believe, that by
his own readiness to bu;-v ancient animofities in
oblivion, as well as his liberality in conferring
several recent favours, he hadl already gained
the good-will of Corr.-s, and hoped, by this new
and unexpected mark: of confidence, that he
mright attach him for ever to his inrcreft.
s-o.r- . COR -ES receiving his co!nmiion with the

'''"m. -warm'Reft expressions of rctpect and gratituJe to
oUi::. [. the governor, immeiiatelv erected his ifandard

before i'.s own houfc, appcared in a milltary

. . .;"

dress, and assumed all the ensigns of his new BooK V.
dignity, His utmost influence and activity 5zS.
were exerted in periuading many of his friends
to engage in the service, and in urging forward
the preparations for the voyage. All his own
funds, together with what money he could raise
by mortgaging his lands and Indians, were ex-
pended in purchasing military stores and provi-
sions, or in supplying the wants of such of his
officers as were unable to equip themselves in a
manner suited to their rank . Inoffensive, and
even laudable as this condua was, his difap-
pointed competitors were malicious enough to
give it a turn to his disadvantage: They re-
presented him as aiming already, with little
disguise, at establishing an independent au-
thority over his troops, and endeavouring to
secure their refpe& or love by his ostentatious
and interested liberality. They reminded Ve-
lafquez of his former dissensions with the man
in whom he now reposed so much confidence,
and foretold that Cortes would be more apt to
avail himfelfof the power, which the governor
was inconsiderately putting in his hands, to
avenge past injuries, than to requite late obli-
gations. These insinuations made such in-
preflion upon the suspicious mind of Velasquez,

' See N 0 T E LXXI.

that

Boa V. that Cortes soon observed some symptoms of a

SiE. growing alienation and diftrufc in his behaviour,

and was advised by Lares and Duero, to haften
his departure, before these should become so
confirmed, as to break out with open violence.
Fully sensible of this danger, he urged forward
his preparations with such rapidity, that he set
fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth
of November, Velasquez accompanying him to
the shore, and taking leave of him with an ap-
pearance of perfect friendship and confidence,
though he had secretly given it in charge to
some of Cortes's officers, to keep a watchful
eye upon every part of their commnnder's con-
dut '.

Ez..ro..rs CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a fiall set-
biof . tlement on the fame fide of the island, where
a=....;a he was joined by several adventurers, and re-

ceived a supply of provisions and military stores,
of which his frock was flill very incomplete.
He had hardly left St. Jago when the jealousy
which had been working in the breast of Velaf-
quez, grew so violent that it was impoifible to
suppress it. The armament was no longer
under his own eye and directions and he felt
that as his power over it ceased, that of Cortes

f G nara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 2:'.

became

became more absolute. Imagination now ag- BooK V.
gravated every circumstance, which had for- UiS.
inerly excited fufpiciun: the rivals of Cortes in-
dufrioufly threw in refle&ions which increased
his fears; and with no less art than malice they
called iiperfition to their aid, employing the
prediclions of an astrologer in order to complete
the alarm. AHl these, by their united opera-
tion, produced the desired effect. Velasquez
repented bitterly of his own imprudence, in
having committed a trust of so nmch import-
ance to a person whose fidelity appeared so
doubtful, and.haftily dispatched inftrucaions to
Trinidad, empowering Verdugo, the chief ma-
giftrate there, to deprive Cortes of his com-
miflion. But Cortes had already made such
progress in gaining the esteem and confidence
of his troops, that, finding officers as well as
soldiers equally zealous to support his authority,
he toothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was
permitted to depare from Trinidad without mo-
leftation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana, and ,o s

in order to raise more soldiers, and to complete him under
the vitualling of his fleet. There several per-
Ions of difintion entered into the service, and
engaged to supply what provisions were still
wanting; but as it was necessary to allow themt

5 some

BOOK V. some time for performing what they had pro-
',j;, mifed, Velasquez, sensible that he ought no

longer to rely on a man of whom he had so
openly discovered his distrust, availed himself
of the interval, which this unavoidable delay
afforded, in order to make one attempt more to
wrest the command out of the hands of Cortes.
He loudly complained of Verdugo's conduct,
accusing him either of childish facility, or of
manifest treachery, in suffering Cortes to escape
from Trinidad. Anxious to guard againfi a
second disappointment, he sent a person of con-
fidence to the Havana, with peremptory in-
junctions to Pedro Barba, his lieutennnt-gover-
nor in that colony, inliantly to arrell Cortes, to
fend him prisoner to Sr. Jago under a strong
guard, and to countermand the failing of the
armament until he should receive farther orders:
He wrote likewise to the principal officers, re-
quiring them to afift Barba in executing what
he had given him in charge. But before the
arrival of his messenger, a Franciican friar of
St. Jago had secretly conveyed an account of
this interesting transaction to Bartholomewv de
Olmedo, a monk of the fame order, who aced
as chaplain to the expedition.
coe, j- CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time

, to take precautions for his own fafetv. His

fisrc

first ftep was to find some pretext for removing BOOK V.
from the Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of ,5lx
great merit, but in whom, on account of his nu'esa h
known attachment to Velasquez, he could not aPr."-
confide in this trying and delicate juncure. He
gave him the command of a vessel, destined to
take on board some .,provisions in a fimal har-
bour beyond Cape Antonio, and thus made
sure of his absence, without seeming to fufpe&
his fidelity. When he was gone, Cortes no
longer concealed the intentions of Velasquez
from his troopst and as officers and soldiers
were equally impatient to set out on an expedi-
tion, in preparing for which most of them had
expended all their fortune, they expressed their
astonishment and indignation at that illiberal
jealousy, to which the governor was about to
sacrifice, not only the honour of their general,
but all their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth.
With one voice they intreated that he would
not abandon the important station to which he
had such a good title. They conjured him not
to deprive them of a leader whom they fol-
lowed with, such well-founded confidence, and
offered to shed the last drop of their blood in
maintaining his authority. Cortes was easily
induced to comply with what he so ardently de-
fired. He swore that he would never desert
soldiers who had given him such a signal proof

Vor. II. S of

Boor V. of their attachment, and promised instantly to

,;s. condut them to that rich country, which had

been tso lon the objec of their thoughts and
v.'ises. This declaration was received with
transports of miiitary applause, accompanied
with threats and imprecations againit all who
should prelume to call in question the jurifdic-
tion of their general, or to obstruct the execu-
tion of hi, designs.

T ..
. EVERav thing was now ready for their depar-

rure: but though this expedition was fitted out
by the united effort of the Spaniih power in
Cuba; though every fettcement had contributed
its quota of men and provilions; though the
governor had laid our considerable rums, and
each adventurer had exhauated his stock, or
firained his crcdit, the poverty of the prepara-
tions was such as must aftonilh the present
age, and bore, indeed, no resemblance to an
armament destined for the conquest of a great
empire. The fict conilfted of eleven vessels;
the largest of a hundred tons, which was dig-
n;fied with the name of Admiral; three of
fcventy or eighty tons, and the reft small open
barks. On board of thefk were fix hundred and
icventeen men; of which five hundred and eight
belonged to the land service, and a hundred and
. ine wcre f'amcn or artificers. The soldiers

were

Were divided into eleven companies, according BooK V.
to the number of the ihips; to each of which 1's.
Cortes appointed a captain, and committed to
him the command of the vessel while at sea, and
of the men when on shore g. As the use of fire-
arms among the nations of Europe was hitherto
confined to a few battalions of regularly difci-
plined infantry, only thirteen soldiers were
armed with muskets, thirty-two were cross-
bow-men, and the reft had swords and spears.
Instead of the usual defensive armour, which
mult have been cumbersome in a hot climate;
the soldiers wore jackets, quilted with cotton,
which experience had taught the Spaniards to
be a sufficient protection against the weapons of
the Americans. They had only sixteen horses,
ten small field-pieces, and four falconets h.

WITH this slender and ill-provided train did F. i
Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch 1519.

-lis oepar-

whose dominions were more extensive than all ture from
the kingdoms subject to the Spanish crown. As
religious enthusiasm always mingled with the
spirit of adventure in the New World, and, by
a combination still more strange, united with
avarice, in prompting the Spaniards to all their
enterprises, a large cross was dilplayed in their

See NOTE LXXII. E , Diaz. c. 19.

S 2 standards,

BOOK V. standards, with this inscription, Let us follort
,sg. ibe cro;s, for under this sign we/ball ccnticr-.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers

animated with both there pafions, that no less
eager to plunder the opulent country whither
they were bound, than zealous to propagate
the Chriitian faith among its inhabitants, they
set out, not with the solicitude natural to men
going upon dangerous service, but with that
confidence which arises from security of success,
and certaint of the divine protection.

Ts.-a. s: As Cortes had determined to touch at every
c .'.:' place which Grijalva had visited, he fleered

direcdly towards the island of Cozumel; there
he ha]d the good fortune to redeem Jerome de
ArZ-il2-, a Spaniard, who had been eight years
a prisoner among the Indians. This man was
perfectv acquainted with a dialet of their lan-
guage, understood through a large .extent of
country, and possessing besides a considerable
share of prudence and lagacitv, proved ex-

4:.=:-.4. tremely useful as an interpreter. From Cozu-
bco. re mel, Cortes proceeded to the river of Tabasco,

in hopes of a reception as friendly as Grijalva
had met with there, and of finding- old in the
fiane abundance; but the dilpofition of the na-
tives, fronm lome unknown cause, was totally

changed.

changed. After repeated endeavours to con- BooK V.
ciliate their good-will, he was constrained to 19
have recourse to violence.. Though the forces
of the enemy were numerous, and advanced
with extraordinary courage, they were routed,
with great slaughter, in several fuccefiive actions.
The loss which they sustained, and still more
the afronifhment and terror excited by the
defftruEive effect of the fire-arms, and the
dreadful appearance of the horses, humbled
their fierce spirits, and induced them to sue for
peace. They acknowledged the king of Caffile
as their sovereign, and granted Cortes a supply
of provisions, with a present of cotton gar-
ments, some gold, and twenty female slaves'.

CORTES continued his course to the westward, Arrs at

keeping as near the lhore as possible, in order s. J"n do
to observe the country; but could discover no
proper place for landing, until he arrived at St.
Juan de Ulua'. As he entered this harbour, Aprilz.
a large canoe, full of people, among whom
were two who seemed to be persons of diftinc-
tion, approached his ship, with signs of peace
and amity. They came on board without fear

i Sec NOTE LXXIlT.

k B. Diaz. c. 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 18-z3. Her-
rcra, dec. z. lib. iv. c. 1, &c.

S 3 or

BooK V. or dillruft, and addressed him in a most re-

,jsg. fpecIful manner, but in a language altogether

unknown to Aguilar. Cortes was in the utmost
perplexity and distress, at an event of which he
inffantly foresaw all the consequences, and al-
ready felt the hesitation and uncertainty with
which he Ihould carry on the great schemes
which he meditated, if, in his transactions with
the natives, he must depend entirely upon such
an imperfect, ambiguous, and conjecural mode
of communication, as the use of signs. But he
did not remain long in this embarrafling fitua-
t;on: a fortunate accident extricated him, when
n:s cwn fagaciry could have contributed little
:owards his relief. One of the female slaves,
-.n,:n he had received from the cazique of Ta-
haco, happened to be present at the first inter-
'.ew between Cortes and his new guesss. She
perceived his ditirefs, as well as the confusion
*· f Aguilar; and as !he perfefly understood the
Mexican language, she explained what they said
'..- : Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was
a. quadn-ned. . T;is waoinn, knov;n afterwards
b- the nam.e of Donna Marina, and who makes
; co-fpic.ous !"g're in the history of the New
\\Sorid, w'tre gre.lt revolutions were brought

o'.: bv ilnall . ies and inconsiderable inftm-
:ie-,:, was born :n one of the provinces of the

::.-::c.n empire. Having been carried off a

captive

captive by some hollile party, after a variety of BoOK V.
adlventures ihe fell into the hands of the Ta- .---
balcans, and had resided long enough among
them to acquire their language, without losing
the ule of her own. Though it was both tedious
and troublesome to converse by the.intervention
of two different interpreters, Cortes :.was so
highly pleased with having discovered this me-
thod of carrying on tome intercourse .with the
people of a country into which hewas .deter-
mined to penetrate, that in the transports of
his joy he confidered it as a visible interpgfition
of Providence in his favour .

HE now learned, that the two persons whom Ir.nd hi,

lie had received on board of his ship were d'e- "°P''
puties from Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one go-
vernor of that province under a great monarch,
whom they called Montezuma, and the other
the commander of his forces there, and that
they were Ient to inquire what his intentions
were in visiting their coast, and to offer him
what aflifsance he might need, in order to con-
tinue his voyage. Cortes, struck with the ap-
pearance of those people, as well as the tenor
of the mefage, assured them, in refpetful

' B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomgra Cron. c. 25, 26.
Herrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. 4.

S 4 terms,

B-o sV. terms, that he approached their country with

-,-. most friendly sentiments, and came to propose

matters of great importance to the welfare of
their prince and his kingdom, which he-would
unfold more fuihy, in person, to the .governor
and-the'general. Next morning, without wait-
ing for any answer, he landed his troops, his
horses and artillery; and having chosen proper
ground, beg-an to erec huts for his men, and
to fortify his camp. The natives, instead of
opposing the entrance of those fatal guesss into
their country, assisied them in all their opera-
tions, with an alacrity of which they had. ere
long good reason to repent.

::-. := _ NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered the

'^ Spanish camnp with a numerous retinues and
.i --.- Cortes confidering them as the ministers of a

great monarch, entitled to a degree of attention
very different from that which the Spaniards
were accustomed to pay to the petty Caziques,
with whom they had intercourse in the isles, re-
ceived them with much formal ceremony. He
informed them, that he came as ambassador
from Don Carlos of Auflria, king of Castile,
the greatefl monarch of the east, and was in-
trui'ed with propositions of such moment, that
he couli. impart them to none but the emperor
Montczu;na himnfelf and therefore required

.! .....

them to condu& him, without loss of time, into BooK V.
the presence of their master. The Mexican of- -, ~.
ficers could not conceal their uneasiness at a re-
quest, which they knew-to be disagreeable, and
which they foresaw might prove eitremely em-
barrafling to their sovereign, whose mind had
been filled with many disquieting apprehensions,
ever since the former appearance of the Spaniards
on his coasts. But before.they atterhpted to
difuade Cortes from infiting on this demand,
they endeavoured to conciliate his good-will,
by entreating him to accept of certain presents,
which, as humble saves of Montezuma, they
laid at his feet. These were introduced with
great parade, and consisted of fine cotton cloth,
of plumes of various colours, and of ornaments
of gold and silver, to a considerable value; the
workmanship of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of
there produced an effect very different from
what the Mexicans intended. Instead of satis-
fying, it increased the avidity of the Spaniards,
and rendered them so eager and impatient to
become masters of a country which abounded
with such precious produtions, that Cortes
could hardly liften with patience to the argu-
ments which Pilpatoe and Teutile employed to
dissuade him from vifiring the capital, and in
a haughty determined tone he insisted on his

demand,

BooK V. demand, of being admitted to a personal
t5i9. audience of their ibvereign. During this in-

terview, some painters, in the train of the
Mexican chiefs, had been diligently employed
in delineating upon white cotton cloths, figures
of the ships, the horses, the artillery, the fol-
diers, and whatever else attracted their eyes, as
singular. When Cortes observed tlis, and was
informed that these pi&ures were to be sent to
Montezuma, in order to convey to him a more
lively idea of the strange and wonderful objecs
now presented to their view, than any words
could communicate, he resolved to render the
representation frill more animated and interest-
ing, by exhibiting such a spectacle as might
give both them and their monarch an awful im-
prefion of the extraordinary prowels of his fol-
lowers, and the irrefillible force of their arms.
The trumpets, bv his order, founded an alarm;
the troops, in a moment, formed in order of
..;ti?, the in'fantry performed such martial
exerci;:c as acre best suited to difplav the effect
of he·r c.;i.crenr. weapons; the horse, in various
Pvolu-io:or, gave a specimen of their agility and
i rfng:th; tnc artillery pointed towards the thick
v -ood, x icih iurrounded the camp, made dread-
s.i .:voc amnor.g the trees. The Mexicans
io-'.:c cen xith that flent amazement, which is
:..::r.'.i w-'cn the minrd is struck with objets,

which

which are both awful and above its comprehen- BOOK V,
sion. But, at the explosion of the cannon, -'.
many of them fled, some fell to the ground, and
all were so much confounded at the fight of
men whose power so nearly resembled that of
the Gods, that Cortes found it difficult to com-
pose and re-assure them. The painters had
now many new subje&s on which to exercise
their art, and they put their fancy on the stretch
in order to invent figures and chara&ers to re-
present the extraordinary things which they had
seen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to Nógoc;,-

tinn u.ith

Montezuma with those pi&ures, and a full ac- Mnnto-
count of every thing that had passed since the
arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes
sent a present of some European curiosities to
Montezuma, which, though of no great value,
he believed would be acceptable on account of
their novelty. The Mexican monarchs, in
order to obtain early information of every oc-
currence in all the corners of their vast empire,
had introduced a refinement in police, un-
known, at that time, in Europe. They had
couriers posted at proper itations along the prin-
cipal roads, and as there were trained to agility
by a regular education, and relieved one another
at moderate distances, they conveyed intelli-

gence

BocK V. gence with surprising rapidity. Though the

capital in which Montezuma resided was above
a hundred and eighty miles from St. Juan de
Ulua, Cortes's presents were carried thither,
and an answer to his demands was received in a
few days. The fame officers who had hitherto
treated with the Spaniards, were employed to
deliver this answer; but as they knew how re-
pugnant the determinatcin of their master was
to all the schemes and wishes of the Spanish
commander, they would not venture to make
it known until they had previously endeavoured
to loothe and mollify him. For this purpose,
they renewed the negociation bv introducing a
-': e.- train of a hundred Indians, loaded with presents

lent to him bv Montezuma. The magnificence
of these was Siuch as became a great monarch,
and tar exceeded any idea which the Spaniards
had hitherto or:red of his wealth. They were
placed upon mats spread on the ground, in
such order, as shewed them to the greatcft ad-
vantage. Cortes and his officers viewed, with
2dmiration, the various manufactures of the
country, cotton stuffs so fine, and of such deli-
cate texture, as to refenble silk; pictures of ani-
rals, trees, and other natural objects formed
with fca rhrs of different colours, disposed and
min-e.nej with uch skill and elegance, as to rival

;he v.c.r of :he ;'c:cil in truth and beautv of

imitation,

imitation. But what chiefly attra&ed their BOOK V.
eyes, were, two large plates of a circular,forn '
one of:malive gold reprefsnting the fun, tke
otherof firvev, an emblem of the moon ". ThXefe
were acco-npanied with bracelets, collars, rings,
and other trinkets of gold; and that na.thing
might be wanting which could give .the Spa-
niards a complete idea of what the country as-
forded, with some boxes filled with pearls, pre-
cious siones, and grains of gold unwrought, as
they had been found in the mines or rivers.
Cortes received all there with an appearance.of
profound veneration for the monarch by whom
they were betlowed. But when the Mexicans,
presuming upon this, informed him, that their Frbids
master, though he desired him to accept of what DpCo:h
he had sent as a token of his regard for the mo- h1s "caitJ'.
narch whom Cortes represented, would not
give his content that foreign troops ihould ap.
proach nearer to his capital, or even allow. thenm
to continue longer.in his dominions, the Spanish
general declared, in a manner more resolute
and peremptory than formerly, that he must
insist on his firlftdemand, as he could not with-.
out difhonovr return to his own sovereign, until
he was admitted into the pretence of the prince
whom hle was appointed to visit in his name.

" See NOTE LXXIV.

The

Boor V. The Mexicans, aftonlfhed at feeing any man

1 dare to oppose that will, which they were ac-

customed to confider as supreme and irresistible,
yet afraid of precipitating their country into an
open rupture with such formidable enemies,
prevailed with Cortes to promise, that he would
not move from his present camp, until the re-
turn of a messenger, whom they lent to Mon-
tezuma for farther instructions ".

St.t the THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to
Mbc.can his original proposal should, naturally, have
e"pire at
th .-,.od. brought the negociation between him and Mon-

tezuma to a speedy issue, as it teemed to leave
the Mexican monarch no choice, but either to
receive him with confidence as a friend, or to
oppose him openly as an cnemy. The latter
was what might have been expected from a
haughty prince in poffefion of extensive power.
The Mexican empire, at this period, was at a
pitch of grandeur to which no society ever at-
tained in so short a period. Though it had
subsisted only a hundred and thirty years, its
dominion extended from the North to the South
Sea, over territories stretching, with some small
interruption, above five hundred leagues from

B. Diaz. c. 39. Gcmara Croo. c. z-. sHerrera, dec.
2. lib. v. c. 5, 6.

eafl

eal: to weft, and more than two hundred from BooK V.
north to south, comprehending provinces not 1519.
inferior in fertility, population, and opulence
to any in the torrid zone. The people were
warlike and enterprising. The authority of the
monarch unbounded, and his revenues con-
fiderable. If, with the forces which might
have been suddenly aflembled in such an em-
pire, Montezuma had fallen upon the Spaniards
while encamped on a barren unhealthy coast,
unlupported by any ally, without a place of re-
treat, and deftiute of provisions, it is impof-
lible, even with all the advantages of their fu-
perior discipline and arms, that they could have
flood the Ihock, and they muff either have
periihed in such an unequal contest, or have
abandoned the enterprise.

As the power of Montezuma enabled him to Characrof,

take this spirited part, his own dispositions hach.
seemed naturally to prompt him to it. Of all
the princes who had swayed the Mexican fcep-
tre, he was the most haughty, the most vio-
lent, and the most impatient of controul. His
fubjeEs looked up to him with awe, and his
enemies with terror. The former he governed
with unexampled rigour, but they were im-
pressed with such an opinion of his capacity, as
commanded their refpe&c and by many vic-

5 tories

Bpo V- tories over the latter, he had spread far the dread
i--,- of his ahrms, and had added' everal confiierable

provinces to his dominions. But though his
talents might be fulted to the trahfactions of. a
fta;e so imperfectly polified as the M.exican em-
pire, and fufiicient to conduct them while in
their accufromred course, they were altogether
inadequ-te to a conjuncure so extraordinary,
and did not qualify him either ro judge with
the difcern:nent, or to act with the decision, re-
quifite in such a trying emergence.

WH r- FROM the moment that the Spaniards ap-
..'...r.o peared on his coast, he discovered fymptoins of
...*.'..I timiditv and embarraflinent. Instead of taking
o:' 'r, 5:2-
L.... such resolutions as the confciouinefs of his own

power, or the memory of his former exploits,
might have inspired, he deliberated with an
anxiety and hesitation which did not escape the
notice of his meanest courtiers. The perplexity
and discomposure of Montezuma's mind upon
this occfion, as well as the general diilnay of
his fuibiecs, were not owing whiolly to the im-
prefilon which the Spaniards had made by the
novelty of their appearance and the terror of
their. arms. Its origin may be traced up ,Q a
more remote source. There was an opinion,
if we may believe the earliest and mos't authen-
tic- Spanish hiitorians, almost universal among

3 the

the Americans, that some dreadful calamity was Book V.
impending over their heads, from 'a race of 19.
formidable invaders who should come from re-
gions towards the rising fun> to overrun and
desolate their country. Whetherthis disquieting
apprehension flowed from the memory-of some
natural calamity which had affli&ed that part
of the globe, and impressed the minds of the
inhabitants with superstitious fears and fore-
bodings, or whether it was an imagination ac-
cidentally suggested by the astonishment which
the first fight of a new race of men occasioned,
it is impossible to determine. But as the Mexi-
cans were more prone to superstition than any
people in the New World, they were more
deeply affefted with the appearance of the Spa-
niards, whom their credulity instantly repre-
Icnted as the instruments defRined to bring about
this fatal revolution which they dreaded: Utn-
der those circumstances, it ceases to be incre-
dible that a handful of adventurers should alarm
the monarch of a great empire and all his sub-
jCd'S0.

NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this im- Contin.e

preflion, when the messenger arrived from the teo goci-

o Cortes Relatione Seconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 235.

llerrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. lib. v. c. II. lib. vii. c. 6.
Gomrnra Cron. c. 66. 92. 144.

VOL. II. T Spanish

Boor V. Spaniffi camp with an account that Cortes,
9, g. adhering to his original demand, refused to

obey the order-enjoining him to leave the coun-
try, Montezuma assumed some degree of refo-
lution, and in a transport of rage natural to a
fierce prince, unaccustomed to meet with any
opposition to his will, he threatened to sacrifice
those presumptuous strangers to his gods. - But
his doubts and fears quickly returned, and in-
flead of issuing orders to carry his threats into
execution, he again called his ministers to con-
ser and offer their advice. Feeble and tem-
porizing measures will always be the result when
men assemble to deliberate in a situation where
they ought to ace. The Mexican counsellors
rook no effectual measure for expelling such
troublesome intruders, and were satisfied with
issuing a more positive injunction, requiring
them to leave the country but this they pre-
pofteroufly accompanied with a present of such
value, as proved a freih inducement to remain
there.

Anxc-Tv MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not with-
.,,7,,of out Solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in de-

5^s'- liberating concerning their own future condut.

From what they had Iaready seen, many of them
formed luch extravt.:.nt ideas concerning the
opulence of the country, that, despising dan-

ger

ger or hardships, when they had in view trea- BooR V.
fures which appeared to be inexhaustible they I,"
were eager to attempt the conquest. - Others,
estimating the power of the Mexican empire by
its wealth, and enumerating the various proofs
which had occurred of its being under a well-
regulated administration, contended that, it
would be an a& of the wildest frenzy to attack
such a frate with a small body of men, in want
of provisions, unconne&ed with any ally, and
already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar to the
climate, and the loss of several of their num-
ber P. Cortes secretly applauded the advocates
for bold measures, and cherished their roman-
tic hopes, as such ideas corresponded with his
own, and favoured the execution of the schemes
which he had formed. From the time that the
suspicions of Velasquez broke out with open
violence in the attempts to deprive Cortes of
the command, he saw the necessity of dissolving Schemes f
a connection which would obftru&t and em- co
barrafs all his operations, and watched for a
proper opportunity of coming to a final-rupture
with him. Having this in view, he had la.
boured by every art, to secure the esteem and
affection of his soldiers. With his abilities for
command, it was easy to gain their esteem;

P B. Diaz, c. 40.

T 2 and

Boor V. and his followers were quickly satisfied that
-J9, they might rely, with perfec confidence, on

the condu& and courage of their leader. Nor
was it more difficult to acquire their affeclion.
Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank,
and serving at their own expence, the dignity
of command did not elevate a general above
mingling with those who afted under him.
Cortes availed himself of this freedom of inter-
course, to insinuate himself into their favour,
and by his affable manners, by well-timed ats
of liberality to rome, by inspiring all with vail
hopes, and by allowing them to trade privately
with the natives q, he attached the greater part
of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that they
almost forgot that the armament had been fitted
out by the authority, and at the expence, of
another.

.Rbs2,f, DURING thole intrigues, Teutile arrived
t^w":gB with the present from Montezuma, and, toge-

ther with it, delivered the ultimate order of
that monarch to depart inifantly out of his do-
minions; and when Cortes, instead of com-
plying, renewed his request of an audience,
the Mexican turned from him abruptly, and
quitted the camp w irh looks and geflures which

' e N0 OTE LXXV.

strongly

f!rongly expressed his surprise and resentment. BOOK V.
Next morning, none of.the natives, who used s19.
to frequent the camp in great.numbers, in
order to barter with the soldiers, and to bring
in provisions, appeared. All friendly corre-
lpondence seemed, now to be at an end,.. and it
was expeEted every moment that .hostilities
would commence. This, though an event
that might have been foreseen,: occasioned a
ludden consternation. among the Spaniards,
which emboldened the adherents of Velasquez
not only to murmur and cabal against their
general, but to appoint one of their number to
remonstrate openly against his imprudence in
attempting the conquest of a mighty empire
with such inadequate force, and to urge the
nccelfity of returning to Cuba, in order to refit
the tlcet and augment the army. Diego de
Ordaz, one of his principal officers, whom the
malcontents charged with this commission, de-
livered it with a ioldierly freedom and blunt-
ncfs, afluring Cortes that he spoke the senti-
mcnts of the whole army. He listened to this
rci.noniti-ance without any appearance of emo-
tion, and as he well knew the temper and wishes
of hi., Ijllit:rs, and foresaw how they would re-
ceive a proposition fatal at once to all the fplen-
did liopes and schemes which they had been
forming Isith 'uch complacency, he carried his

T 3 diffimu-

BooK V. diffimulatiorl so far as to seem to relinquifl his

own measures in compliance with the request
of Ordaz, and issucd orders that the army
should be in readiness next day to reimbark
for Cuba. As soon as this was known, the
difappoihced adventurers exclaimed and threat-
ened; the emilaaries of Cortes, mingling with
them, inflamed their rage; the ferment be-
came general; the whole camp was almost in
open mutiny; all demanding with eagerness
to fee their commander. Cortes was not flow
in appearing; when, with one voice, officers
and soldiers expressed their aftoniflment and
indignation at the orders which they had re-
ceived. It was unworthy, they cried, of the
Castilian courage to be daunted at the first
afpe& of danger, and infamous to fly before
any enemy appeared. For their parts, they
were determined not to relinquish an enter-
prise, that had hitherto been successful, and
which tended so visibly to spread the know-
ledge of true religion, and to advance the
glory and interest of their country. Happy
under his command, they would follow him
with alacrity through every danger, in quest
of those settlements and treasures which he
had so long held out to their view; but if he
chore rather to return to Cuba, and tamely
g;ve up all his hopes of distinction and opu-

lence

lence to an envious rival, they would initahtly Booi V.
chufe another general to conduct.them in that 15i;
path of glory which he had not spirit to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took

no offence at the boldness with which-it *as
uttered. The sentiments were what he him-
itlf had inspired, and the warmth of expression
satisfied him that his followers had imbibed
them thoroughly. He affec&ed, however, to
be surprised at what he heard, declaring that
his orders to prepare for embarking were issued
from a persuasion that this was agreeable to
his troops; that, firom deference to what he
had been informed was their inclination, he
had sacrificed his own private opinion, which
was firmly bent on establishing immediately a
settlement on the sea-coast, and then on en-
deavouring to penetrate into the interior part
of the country; that now he was convinced of
his error; and as he perceived that they were
animated with the generous spirit which
breathed in every true Spaniard, he would re-
lume, with fresh ardour, his original plati of
operation, and doubted not to conduct them,
in the career of viCtory, to fich independent
bortunes as their valour merited. Upon this
dtclaration, ihouts of applause testified the
exccfs of their joy. The measure seemed to

T 4 be

Boor V. be taken: with unanimous consent p such as

>~s - fecredy condemned it, being obligedto join

in the acclamations, partly to conceal their
difaffecrion from their general, and partly to
avoid the imputation of cowardice from their
fellow-foldiersr. .

~Et'A;,e WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or
a form ot
ci.p, erD- to reflec, Cortes set about carrying his design

into execution. In order to give a beginning
to a colony, he assembled the principal per-
sons in his army, and by their suffrage eleced
a council and magifsrates in whom the govern-
ment was to be vested. As men naturally
transplant the intitutions and forms of the
mother-country into their new settlements,
this was framed upon the model of a Spanish
corporation. The magistrates were diftin-
guiied by the fame names and ensigns of
office, and were to exercise a similar jurif-
diction. All the persons chosen were most
firmly devoted to Cortes, and the instrument
of their election was framed in the king's name,
without any mention of their dependance on
Velasquez. The two principles of avarice and
enthufiafin, which prompted the Spaniards to
all their enterprises in the New World, feern

' . D:-. - :,
* 2. IieH -era, dec. z. lib. v. c. 6, 7.

t9

to have concurred in; rfuggefting- the- hiarrie Fboic
which Cortes bestowed oh his irffadt fettleeriti `. ,;
He called it, 'Villa :ric de 'laveir C ,u; 'thit
is, The ick, town ofthe te trueCrofs.'
: " - ; -

THE first meeting of the new:couiiecl'-wta Resign his

distinguished by a tranfafRion of great moment. cn "liss''
As soon as it assembled, Cortes.applied.for leave
to enter; and approaching with many marks
of profound refpet, which added dignity to
the tribunal,; and set an example of:reverence
for its authority, he began a long harangue,
in which, with. much art, and in terms ex-
tremely flattering to persons just entering upon
their new funtion, he oblerved,. that as tht
supreme jurifdiion over the colony which
they had planted was now vested in- this court,
lie confidered them as clothed with the autho-
rity and representing the person of their fove-
reign; that accordingly he would communi-
cate to them what he deemed essential to the
public lafety, with the fame dutiful fidelity as
if he were addrefling his royal maser; that the
security of a colony fettled in a great empire,
whole Iovereign had already discovered his
hultile intentions, 'depended upon arms, and
the etiicacy of these upon the subordination
and dilcipline pretlrved among the troops;
that hio right to command was derived from a

commission

BooK V. commission granted by the governor of Cu'ba;

-'l and as that had been long.fince revoked, the

lawfulness of his jurifdicion might well be
quellioned that he seemed to at upon a de-
festive, or even a dubious title; nor could
they trust an army which might dispute the
powers of its general, at a juncure when it
ought implicitly to obey his orders that,
moved by there considerations, he now resigned
all his authority to them, that they, -having
both right to chute, and power to confer full
jurisdiction, might appoint one, in the king's
name, to command the army in its future
operations; and as for his own part, such was
his zeal for the service in which they were en-
gaged, that he would most cheerfully take up
a pike with the fame hand that laid down the
general's truncheon, and convince his fellow-
soldiers, that though accustomed to command,
he had not forgotten how to obey. Having
finished his discourse, he laid the commission
from Velasquez upon the table, and, after
kifuing his truncheon, delivered it to the chief
magifrrate, and withdrew.

alic'ta THE deliberations of the council were not
.. =,i-.- long, as Cortes had concerted this important
E'£":l. measure with his conidents, and had prepared

the other members, with great address, for the

pjr:

part which he wished them to take. His re- -Boo6 V.
fignation was accepted; and as the ulinter- ,sg
rupred tenour of their ptofperity under hit
condu& afforded the most fatiTfyirg evitdence
of his abilities for comrmand, tliey, by thit
unanimous suffrage, eleced hilh chief jufttie
of the colony, and captain-general of'its atrmy,
and appointed his comnmiflon to be made dut
in the king's hame, with rmot ammple 'powers
which were to continue in force until the loyal
pleasure should be farther knownr. That thiA
deed might not be deemed the machination of
a junto, the council called together the troops,
and acquainted them with what had been re&
solved. The soldiers, with eager applausfe
ratified their choice; the air resounded with
the name of Cortes, and all vowed to shed
their blood in support of his authority.

CoRTEs having now brought his intrigues Amr-r hi;

to the desired issue, and shaken off his mortify- withotyr.
ing dependance on the governor of Cuba, ac-
cepted of the cbinmifflon, which vested in hini
iU)preme jurilditiion, civil as well as military,
over the colony, with many professions of re-
ie:;t to the council, and gratitude to the
army. Together with his new command, he
alil.ned greater dignity, and began to exer-
ciib more extensive powers. Formerly he had

felt

Boos y. felt himself to be only the deputy of a fubjeat

now he ated as the reprefenrative of his fove-
reign. The adherents of Velasquez, fully
aware of what would be the effe& .of this
change in the situation of Cortes, could no
longer continue silent and passive fpe&ators of
his actions. They exclaimed openly against
the proceedings of the council as illegal, and
against those of the army as mutinous. Cortes,
infantly perceiving the necessity of giving a
timely check to such seditious discourse by
some vigorous measure, arrested Ordaz, Efcu-
dero, and Velasquez de Leon, the ringleaders
of this facion, and sent them prisoners aboard
the fleet, loaded with chains. Their depend-
ants, astonished and overawed, remained quiet;
and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than to
punish his prisoners, who were officers of great
merit, courted their friendship with such affi-
duity and address, that the reconciliation was
perfectly cordial; and on the most trying occa-
sions, neither their connection with the go-
vernor of Cuba, nor the memory of the indig-
nity with which they had been treated, tempted
them to swerve from an inviolable attachment
to I.s interest'. In this, as well as his other
ncz-'ciArions at this critical conjuncture, which

.' D. ;'c. C ,
4. 3. Gomnra Cron. c. 30, 31. Hcr-

.edc_,, . . V. C. 7.

decided

ilecided with refpe& to his future fame and Asr-.
fortune, Cortes owed much of his success to 5'".
the Mexican gold, which he diffributed with
a liberal hand both among his friends and his
opponents '.

CORTES, having thus rendered the union His friend-

between himself and his army indissoluble by byptheZem-
those common aAs of disobedience, thought poallans.
he might now venture to quit the camp in
which he had hitherto remained, and advance
into the country. To this he was encouraged
by an event no less fortunate than seasonable.
Some Indians having approached his camp in
a mysterious manner, were introduced into his
presence. He found that they were sent with
a proffer of friendship from the cazique of
Zempoalla, a considerable town at no great
distance; and from their answers to a variety
of questions which he put to them, according
to his usual practice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that
their inmfer, though subject to the Mexican
empire, was impatient of the yoke, and filled.
\v ihi Ich dread and hatred of Montezuma,
r 'at nothing could be more acceptable tohi!n
.hain aln profpe&t of deliverance from the op-

B. Diaz, c. 4..

prenion

Boon V. pression under which he groaned. On hearing

;, 1this, a ray of light and hope broke in upon

the mind of Cortes. He law that the great
empire which he intended to attack was not
united, nor its sovereign beloved. He con-
cluded, that the causes of disaffection could
not be confined to one province, but that in
other corners there must be malcontents, lo
weary of subjection, or so desirous of change,
as to be ready to follow the standard of any
protector. Full of those ideas, on which he
began to form a scheme, that time, and more
perfect information concerning the state of the
country, enabled him to mature, he gave a
most gracious reception to the Zempoallans,
and promised soon to visit their cazique a.
;r; to IN order to perform this promise, it was not

necessary to vary the route which he had already
fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he
had employed to survey the coast, having dif-
covered a village named Quiabiflan, about
forty miles to the northward, which, both on
account of the fertility of the foil, and com-
modioufnefs of the harbour, seemed to be a
more proper fation for a fettlctment than that
where he was encamped, Cort:s determined to

B. Diaz. c. 41. Gcm ra Cron. c. 28.

renmove

remove thither. Zempoalla lay, in his way, BtoK V.
where the.cazique received him in the manner ,, -
which he had reason to expe&; with gifts and
carel'es, like a man solicitous to gain his good-
will; with refpe& approaching almost to ado-
ration, like one who looked up to him as a
deliverer. From him he learned many parti-
culars with refpe& to the chara&er of Monte-
zuma, and the circumitances which rendered
his dominion odious. He was a tyrant, as the
cazique told him with tears, haughty, cruel,
and ful-picious; who treated his own subje&s
with arrogance, ruined the conquered pro-
vinces by excessive exactions, and often tore
their sons and daughters from them by vio-
lence; the former, to be offered as victims to
his gods; the latter, to be reserved as concu-
bines for himself or favourites. Cortes, in
reply to him, artfully insinuated, that one
great object of the Spaniards in visiting a
country so remote from their own, was to
redress grievances, and to relieve the oppressed;
and having encouraged him to hope for this
interposition in due time, he continued his
march to Quiabiflan.

T1 IE pot which his officers had reconl- u;!adlro-.

mended as a proper situation, appeared to him
to be so well chosen, that he immediately

6 marked

Boo V. marked out ground for a town. The houses

to be erected were only huts; but these were
to be surrounded with fortifications, of fuffi-
cient strength to resist the aifaults of an Indian
army. As the finishing of those fortifications
was essential to the existence of a colony, and
of no less importance in prosecuting the designs
which the leader and his followers meditated,
both in order to secure a place of retreat, and
to preserve their communication with the Tea,
every man in the army, officers as well as fol-
diers, put his hand to the work, Cortes him-
self setting them an example of aftivity and
perseverance in labour. The Indians of Zem-
poalla and Quiabiflan lent their aid; and this
petty station, the parent of so many mighty
fctdlemenrs, was soon in a state of defence .

ConwlOd a VWHILE engaged in this ncceffary work,
°a...i:lh Cortes had ieverai interviews with the caziques
an i-e of Zempoalla and Qliiabiilan; and availing

himself of their wonder and afionifhment at
the new obje&s which they daily beheld, he
gradually infpiried them with such an high
opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of a fupe-
rior order, and irrtfiftible in arms, that, rely-

B. Diaz. c. .;, 6. S. Gomnara Cron. c. 3z, 33. 37.
Herrera, dec. :. .ib. .c . .

ing

ing on their protection, they ventured to insult BDOO V.
the Mexican power, at the very name of which ---
they were accustomed to tremble. Some of
Montezuma's officers having appeared to levy
the uiual tribute, and to demaid a certain
number of humian victims, as an expiation for
their guilt in prefuiring to hold intercourse
with those firangers whom the emperor had
commanded to leave his dominions, instead of
obeying the order, the caziques made them
prisoners, treated them with great indignity,
and as their superstition was no less barbarous
than that of the Mexicans, they prepared to
sacrifice them to their gods. From this lafi
danger they were delivered by the interposition
of Cortes, who manifested the utmost horror
at the mention of such a deed. The two
caziques having now been pushed to an aat of
flch open rebellion, as left them no hope of
safety but in attaching themselves inviolably
to the Spaniards, they soon completed their
union with them, by formally acknowledging
themselves to be vassals of the fame monarch.
Their example was followed by the Toto-
naques, a fierce people who inhabited the
mountainous part of the country. They ivil-
lingly fubjeEted themselves to the crown of
Castile, and offered to accompany Cortes,

VOL. II. U with

Boor V. with all their forces, in his march towards
'"sg. Mexico r.

His ;ec- CORTES had now been above three months
r a con- in New Spain; and though this period had
....o. not been distinguished by martial exploits,
'y ' t'e every moment had been employed in opera-

tions, which, though less splendid, were more
important. By his address in conducting his
intrigues with his own army, as well as his
sagacity in carrying on his negociations with
the natives, he had already laid the founda-
tions of his future success. But whatever con-
fidence he might place in the plan which he
had formed, he could not but perceive, that
as his tite to command was derived fiom a
doubtful authority, he held it by a prccarious
tenure. The injuries which Velailquez had
received, were such as zwo:uld naturally prompt
him to appiy for redres to their common
sovereign; and such a reprefcntation, he forc-
avw, might be given of his condutr, that hl
had realon to apprehend, not only that lihe
might be degraded from his r'rc-fnt r.nk, but
iubjected to punishment. Before he beg.an lis
march, it was necc:rarr to take the most cfec-

B. Dniz. c. ?-. Co-im 'a Cron. ;., S. Hierre.a.
iJ c. 2. ','. v. C. :, 1.

'.t':

tulil precautions against this impending danger. Boor V.
With this view, he perfiaded the magistrates '--
of his colony to address a letter to the kings
containing a long account of their own ser-
vices; a pompous description of the country
which they had discovered; its riches; the
number of its inhabitants, their civilization
;ind arts; a view of the progress which they
had already made, in annexing several exten-
five provinces of it to the crown of Castile,
and of the schemes which they had formed, as
well as the hopes which they entertained; of
reducing the whole to fubjetion; and last of
all, they gave a minute detail of the motives
which had induced them to renounce all con-
nection with Velasquez, to fettle a colony de-
pendant upon the crown alone, and to veil the
lupreme power, civil as well as military, in
the hands of Cortes; humbly requesting their
lbvereign to ratify what they had done by his
royal authority. Cortes himself wrote in a
limilar strain; and as he knew that the Spanish
court, accustomed to the exaggerated repre-
lentations of every new country by its disco-
verer, would give little credit to their splendid
accounts of New Spain, if these were not ac-
companied with such a specimen of what it
contained, as would excite an high idea of its
npulence, he solicited his soldiers to relinquish

U 2 what

BooK V. wh at they might claim as their part of thd
1,5. t rreafures which had hitherto been colleced, in

order that the whole might be sent to the king.
Such was the ascendant which he had acquired
over their minds, and such their own romantic
expectations of future wealth, that an army of
indigent and rapacious adventurers was capable
of this generous effort, and offered to their
sovereign the richest present that had hitherto
been tranfinitted from the New World '. Por-
tocarrero and Montejo, the chief magistrates
of the colony, were appointed to carry this
present to Castile, with express orders not to
touch at Cuba in their passage thither'.

A ,-:i- W\HILE a vessel was preparing for their de-
Ccoc,. parture, an unexpected event occasioned a

general alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, fe-
cretly attached to Velasquez, or intimidated
at the profpe& of the dangers unavoidable in
attempting to penetrate into the heart of a
great empire with such unequal force, formed
the design of Seizing one of the brigantines,
and making their escape to Cuba, in order to
give the governor such intelligence as might
enable him to intercept the flhip which was to

S- Sc NOTE LXX!I.
- B. D3l.... . z. UG ma-a Cron. c. 4:.

carry

carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain. BooK V.
This conspiracy, though formed by persons of S
low rank, was conducted with profound fecre-
cy; but at the moment when every thing was
ready for execution, they were betrayed by one
of their associates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes inter- He defroyt

hi, fceet.

posed so seasonably on this occasion, the de-
tection of this conspiracy filled his mind with
most disquieting apprehensions, and prompted
him to execute a scheme which he had long
revolved. He perceived that the spirit of dif-
affection frill lurked among his troops; that
though hitherto checked by the uniform fuc-
cess of his schemes, or kept down by the hand
of authority, various events might occur which
would encourage and call it forth. He ob-
served, that many of his men, weary of the
fatigue of elrvice, longed to revisit their fettle-
ments in Cuba; and that upon any appearance
of extraordinary danger, or any reverse of
fortune, it would be impossible to reflrain
them from returning thither. He was sensible
that his forces, already too feeble, could bear
no diminution, and that a very finall defetion
of his followers would oblige him to abandon
the cnterprile. After ruminating, often, and
with much folicitulde, upon those particulars,

U 3 he

Boor V. he f.w no hope of success, but in cutting of?
,51,.' all possibility of retreat, and reducing his men

to the neceflity of adopting the fame resolution
with which he himself was animated, either to
conquer or to perish. With this view, he de-
termined to destroy his fleet; but as he durst
not venture to execute such a bold relblution
by his single authority, he laboured to brine
his soldiers to adopt his ideas with refped to
the propriety of this measure. His address in
ac:omiplifhing this was not inferior to the
arduous occasion in which it was employed.
He persuaded some, that the ships had sus-
sered so much by having been long at sea, as
to be altogether unfit for service; to others he
pointed out what a seasonable reinforcement of
irrength they would derive from the junction
of an hundred men, now unprofitably em-
ployed as sailors; and to all he reprefcnted the
neceffir of fixing their eves and wilhes upon
what was before them, without allowing the
idea of a retreat once to enter their thoughts.
With universal consent the ships were drawn
ashore, and after stripping them of their fails,
rigging, iron-works, and whatever elle might
be of us., they were broke in pieces. Thus,
from an effort of magnanimity, to which there
is nothing parallel in hiiiorv, five hundred
..en voiu::-arily conenced to be ihut up in a

ho;U^,Is

hostile country, filled with powerful, and un- BOOK V.
known nations; and having precluded every x-9.
means of escape, left themselves without any
rcfourcc but their own valour and. perfeve-
rance b

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity

of his troops and the disposition of his allies
were equally favourable. All the advantages,
however, derived from the latter, though pro-
cured by much afliduity and address, were
well-nigh loft in a moment by an indiscreet
sally of religious zeal, which, on many occa-
lions, precipitated Cortes into actions incon-
fiftent with the prudence that diftinguilies his
character. Though hitherto he had neither
rime nor opportunity to explain to the natives
the errors of their own fuperflition, or to in-
flriit them in the principles of the Christian
faith, he commanded his soldiers to overturn
the altars and to destroy the idols in the chief
temple of Zempoalla, and in their place to
erct a crucifix and an image of the Virgin
Mary. The people beheld this with aftonilh-
ln:nt and horror; the pricfts excited them to
arnms but such was the authority of Cortes,

b Rclat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. z:5. B. Diaz. c, 57,
;S. Iicrrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14.

U 4 and

Boor V. and so great the ascendant which the Spaniards
JS9. had acquired, that the commotion was ap-

peared without bloodshed, and concord per-
frctly re-established'.

.r CORTas began his march from Zempoalla
c-':r. on the sixteenth of Augui;, with five hundred

men, fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. Th!
reft of his troops, consisting chiefly of such as
from age or infirmity were lets fit for a';; -e
l-rvice, he left as a garriion in Villa - ica,
inder the command of Efcalante, an officer of
merir, and warmly attached to his intrerft.
The cazique of Zemnpoalla supplied him with
provisions, and with two hundred of those
Indians called Tan:^nes, whose office, in a
country where tame animals were unkrnoxn,
was to carry burdens, and perform all servile
labour. They were a great relief to the Sanilh
i;l'crs, -who hitherto had been obliged, not
only to carry their own baggage, but to dsra
along the artillerv b;- main force. He oihered
likewise a conficirable body of his troops, but
Cortes was fatsit;d w.:th four h'unird:-; taking
care, however, to ci;uife periuns of such nore
as miaht prove hoftae ir the rdclity of teir
inaPrcr. Nothing mi -orable happened in his
c ]. D:j-. c. ! . 4:. Hcerer, d;c. 2 . iib. v. c. ^, 4.

S pragreis,

progress, until he arrived on the confines of BooK V.
Tialcala. The inhabitants of that province, a 51,9.
vwarlike people, were implacable enemies of
the Mexicans, and had been united in an an-
cient alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla.
Though leis civilized than the subje&s of Mon-
tezumia, they were advanced in improvemenE
far beyond the riide nations of America, whose
manners we have delcribcd. They had made
considerable progress in agriculture; they dwelt
in larie towns; they were not strangers to
bmiinc pecics of commerce; and in the imper-
fct accounts of their inititutions and laws,
tranlinlttcd to us by the early Spanish writers,
we dilcern traccs both of distributive juflice
and of criminal jurisdiction, in their interior
police. But still, as the degree of their civi-
lization was incomplcte, and as they depended
for subsistence not on agriculture alone, but
trulled for it, in a great meafire, to hunting,
they retained many of the qualities natural to
men in this itate. Like them, they were fierce
andt revengeful ; like them, too, they were
hi-gh-fpirited and independent. In consequence
of the formner, they were involved in perpetual
hioltilties, and had but a slender and occa-
fional intercoulre wviith neighbouring states.
Thc latter c inf)ired theml witih fiic detestation
us Irv\it'ude, that thely nLo unly refuedi to ltoop

to

Boor V. to a foreign yoke, and maintained an obstinate
159..- and successful contest in defence of their liberty

againfl the fuoerior power of the Mexican em-
pire, but they guarded with equal fblicitude
againfl domestic tyranny; and disdaining to
acknowledge any malter, they lived under the
mild and limied jurilliction of a council elected
by their several tribes.

;:;, C .

CORTeS, though he had received informa-
..1..'c tion concer.ning the martial character of this

people, flattered himlelf that his profciTions of
delivering the oppressed from the yranny of
Montezu!na, their inveterate enmiity to the
Mexicans, and the example of their ancient
allies the Zempoallans, might induce the Tlaf-
calans to grant him a friendly reception. In
order to diipole them to this, four Zempoallans
of greLr eminence were sent ambassadors, to
requclt, in his name and in that of their
cazice, , tha they would permit the Spaniards
to pai; through the territories of the republic
in thcir way to Mexico. But instead of the
favourable answer which was expected, the
TlaIicians fcized the ambassadors, and, with-
out an'. regnrd to their public charafter, made
Frep.-; ations for .acri cing them to their gods.
A: :a.. a-ne ti.me, they afc;nblcd their troo;!s,
,. Gx.cr :o onrpiD those unknown invaders, if

they

they should attempt to make their ,passage Bqo V.-
good by force of arms. Various motives con- ,.
curred in precipitating the Tlafcalans into this
resolution. A fierce people, ihut up within
its own narrow precincts, and little accultomed
to any intercourse with foreigners, is apt to
conrlider every stranger as an enemy, and is
cafily excited to arms. They concluded, from
Cortes's proposal of visiting Montezuma in his
capital, that, notwithstanding all his profef-
sions, he courted the friendship of a monarch
w hom they both hated and feared. The im-
prudent zeal of Cortes in violating the temples
in Zempoalla, filled the Tlafcalans with hor-
ror; and as they were no less attached to their
tiperftition than the other nations of New
Spain, they were impatient to avenge their in-
jured gods, and to acquire the merit of offer-
ing up to them as victims those impious men,
who had dared to profane their altars; the
Spaniards, from the nmallnefs of their number,
were objects of contempt; they had not yet
mcaflrrd their own strength with those new
enemies, and had no idea of the superiority
which they derived from their arms and dii-
cipline.

CoRTrs, after waiting some days, in vain, Aug 30.
for the return of his amba'aTdors, advanced

into

BooK V. into the Tlafcalan territories. As the refolu-

, rions of people who delight in war are executed

with no less promptitude than they are formed,
he found troops in the field ready to oppose
him. They attacked him with great intrepi-
dity, and in the first encounter, wounded some
of the Spaniards and killed two horses; a loss,
in their situation, of great moment, because it
was irreparable. From this specimen of their
courage, Cortes law the necefirty of proceed-
ing with caution. His army marched in close
order; he chose the ifations, where he halted
with attention, and fortified every camp with
extraordinary care. During fourteen days he
was exposed to almost uninterrupted assaults,
the Tlafcalans advancing with numerous ar-
mies, and renewing the attack in various forms,
with a degree of valour and perseverance to
which the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel
in the New World. The Spanish historians
describe those successive battles with great
pomp, and enter into a minute detail of parti-
culars, mingling many exaggerated and in-
credible circumltances with such as are real
and marvellous. But no power of words can
render the recital of a combat interesting,
v'-cre there is no equality of danger; and

d Se N O TE LXXVII.

when

when the narrative closes with an account of BOOK V.
thousands slain on the one fide, while not a ,59.
single person falls on the other, the most la-
boured descriptions of the previous disposition
of the troops, or of the various vicissitudes in
the engagement, command no attention.

THERE are some circumstances, however, in Some fin.

gillar cir-

this war, which are memorable and merit no- cglmnRancc
tice, as they throw light upon the character both t
of the people of New Spain, and of their con-
querors. Though the Tlafcalans biought into
the field such vast armies as appear iufficient to
have overwhelmed the Spaniards, they were
never able to make any impreflion upon their
small battalion. Singular as this may seem, it
is not inexplicable. The Tlafcalans, though
addicted to war, were, like all unpolifhed na-
tions, firangers to military order and discipline,
and loft all the advantage which they might
have derived from their numbers, and the im-
petuofity of their attack, by their constant soli-
citide to carry offthe dead and wounded. This
point of honour, founded on a sentiment of
tendcrncifs natural to the human mind, and
ilrengihened by anxiety to preserve the bodies
of their countrymen from being devoured by
their enemies, was universal among the people
cf Ne; Spain. Attentioh to this pious office

occupied

Boor V. occupied them, even during the heat of coln-

..,. bat', broke their union, and diminished the

force of the impression which they might have
made by a joint effort.

NOT only was their fuperioriky in number of

little avail, but the imperfecrion of their mi-
litary weapons rendered their valour in a great
measure inoffensive. After three battles, and
many skirmishes and assaults, not one Spaniard
was killed in the field. Arrows and spears,
headed with flint or the bones of fishes, flakes
hardened in the fire, and wooden swords, though
destructive weapons among naked Indians, were
easily turned aside by the Spanish bucklers, and
could hardly penetrate the ei'caipiles, or quilted
jackets which the soldiers wore. The Tlafcalans
advanced boldly to the charge, and often fought
hand to hand. Many of the Spaniards were
wounded, though all niir';iy, ]which cannot be
inpured to any want (of courage in their ene-
mies, but to the defec nof the arms with which
they assailed them.

.NOTWITHSTANDIXG the fr'ry wi l ..:ich the

Tlafcalans attacked the Sp. niard? , ::cv i een
to have conducted their hofiiitict. witih im:e

B. Dia2, c

' .; - e

degree of barbarous generosity. They gave BooK V.
the Spaniards warning of their hostile inten- ,19
tions, and as they knew that their invaders
wanted provisions, and imagined, perhaps, like
the other Americans, that they had left their
own country because it did not afford them sub-
fillence, they sent to their camp a large supply
of poultry and maize, desiring them to eat
plentifully, because they scorned to attack an
enemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would be
an afiront to their Gods to offer them famiffed
viftims, as well as disagreeable to themselves to
feed on fucil emaciated prey r.

V''i;ri they were taught by the sirs en-

counter with their new enemies, that it was not
tean to execute this threat; when they per-
ceived, in the fublequent engagements, that
notwithflanding all the efforts of their own va-
lour, of which they had a very high opinion,
not one of the Spaniards was slain or taken,
they began to conceive them to be a superior
order of beings, against whom human power
could not avail. In this extremity, they had
recourle to their priests, requiring them to re-
veal the mylte-rious caules of such extraordinary
events, and to declare what ne'w means they

!cl-rcra, dec. 2. lib. vi. c..6: Gomara Cron. c. 47.

I Should

Boor V. should employ in order to repulse those formi-

dable invaders. The priests, after many facri-
sices and incantations, delivered this response.
That there strangers were the offspring of the
fun, procreated by his animating energy in
the regions of the east; that, by day, while
cherished with the influence of his parental
beams, they were invincible; but by night,
when his reviving heat was withdrawn, their
vigour declined and faded like the herbs in the
field, and they dwindled down into mortal men a.
Theories less plausible have gained credit with
nmo.e enlightened nations, and have influenced
their conduft. In confcquence of this, the
Tla!calans, with the implicit confidence of men
who fancy themselves to be under the guidance
of Heaven, acted in contradiction to one of their
most established maxims in war, and ventured
to attack the enemy, with a strong body, in the
night-time, in hopes of destroying them when
efcebled and surprised. But Cortes had more
vigilance and discernment than to be deceived
bv the rude stratagems of an Indian army. The
centinels at his out-posts, observing tome ex-
traordinary movement among the Tlatcalans,
gave the alarm. In a moment the troops were
un.er arms, and fallving out, diiperfed the

s B. Dia7.. £. .

party

party with great slaughter, without allowing it BdoK V.
to approach the camp. Convinced, by fad ex- ,s9.
perience, that their priests had deluded them,
and altisfied that they attempted in vain, either
to deceive or to vanquilh their enemies, the
tiercenefs of the Tlafcalans abated, and they
began to incline seriously to peace.

THEY were at a lots, however, in what man- The T.f.

ner to address the Itrangers, what idea to form Cpf d"'
of their character, and whether to confider p"".
them as beings of i gentle or of a malevolent
nature. There were circumstances in their con-
duct which seemed to favour each opinion. On
the one hand, as the Spaniards constantly dif-
miflzd the prilbners whom they took, not only
without injury, but often with presents of Euro-
pean toys, and renewed their offers of peace
after every victory; this lenity amazed people
accustomed to the exterminating system of war
known in America, who sacrificed and devoured
without mercy all the captives taken in battle,
and disposed them to entertain favourable fen-
timenrs of the humanity of their new enemies.
Bur, on the other hand, as Cortes had seized
fifty of their countrymen who brought provi-
lions to his camp, and supposing them to be
ipics, had cut off their hands'; this bloody

h Cortes Relat. Ranmu. iii. 22S. C. Gomara Cron. c.
43.

VoL. II. X fpeEtacle,

Boor V. fpeitacle, added to the terror occasioned by the

9. oi re-arms and horses, filled them with dreadful

imprefTions of their ferocity'. This uncertainty
was apparent in the mode of addressing the Spa-
niards. " If, said they, you are divinities of
a cruel and savage nature, we present to you
five slaves, that you may drink their blood and
eat tlc-ir icffn. If ou are Inild deities, accept
an oficring of incenic and variegated plumes.
If you are men, here is meat, and bread and
fruit to nourish you k." The peace which both
parties now desired with equal ardour, was soon
Co: ,j. concluded. The Tlafcalans yielded themiTclves

as vai ls to the crown of Castile, and engaged
to afiil Cortes in all his future operations. He
took the republic under his protection, and
pro;r.ii -i : d.-cnd their persons and possessions
from injury or -,iolence.

. ..., 'T;:s tr-:- was concluded at a ieafonable
-..-:' ;-' n:ure fcr t-' Spaniards. The fatigue of ser-

vicc among a inaill body of men, surrounded
by I-ich a n:;'iL-:ude of enemies, was incredible.
lait tihe ar'my. was oin dut every night, and

'-. : '

i;:e'.' o\:.i! tur'n .. was to reft, slept always
oi thcir arms, that they might be ready to

.:' N '1T LXX'.'i].

* i.: . -. I,.:..'.: C

o.

-c. I
4 . rrera,

rtun

run to their pots on a moment's warning. BOOK V.
Many of them were wounded, a good number, 1 ,.
and among there Cortes himself, laboured
under the distempers prevalent in hot climates,
and several had died since they set out from
Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding the supplies which
they received from the Tlafcalans, they were
often in want of provisions, and so destitute of
the necessaries most requisite in dangerous ser-
vice, that they had no salve to dress their
wounds, but what was composed with the fat of
the Indians whom they had slain'. Worn our
with such intolerable toil and hardships, many
of the soldiers began to murmur, and when they
reflected on the multitude and boldness of their
enemies, more were ready to despair. It re-
quired the utmost exertion of Cortes's authority
and address to check this spirit of despondency
in its progress, and to reanimate his followers
with their wonted sense of their own superiority
over the enemies with whom they had to con-
tend ". The fubmiflion of the Tlafcalans, and
their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence
paid to beings of a superior order, banifhedj at

B. Diaz c. 62. 6;.
Cortcs Relat. Ramus. iii. 229. B. Diaz, c. 69. Go-
inara Cron, c. 51.

X 2 once,

Boos V. once, from the minds of the Spaniards, all me-
,1. 9- mory ofpaft sufferings, dispelled every anxious

thought with respect to their future operations,
and fully satisfied them that there was not now
any power in America able to withstand their
arms °.

Corte ro. CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in
pi tb°;ir order to allow his troops a short interval of re-
Cifidc. pose after such hard service. During that time,

he was employed in tranfacions and inquiries
of great moment with respect to his future
schemes. In his daily conferences with the
Tlafcalan chiefs, he received information con-
cerning every particular relative to the state of
the Mexican empire, or to the qualities of its
sovereign, which could be of use in regulating
his conduc, whether he should be obliged to
act as a friend or as an enemy. As he found
that the antipathy of his new allies to the Mexi-
can nation was no less implacable than had been
represented, and perceived what benefit he
might derive from the aid of such powerful
confederates, he employed all his powers of in-
finuation in order to gain their confidence. Nor
was any extraordinary exertion of these ne-
ccffar.. The Tlafcalans, with the levity of

r Corte Rc :. Rmuf. im:. 2: ., . Diaz. c. 2.

mind

mind natural to unpoliihed men, were, of their BooK V.
own accord, disposed to run from the extreme ,,9
of hatred to that of fondriefs. Every thing in
the appearance and condu& of their guests, was
to them matter of wonder0. They gazed with
admiration at whatever the Spaniards did, and
fancying them to be of heavenly origin, were
eager not only to comply with their demands,
but to anticipate their wilies. They offered,
accordingly, to accompany Cortes in his march
to Mexico, with all the forces of the republic,
under the command of their most experienced
captains.

BUT, after bestowing so much pains on cc- which he

menting this union, all the beneficial fruits of '1 ,m'yl
it were on the point of being loft, by a new ralh zcal.
effusion of that intemperate zeal with which
Cortes was animated, no less than the other ad-
venturers of the age. They all confidered
themselves as inftnlments employed by Heaven
to propagate the Christian faith, and the less
they were qualified either by their knowledge
or morals for such a funfcion, they were more
eager to discharge it. The profound venera-
tion of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards, having
encouraged Cortes to explain to some of their

S See N 0 T E I.XXIX.

X 3 chiefs

Booor V. chiefs the doErines of the Christian religion,

.and to insist that they should abandon their own
;uperftitions, and embrace the faith of their
new friends, they, according to an idea uni-
versal among barbarous nations, readily ac-
knowledged the truth and excellence of what
he taught; but contended, that the Teules of
Tlafcala were divinities no less than tie God in
whom the Spaniards believed; and as that
Being was intitled to the homage of Europeans,
ib they were bound to revere the fame powers
which their ancestors had worshipped. Cortes
continue3, rev-erthelefs, to urge his demand in
a tone of authority, mingling threats with his
arguments, until the Tlafcalans could bear it
.o longer, and conjured him never to mention
this again, lri: the gods flould avenge on their
heads the guilt of having listened to such a pro-
position. Cortes, aitonilhed and enraged at
their obflinacy, prepared to execute by force
what he could not accomplish by persuasion, and
was go.ng to overturn their altars, and cast
down their idols with the fame violent hand as
at Zempoalla, if father Barrholenew de 01-
ni:co, chaplain to the expedition, had not
checked his inconsiderate impetuoltv. He re-
prei'cnted the imprudence of lsich an attempt in
a la;:e ci:y newly reconcilcl, and filled with

people

people no less superstitious than warlike; he Bcx V.
declared that the proceeding at Zempoalla had 159.
always appeared to him precipitate and unjufti
that religion was not to be propagated by the
l'-ord, or infidels to be converted by violence;
th.'t other weapons were to be employed in this
rminiftry, patient inftrution muff enlighten the
understanding, and pious example captivate the
heart, before men could be induced to abandon
error, and embrace the truth P. Amidst scenes,
where a narrow-minded bigotry appears in such
clole union with oppression and cruelty, senti-
ments so liberal and humane sooth the mind
with unexpeced pleasure; and at a time, when
the rights of conscience were little understood
in the Christian world, and the idea of toleratiorn
unknown, one is astonished to find a Spanifi
monk of the sixteenth century among the first
advocates against persecution, and in behalf of
religious liberty. The remonstrances of an ec-
cleliaftic, no lels respectable for wisdom than
virtue, had their proper weight with Cortes.
I-Ic left the Tlafcalans in the undisturbed exer-
cife of their own rites, requiring only that they
flould delist from their horrid practice of
olTering human victims in sacrifice.

P P. Diaz. c. 77. p. 54. c. 83. p. 61.

X 4 CORTES,

Bcot V. CORTas, as soon as his troops were fit for

,3,9- ferviee; resolved to continue his march towards
":O,;': Mexico, notwithlanding the earnest dissuasives

of the Tlafcalans, who represented his de-
ftruction as unavoidable, if he put himnfelf in
the power of a prince so faithless and cruel as
Montezuma. As he was accompanied by fix
:houfand TlaCcalans, he had now the command
of forces which resembled a regular army.
eea.;. They directed their course towards Cholula;

Montezuma, who had at length consented to
admit the Spaniards into his presence, having
informed Cortes, that he had given orders for
his friendly reception there. Cholula was a
considerable town, and though only five leagues
distant from Tlafcala, was formerly an inde-
pendent Rtate, but had been lately subjected to
the Mexican empire. This was confidered by
all the people of New Spain as a holy place, the
fancfuary and chief feat of their gods, to which
pilgrims reolrted from every province, and a
greater number of human vicims were offered in
its principal temple than even in that of Mexi-
co '. Montezuma teems to have invited the
Spaniards thither, either from some fuperftiious

Torouemada Monar. Ind. i. :S2, 282. ii. 291. Go-
izara Lron. c. Il. Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii, c. 2.

hope

hope that the gods would not susser. this sacred BooK V.
mansion to be defiled, without pouring down g9.
their wrath upon.thofe impious firangers, who
ventured to insult their power in the place of its
peculiar residence, or from a belief that he him-
self might there attempt to cut them off with
more certain success, under the immediate pro-
tetion of his divinities.

CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, The rever!y

before he set out on his march, to keep a watch- ccducthem.
ful eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though
received into the town with much teeming re-
spect and cordiality, observed several circum-
Itances in their conduct which excited suspicion.
Two of the Tlafcalans, who were encamped at
some distance from the town, as the Cholulans
refuted to admit their ancient enemies within
its precincs, having found means to enter.in
disguise, acquainted Cortes, that they observed
the women and children of the principal citizens
retiring in great hurry every night; and that
fix children had been sacrificed in the chief
temple, a rite which indicated the execution of
some warlike enterprise to be approaching. At
the fame time, Marina the interpreter received
information from an Indian woman of diftinc-
ton, whose confidence she had gained, that the
destruction of her friends was concerted; that

3 a body

Boo V. a body of Mexican troops lay concealed near
59 the town; that some of the streets were barri-

caded, and in others, pits or deep trenches
were dug, and slightly covered over, as traps
into which the horses might fall; that stones
and missive weapons were collected on the tops
of the temples, with which to overwhelm the
infantry; trat the fatal hour was now at hand,
and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three
of the chief prieits, and extorted froln them a
confefilon that confirmed the intelligence which
he had received. As not a moment was to be
loll, he initantid refoived to prevent his ene-
miies, and to infiit on thnem such dreadful ven-
geance as might strike Montezuma and his Iub-
icts with terror. For this purpole, the Spa-
niards and Zempozllans were drawn up in a
large court, which had been allor-ed for their
quarters near the centre of the town; the Tlaf-
calans had orders to advance; the magiltrates,
..id ieveral of the chief citizens, were sent for,
under various pretexts, and leized. On a signal
g;.'en, the troops ru; e;d cut, and fe!l upon the
;i.,:]:itude, deiit;te of leaders, and to iluch
ai'iuniflic, thlt the swepons cropping from
tiL:r harnds, they flood motionless, and inca-
:.ibLc of dcilnce. W hile the Spaniards preflc-(
"i'.'n;. :; £.'':u:, t:.;e It'lrfcalSns ratti ckd thc;n in

th,

the rear. The streets were filled with blaodfled Boor V.
and death. The temples, which afforded a re- 't .
treat to the priess and ornme of the leading
men, were set on fire, and they perished in the
flames. This scene of horror continued two
days during which, the wretched inhabitants
suffered all that the destructive rage of the Spa-
niards, or the implacable revenge of their In-
dian allies, could infict. At length the car-
nage ceased, after the slaughter of fix thousand
Cholulans, without the loss of a single Spa-
niard. Cortes then released the magistrates,
and reproaching them bitterly for their intended
treachery, declared, that as justice was now ap-
pealed, he forgave the offence, but required
them to recal the citizens who had fled, and re-
eitablih order in the town. Such was the
alfendant which the Spaniards had acquired
over this superstitious race of men, and so
deeply were they impressed with an opinion of
their superior discernment, as well as power,
that, in obedience to this command, the city
was; in a few days filled again with people, who
amidct the ruins of their sacred buildings,
yielded refpecful service to men whose hands
v.crc tiained with the blood of their relations
anad fellow-citizens r.

. Cortes Relat. Ramur. iii. 231. E. Diaz. c. 83. Go-

im:r.l Cron. c. 64. Hcrrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. i, z. See
X OT'1 1. I.XXX.

FROM

;Bor V. FFROM Cholula, Cortes advanced directly

- towards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues

°c' t' distant. In every place through which he
.t... : passed, he was received as a person possessed

of lufficient power to deliver the empire from
the oppreflion under which it groaned; and
the caziques or governors, with the unreserved
confidence reposed in superior beings, com-
municated to him all the grievances which
they felt under the tyrannical government of
Montezuma. When Cortes first observed the
.eeds of dilcontent in the remote provinces of
the empire, hope dawned upon his mind; but
when he now discovered such symptoms of
alienation from their monarch near the fear of
government, he concluded that the vital parts
of the constitution were affected, and conceived
the most sanguine expectations of overturning
a state whose natural strength was thus divided
and impaired. W\hile those reflections en-
couraged the general to perift in his arduous
undertaking, the Ibidiers were no less animated
by observations more obvious to their capacity.
In descending from the mountains of Chalco,
acrors which the road lay, the vast plain of
.;.-. -'. Mexico opened gradually to their view. When

'' they first beheld this profpet, one of the moit

striking and beautif.l on the face of the earth;
when they observed fertile and cultivated fields,

ftrctching

firetching farther than the eye could reach; Booi .
when they law a lake resembling the sea in L,9.-
extent, encompassed with large towns, and-
dilfovered the capital city rising upon an island
in the middle, adorned with its temples and
turrets the scene so far exceeded their imagi-
nation, that some believed the fanciful defcrip-
tions of romance were realized, and that its
enchanted palaces and gilded domes were pre-
sented to their fight; others could hardly per-
Iuade themlelves that this wonderful fperacle
was any thing more than a dream'. As they
advanced, their doubts were removed, but
their amazement incrcafed. They were now
fullvy atisfied that the country was rich beyond
any conception which they had formed of it,
and flattered themselves that at length they
ihould obtain an ample recompence for all
their ferviccs and sufferings.

No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their The irero.

progress, though feveiai circumstances oc- Mnte-
curred which led them to fufpec that some z'""'
design was formed to surprise and cut them
off. Many messengers arrived fuccelfively
from Montezuma, permitting them one day
to advance, requiring them on the next to

' See NOTE LXXXI.

retire,

Boor V. retire, as his hopes or fears alternately pre-
1- - vailed; and so wonderful was this infatuation,

which feelns to be unaccountable on any sup-
position but that of a superstitious dread of the
Spaniards, as beings of a luperior nature, that
Cortes was almost at the gates of the capital,
before the monarch had determined whether to
receive hi;n as a friend, or to oppose him as
an enemy. But as no sign of open hostility
appeared, the Spaniards, without regarding
the fluctuations of Montezuma's sentiments,
continued their march along the causeway
which letd to MIexico through the lake, with
great crrcurnipetion and the itric-elt discipline,
thou .h without fceming to l spect the prince

hor:i thev were about to visit.
Hw.: --. \VHE'E thcv drew near the city, about a

,;:. : thouand pcrlons, who appeared to be of dif-

tinictn, caiie fortrh to meet them, adorned
with plumes, and clad in manrles of fine cotton.
Each of th-fe, in h:s order, paTed by Cortes,
and Ii!rted hi:n according to the mode deemed
most refpecful; and lubmiffive in their country.
They announced the approach of Montezuma
him!fii, and soon after his harbingers came in
sigh:. There appeared firit two hundred per-
sons in an ucni rm dress, w1th l.:rge plumes of
is'.te:rs, ake in fan -ton, marching two and

t o,

two, in deep silence, bare-footed, with their BOOK V.
eyes fixed on the ground. These were fol-
lowed by a company of higher rank, in their
motll howy apparels in the midt of whom was
Montezuma, in a chair or litter richly orna-
icncd with gold, and feathers of various
colours. Four of his principal. favourites car-
ried him on their Ihoulders, others supported
a canopy of curious workmanship over his
head. Before him marched three officers with
rods of gold in their hands, which they lifted
up on high at certain intervals, and at that
signal all the people bowed their heads, and
hid their faces, as unworthy to look on tb great
a monarch. When he drew near, Cortes dif-
mounted, advancing towards. him with offi-
cious haste, and in a respectful poflul-e. At
the fame time Montezuma alighted from his
chair, and leaning on the arms of two of his
near relations, approached with a flow and
ltately pace, his attendants covering the street
with cotton cloths, that he might not touch
the ground. Cortes accosted him with pro-
found reverence, after the European fashion.
lie returned the salutation, according to the
mode of his country, by touching the earth
with his hand, and then kifiing it. This cere-
mony, the customary expreflion of veneration
from inferiors towards those who were above

4 them

Boor V. them in rank, appeared such amazing *cd i-'
~',--- descension in a proud monarch, who scarcely'

deigned to confider the reft of mankind, as of
the fame species with himself, that all his sub-
je&s firmly believed those persons, before whom
he humbled himself in this manner, to be
something more than human. Accordingly,
as they marched through the crowd, the Spa-
niards frequently, and with much fatisfationl,
heard themselves denominated Teules, or divi-
nities. Nothing material passed in this first
interview. Montezuma conduced Cortes to
the quarters which he had prepared for his
reception, and immediately took leave of him,
with a politeness not unworthy of a court more
refined. " You are now," fays he, " with
your brothers in your own house; refresh your-
selves after your fatigue, and be happy until I
return'." The place allotted to the Spaniards
for their lodging was a house built by the
father of Montezuma. It was surrounded by
a flone-wall, with towers at proper distances,
which served for defence as well as for orna-
ment, and its apartments and courts were so
large as to accommodate both the Spaniards
z-d their Indian allies. The first care of

:Cortes Rc'a:. Ram. iii. z2:-z;3. B. Diaz. c. 83-

3. Gomara C;on. c. 64, 6;. Herrcra, dec. z. lib. vii.
c. 3, 4, 5.

Cortes

Cortes was to take precautions for his security, BOOK V.
by planting the artillery fo-as- o comm ad-th -9
different avenues which led -tQ it, .by.appoint.- --
ing a large division of his troops to.,be al-ways-
on guard, and by posting centinels at -proper..
Itations, with injuntions to observe .the.fame
vigilant discipline as if they were within fight
of an enemy's camp.

IN the evening Montezuma returned to visit His;sea of

his guests with the fame pomp as in their firlt ird,."
interview, and brought presents of such values
not only to Cortes and to his officers, but even
to the private men, as proved the liberality of
the monarch to be flitable to the opulence of
his kingdom. A long conference ensued, in
which Cortes learned what was the opinion. of
Montezuma with refpe& to the Spaniards. It
was an eftabliihed tradition, he told himn
among the Mexicans, that their ancefrors camoe
originally from a remote region, and con-.
quered the provinces now subjec to his domi-
nion; that after they were fettled there,. the
great captain who conducted this colony re-
turned to his own country, proini.ing, that at
obmc future period his descendants should visit
them, afli:me the government, and reform
their constitution and laws; that, from what

VOL. II. Y he

BooK V-. he had heard and seen of Cortes and his sos-
»5"9. lowers, he was convinced that they were the

very perfJns whose appearance the Mexican
traditions and prophecies taught them to ex-
pect; that accordingly he had received them,
not as itrangers, but as relations of the fame
blood and parentage, and desired that they
might conilder themlelves as mailers in his
dominions, fbr both himself and his subjects
should be readv to comply with their will, and
even to prevent their wishes. Cortes made a
reply in his uiual 2tile with respect to the dig-
nirt and power of his sovereign, and his inten-
rionn nen ing him into that country; artfully
endeavouring so to frame his discourse, that it
:hight coincide as much as possible with the
iiea which Moniezuma had fonned concerning
:i; origin of the Spaniards. Next morning,
Co-res and 1ome of his principal attendants
were admitted to a public audience of the em-
peror. Til.e three fibfequent days were em-
pioved in vicxing the city; the appearance of
which, ;1) i.ir ftierior in the order of its build-
ings anod ihe number of its inhabitants to any
plice tie ';)aniaiLs had beheld in America,
and yet i0 little relc-mbling the structure of
.in E.iropean city, filled them with surprise
. .-. 'mir.::ICO.,

5 IMEXICo,

MEXICO, or Tenuchtitlan as it was anciently BboK V.

called by the natives, is situated in a large 1519.
plain, environed by mountains of such height,
thar, though within the torrid zone, the tem-
perature of its climate is mild and healthful.
All the moisture which descends from the high
grounds is colleced in several lakes, the two
largefl of which, of about nirnety miles in cir-
cuit, communicate with each other. The
waters of the one are fresh, those of the other
brackish. On the banks of the latter, and on
some finall islands adjoining to them, the capi-
tal of Montezuma's empire was built. The
acccfs to the city was by artificial causeways
or streets, formed of stones and earth, about
thirty feet in breadth. As the waters of the
lake during the rainy season overflowed the flat
country, these causeways were of considerable
length. That of Tacuba on the weft extended
a mile and a half; that of Tezeuco on the
north-west three miles; that of Cuoyacan to-
wards the south fix miles. On the east there
was no causeway, and the city could be ap-
proached only by canoes U. In each of these
causeways were openings at proper intervals,
through which the waters flowed; and over
theie beams of timber were laid, which being

F. Torribio MS.

Y 2 covered

BooK v. covered with earth, the causeway or street had

s5,9. every-where an uniform appearance. As the

approaches to the city were singular, its con-
itrutfion was remarkable. Not only the
temples of their gods, but the houses belong-
ing to the monarch, and to persons of diftinc-
tion, were of such dimensions, that, in com-
parilon with any other buildings which had
been diicovered in America, they might be
termed magnificent. The habitations of the
common people were mean, resembling the
huts of other Indians. But they were all
placed in a regular manner, on the banks of
the canals which passed through the city, in
;bme of its districts, or on the fides of the
treers which interfe&ed it in other quarters.
In icveral places were large openings or squares,
one of which, allotted for the great market, is.
Laid to have been lb Ipacious, that forty or fifty
thousand peribns carried on traffic there. In
:his city, the pride of the New World, and
t.e noblest monument of the industry and art
of man, while unacquainted with the use of
iron, and destitute of aid from any domeRfic
animal, the Spaniards, who are most mode-
rate in their computations, reckon that there
vewre eat afixty thousand inhabitants

C-:-' R-.:. Ram. iii. i:9. D. Re!a:. dclla gran

C:::- cc ?^.idco. ,nr un Ge.:e!huomo del Cortefe. Ram.
:i J. C4. . i, .. l :. Zcrr . . :Ib. vii. c. I4, &c.

Bc T

BUT how much soever the novelty of those BOOK V.

oblects might amuse or aftonilh the Spaniards, 19.
they felt the utmost solicitude with respect to .^.u.
their own ficuation. From a concurrence of a:io""
circumstances, no less unexpected than favour-
able to their progress, they had been allowed
to penetrate into the heart of a powerful king-
dom, and were now lodged in its capital, with-
out having once met with open opposition
from its monarch. The Tlafcalans, however,
had earnestly dissuaded them from placing such
confidence in Montezuma as to enter a city of
such a peculiar situation as Mexico, where that
prince would have them at mercy, shut up as
it were in a snare, from which it was impoflible
to escape. They assured him that the Mexi-
can priests had, in the name of the Gods,
counselled their sovereign to admit the Spa-
niards into the capital, that he might cut them
off there at one blow with perfect security Y.
They now perceived, too plainly, that the ap-
prehensions of their allies were not destitute
of foundation; that, by breaking the bridges
placed at certain intervals on the causeways, or
by destroying part of the causeways them-
selves, their retreat would be rendered im-
practicable, and they must remain cooped up

y B. Diaz. c. 85, 86.

Y 3 in

BOrK V. in the centre of a hostile city, surrounded by

,;1' multitudes sufficient to overwhelm them, and

without a pofiibiiity of receiving aid from their
allies. Montezuma had, indeed, received
them with distinguished respect. But ought
they to reckon upon this as real, or to confider
it as feigned ? Even if it were sincere, could
they promise on its continuance ? Their safety
depended upon the will of a monarch in whose
attachment they had no reason to confide;
and an order :towing from his caprice, or a
word uttered bv him in paifion, might decide
irrevocably concerning their fate .

THESE renections, so obvious as to occur to

:' the meaneit soldier, did not escape the vigi-
::' lant fsgacitv of their general. Before he set

out from Cholisla, Cortes had received advice
from Villa Rica', that OQalpopoca, one of
'.e Mexican generals on the frontiers, having

ts-emblcd an army in order to attack some of

the people whom the Spaniards had encouraged
to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had
marched out with part of the garrison to sup-
Fort his allies; that an engagement had en-
sued, in which, though the Spaniards were
victorious, Efcalante, with seven of his men,

E. Diaz. c. 94. Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 23;. C.

had

had been mortally wounded, his horse killed, Boor V.
and one Spaniard had been surrounded by the ,,9.
cilcnIl and taken alive; that the head of this
unfortunate captive, after being carried in
triumph to different cities, in order to con-
vince the people that their invaders were not
immnortal, had been sent to Mexico b. Cortes,
though alarmed with this intelligence, as an
indication of Montezuma's hostile intentions,
had continued his march. But as soon as he
entered Mexico, he became sensible, that, from
all excess of confidence in the superior valour
and diicipline of his troops, as well as from
the disadvantage of having nothing to guidle
him in an unknown country, but the defe&tive
intelligence which lie had received from people
with whom his mode of communication was
very imperfect, he had pushed forward into a
lituation, where it was difficult to continue,
and from which it was dangerous to retire.
l)ifgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain
conlcquence of attempting the latter. The
i':ccels of his enterprise depended upon sup-
porting the high opinion which the people of
New Spain had formed with respect to the
irrclfitible power of his arms. Upon the firfl
lImptom of timidity on his part, their vene-
b .. Diaz. c. 93, 9 Herrera, dec. z. lib, viii. c. I.

Y 4 ration

BOOK V. ra:ion would cease, and Montezuma, whom-
,"J ^ fear alone reoirained at prelent, would let loose

upon him the whole force of his empire. At
thz fame time, he knew that the countenance
of his own sovereign was to be obtained only
by a series of victories, and that nothing but
the merit of extraordinary success could screen
his conduct from the censure of irregularity.
From all these considerations, it was necessary
to maintain his station, and to extricate him-
fils out of the diffcuities in which one bold
Itep had involved him, by venturing upon
anothcr itill bolder. The situation was trying,
but his mind was equal to it; and after revolv-
ing the matter with deep attention, he fixed
upun a plan no le!s extraordinary than daring.

p.--:'. . H2e determined to fcizc Montezuna in his
':':'.. -p palace, and to carnr him as a priloner to the

S<a.niih quarters. From the fuperfTirious ve-
neration of the Mexicans for the person of their
r.onarch, as well as their implicit fubmifiion
to his will, he hoped, by having Montezuma
in his power, to acqi:re the supreme direction
o0 thcir a;:airs; or at ieair, with such a sacred
pledgie in his hands, he made no doubt of being
ilcurc f-om anm effort of their violence.

- . . r '::s he i:h medatelv proposed to his officers.
.' The ti;nid startled at a measure so audacious,

and

and raised objetions. The more intelligent. BOOK V.
and resolute, conscious that. it was. the .only-. 59
reiburce. in which there appeared any prbfpedR.
of safety, warmly approved of it, and brought
over their companions so cordially to the fame
opinion, that it was agreed instantly to 'make
the attempt. At his usual hour of visiting
vMontezuma, Cortes went to the palace, ac-
companied by Alvarado, Sandoval, Lugo, Ve-
laiquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his prin-
cipal officers, and as many trusty soldiers,
'Tlirty chosen men followed, not in regular
order, but sauntering at some distance, as if
they had no objeEt but curiosity; small parties
were posted at proper intervals, in all the
freets leading from the Spaniih quarters to
the courts and the remainder of his troops,
with the Tlalcalan allies, were under arms,
ready to sally out on the first alarm. Cortes
and his attendants were admitted without fufpi-
cion; the Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of
respect. He addressed the monarch in a tone
very different from that which he had employed
in former conferences, reproaching him bit-
terlv as the author of the violent affaulr made
upon the Spaniards by one of his officers, and
demanded public reparation for the lots which
they had fuflained by the death of some of
their companions, as well as for the insult

offered

BOOK V. offered to the great prince whoae servants they
J-p-9 were. Montezuma, confounded at this unex-

pected acculation, and changing colour either
from consciousness of guilt, or from feeling
the indignity with which he was treated,
asserted his own innocence with great earnest-
ness, and as a proof of i:, gave orders inftandy
to bring Qualpopoca and his accomplices pri-
foners to Mexico. Cortes replied, with seem-
ing compiaisance, that a declaration so re-
fpec.able left no doubt remaining in his own
mind, but that something more was requisite
to fatisfv his followers, who would never be
convinced thit Montezuma did not harbour
hostile inte.tions againfl them, unless, as an
evidence of his con0icnce and attachment, he
removed from his own palace, and took up his
reidence in the Spaniih quarters, where he
ilould be served and honoured as became a
great rrmonrcl. Thle firli mention of so strange
J {propu.'ii bereaved Montczuma of speech, and
almo!t c- motion. At length, indignation
cave him u:.e.ance, and he lhaughtily an-
icrcd, " l'.;a; perlbns of his rank were not
accultomed voluntarily to give up themselves
. prine.'rs, and were ne mean enough to do
;. .: . ' ic:3 v.ouid not permit such an

.'.2-,: :O be offered to their sovereign."
'._.-: ::, r.::.'. i:!::g 'c -. nlor force, endeavoured

: te r. arcl ';

alternately to tooth and to intimidate him,. ' The BooK V.
altercation became warm ; and having conti- "v".
nued above three hours, Velasquez de Leon, an
impetuous and gallant young man, exclaimed

twii impatience, " Why waste more time in

vain ? Let us either seize him inflantly, or stab
him to the heart." The threatening voice and
fierce geftures-vwith which these words were ut-
tcred, struck Montezuma. The Spaniards, he
was ienlible, had now proceeded so far, as left
him no hope that they would recede. His own
danger was imminent, the necefityy unavoidable.
He law both, and abandoning himself to his
fate, complied with their request,

Hrs officers were called. He communicate'd MontezumA

r.rritrd to

to them his resolution. Though aflonifhed and tie Spa..ic
affliced, they presumed not to question the iqulr".
will of their master, but carried him in silent
pomp, all bathed in tears, to the Spanish quar-
ters. When it' was known that the strangers
were conveying away the emperor, the people
broke out into the wildest transports of grief
and rage, threatening the Spaniards with irm-
mediate destruction, as the punishment justly
due to their impious audacity. But as loon as
Montezuma appeared with a seeming gaiety of
countenance, and waved his hand, the tumult
was hufiled, and upon his declring it to be of

his

B3oo V. his own choice that he went to reside for some

,,. time among his new friends, the multitude,

taught to revere every intimation of their so-
vereign's plealure, quiety dispersed '.

THus was a powerful prince seized by a few

strangers, in the midst of his capital, at noon-
day, and carried off as a prisoner without op-
position or bloodshed. History contains no-
thing parallel to this event, either with reipe&
to the temerity of the attempt, or the success
of the execution; and were not all the circurn
fiances of this extraordinary tranfation authen-
ticated by the most unquestionable evidence,
they would appear tb wild and extravagant, as
to go far beyond the bounds of that verisimilitude
which must be preserved even in fictitious nar-
rations.

Se,.i IMONTEZU.MA was received in the SpaniA
.:-l': '. quarters with all the ceremonious relpect which

Cortes had promilrd. He was attended by his
own domestics, and served with his usual state,
His principal offcers had free access to him,
and he caried on every funtion of government

S. Diaz. c. 95. Gomara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Rc-
la:. Ram. iii. p. 35;, 35. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c.

3 as

as if he had been at perfect liberty. The Spa- BooK V.
niards, however, watched him with the fcrupu-
lous vigilance which was natural in guarding
lich an important prize", endeavouring at the
fune time to sooth and reconcile him to his
situation, by every external demonstration of
regard and attachment. But from captive prin-
ces the hour of humiliation and suffering is
never far distant. Qualpopoca, his son, and Subicn-dto

cruel intig-

five of the principal officers who served under n.,.
him, were brought prisoners to the capital, in.
conlequence of the orders which Montezuma Dec. .
had issued. The emperor gave them up ta
Cortes, that he might inquire into the nature
of their crime, and determine their punishment.
They were formally tried by a Spanish court-
martial; and though they had acted no other
part than what became loyal fubjeLls and brave
men, in obeying the orders of their lawful so-
;ereign, and in opposing the invaders of their
country, they were condemned to be burnt
alive. The execution of such atrocious deeds
is seldom long suspended. The unhappy vic-
tims were instantly led forth. The pile orr
which they were laid was composed of the wea-
pons colleEted in the royal magazine for the:
public defence. An innumerable multitude of

d Sec NOTE LXXXII.

Mexicans

Boor V. Mexicans beheld, in silent aftoniflment, the
1'5 ' double insult offered to the majesty of their em-

pire, an officer of distinction committed to the
flames by the authority of strangers, for having
done what he owed in duty to his natural so-
vereign; and the arms provided by the foresight
of their an,-eftors for avenging such wrongs,
consumed before their eves.

BrT these were not the mnoi shocking indig-

nities which the Mexicans had to bear. The
Spaniards, convinced that Qiialpopoca would
nor have ventured to attack Efcalante without
orders from his maftcr, were not satisfied with
inflicting vengeance on the instrument employed
in committing that crime, while the author of
it escaped with impunitv. Just before Qualpo-
poca was led out to susser, Cortes entered the
apartment of Montezuma, followed by some of
his officers, and a soldier carrying a pair of set-
ters; and approaching the monarch with a stern
countenance, told him, tha: as the persons who
were now to undergo the Tunifihment which they
merited, had cha-rge hi:-m as the cause of the
outrace com: i:-ed, it w:s neceflary that he
likewise ifhould make atonement for that guilt;
then turning away ?.briupdlv, wirhut waiting
for a reply, com.nn ..ded tihe blci. r to clap the

fetters

fetters on his legs. The orders were instantly Boozc V
executed. The disconsolate monatch, trained ,9.
up with an idea that his person was sacred and
inviolable, and confidering this profanation of
it as the prelude of immediate death, broke out
into loud lamentations and complaints. His
attendants, speechless with horror, fell at his
feet, bathing them with their tears; and bear-
ing up the fetters in their hands, endeavoured
withofficious tenderness to lighten their pressure.
Nor did their grief and despondency abate, until
Cortes returned from the execution with a
cheerful countenance, and ordered the fetters
to be taken off. As Montezuma's spirits had
funk with unmanly dejection, they now rose
into indecent joy; and with an unbecoming
transition, he passed at once from the anguish
of despair to transports of gratitude and fond-
ness towards his deliverers.

IN those tranfaftions, as represented by the ReronI of

Spanish historians, we search in vain for the co.d.&a.
qualities which distinguish other parts of Cor-
tes's conduct. To usurp a jurifdiLtion which
could not belong to a stranger, who assumed no
higher character than that of an ambassador from
a foreign prince, and, under colour of it, to
infict a capital punifhnent on men whose con-
du't entitled them to esteem, appears an aft of

barbarous

BooK V. barbarous cruelty. To put the monarch of a

Careat kingdom in irons, and, after such igno-
minious treatment, suddenly to release him,
teems to be a display of power no less incon-
tiderate than wanton. According to the com-
mon relation, no account can be given either
of the one action or the other, but that Cortes,
intoxicated with fuccels, and presuming on the
afscendant which he had acquired over the minds
of the Mexicans, thought nothing too bold for
hin to undertake, or too dangerous to execute.
Bu:, in one view, thtie proceedings, however
repugnant to justice and humanity, may have
flowed from that artful policy which regulated
every part of Cortes's behaviour. The Mexi-
cans had conceived the Spaniards to be an or-
der of beings superior to men. It was of the
uunoit consequence to cherilh this illusion, and
to keep up the veneration it inspired. Cortes
v..fhed that shedding the blood of a Spaniard
ilho.ld be deemed the oft heinous of ail crimes;
and nothing appeared better calculated to efta-
bliill this opinion, than to condemn the first
Mexicans who had ventured to commit it, to a
cruel death, and to oblige their monarch him-
iclf to submit to a mortit'ing indignity, as an
expiation for being accessary to their guilt'.

See NOTE LXXXIII.

THE

THE rigour with which Cortes punished the Boot V.

unhappy persons who first presumed to lay vio- The power
lent hands upon his followers, seems accordingly tehic Co-u
to have made all the impreffioh that he desired.. 5*so.
The spirit of Montezuma was not only over-
awed, but subdued. During fix months that
Cortes remained in Mexico, the monarch con-
tinued in the Spanish quarters, with an appear-
ance of as entire fatisfa&ion and tranquillity, as
it hie had resided there not from constraint, but
through choice. His ministers and officers at-
tended him as usual. He took cognizance of
all affairs; every order was issued in his name.
The external afpeft of government appearing
the fame, and all its ancient forms being fcru-
puloufly observed, the people were so little fen-
fible of any change,, that they obeyed the man-
dates of their monarch with the fame submissive
reverence as ever. Such was the dread which
both Montezuma and his subjects had of the
Spaniards, or such the veneration in which they
held them, that no attempt was made to deliver
their sovereign from confinement; and though
Cortes, relying on this ascendant which he had
acquired over their minds, permitted him not
only to visit his temples, but to make hunting
excursions beyond the lake, a guard of a few
Spaniards carried with it such a terror as to in-

Vot. II. Z timidate

Bcer V. timidate the multitude, and secure the captive

monarch .

THUS, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once fe-
cured to themselves more extensive authority in
the Mexican empire than it was possible to have
acquired in a long course of time by open force;
and they exercised more abfoltte sway in the
name of another than they could have done in
their own. The arts of polished nations in sub-
je.ing such as are less improved, have been
nearly the fame in every period. The system
of screening a foreign usurpation, under the
fantion of authority derived from the natural
rulers of a country, the device of employing the
magiltrates and forms already established as in-
ftrtnmcnts to introduce a new dominion, of
which wse are apt to boast as sublime refine-
mnenrs in policy peculiar to the present age,
were inventions of a more early period, and
had been tried with success in the Weft, long
before they were praftifed in the East.
rt'r;e~ ' CORTES a\-vled him.fclf to the utmofi of the

pover wh ich i pof,:efTcrd by means of this. He

' &ortes Reia:. p. :5. E. B. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.

sent

f-:nt some Spaniards, whom he judged best BooK V.
'qualified for such commifilons, into differdnt ,.
parts of the empire, accompanied by persons of
distinction, whom Montezuma appointed to at-
tend them both as guides and protectors. They
viiited moll of the provinces, viewed their foil
and productions, surveyed with particular care
the diftrics which yielded gold or silver, pitched
upon several places as proper stations for future
colonies, and endeavoured to prepare the minds
of the people for submitting to the Spanilh yoke.
While they were thus employed, Cortes, in the
name and by the authority of Montezuma, de-
graded some of the principal officers in the em-
pire, whose abilities or independent spirit ex-
cited his jealousy, and substituted in their place
persons less capable or more obsequious.

ON'E thing frill was wanting to complete his

,ecurityr He wished to have such command
of the lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either
from levity or dilguft, the Mexicans should
take arms against him, and break down the
i:.ridgcs or caufewavs. This, too, his own ad-
drefg, and the facility of Montezuma, enabled
himn to accomplish. Having frequently enter-
r.i:nd his pril;,ner with pompous accounts of
thie .uropean marine and art of navigation, he
aw.akcned his curiosity to fee those moving pa-

Z 2 laces

Boor V. laces which made their way through the water
15s0. without oars. Under pretext of gratifying this

desire, Cortes persuaded hi;. to appoint some
of his subjects to fetch part of the naval stores
deposited at Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to em-
ploy others in cutting down and preparing
timber. With their afiftance, the Spanish car-
penters loon coinpleted two brigantines, which
afforded a frivolous amusement to the monarch,
and were confidered by Cortes as a certain re-
source, if he should be obliged to retire.

Moanituna ENCOURAGED by so many instances of the
acknow-
ld h.im- monarch's tame lfbmilfion to his will, Cortes
o:S-' . ventured to put it to a proof frill more trying.

He urged Montezuma to acknowledge himself
a va!.il of the king of Castile, to hold his crown
of hi:: as fiiperior, and to subject his dominions
to the payment of an annual tribute. With
this requiftion, the last and most humbling that
can be made to one possessed of sovereign au-
thority, M.Iontezuma was ro obsequious as to
comply. He called together the chief men of
his empire, and in a solemn harangue, remind-
ing them of the traditions and prophecies which
led them to expect the arrival of a people sprung
from the fame flock with themselves, in order
to tike poT!-riion of the supreme power, he de-
clared his belief that the Spaniards were this

promised

promised race; that therefore he recognized the BooK V.
right of their monarch to govern the Mexicarn Isq.
empire; that he would lay his crown at his feet,
and obey him as a tributary. While uttering
there words, Montezuma discovered how deeply
he was affe&ced in making such a sacrifice. Tears
and groans frequently interrupted his discourse.
Overawed and broken as his spirit was, it still
retained such a sense of dignity, as to feel that
pang which pierces the heart of princes when
conitrained to resign independent power. The
first mention of such a resolution struck the as-
fembly dumb with astonishment. This was fol-
lowed by a fullen murmur of sorrow mingled
with indignation, which indicated some violent
eruption of rage to be near at hand. This
Cortes foresaw, and seasonably interposed to
prevent it, by declaring that his maffter had no
intention to deprive Montezuma of the royal
dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
constitution and laws of the Mexican empire,
This assurance, added to their dread of the Spa-
nifh power, and to the authority of their mo-
narch's example, extorted a reluctant content
from the assembly g. The a& of submission and
homage was executed with all the formalities
which the Spaniards were pleated to prefcribeh,

Z See N OTE LXXXIV.
l Cortes Relat. z38. D. B. Diaz c. col, Gomara
C;,n. , 9z. Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 4.

Z MONTEZULM.A

BooK V. rIONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, ac-

e:. companied this profeelion of fealty and homage
Thf.i.lt w:ith a magnificent present to his new sovereign i

and, after his example, his subjects brought in
ts.i -t very liberal contributions. The Spaniards now

co1leted all the treasure which had been either
voluntarily befrowed upon thlem at different
times by Montezuma, or had been extorted
from his people under various pretexts; and
having melted ihe gold and silver, the value of
thicfe, without including jewels and ornaments
of various kinds, which were preserved on ac-
count of their curious workmanship, amounted

r::, .-- to fix hundred thousand pesos. The soldiers

....-r-..: vwere impatient to have it divided, and Cortes
J-..-. coumplied wit:h their desire. A fifth of the whole

was firrf ser apart as the tax due to the king.
Another fi,sh was allotted to Cortes, as com-
narnd-r in chief. The fums advanced by Ve-
latixu.z, by Curtes, and by iome of the officers,
towards dceiravir. the expence of fitting out the
arnmal..e.:t, were then deduiced. The rcmain-
der ,;as di.- du among the army, including the
g.rriion of Vra Cruz, in proportion to their
different ranks. Ater v mnany defalcations,
the share of a privae man did not exceed a hun-
dred pesos. This itm fell so far bdow their
f.r.2,l: l;e x-:'t'-:.i:ns, tia. ibme soldiers re-
jc,;.: i; iv.irh Ilcorn, and o"iters murmured lo

loudly

loudly at this cruel disappointment of their Bo-K V.
hopes, that it required all the address of Cortes, "i'o
and no finall exertion of his liberality, to ap-
pease them. The complaints of the. army were
not altogether destitute of foundation. As the
crown had contributed nothing towards the
equipment or success of the armament, it was
not without regret that the boldiers beheld it
Iweep away so great a proportion of the treasure
purchased by their blood and toil. What fell
to the liare of their general appeared, according
to the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth century,
an enormous fum. Some of Cortes's favourites
had :Icretly appropriated to their own use fe-
vcral ornaments of gold, which neither paid the
royal fifth, nor were brought into account as
part of the common stock. It was, however,
f) manifefily the interest of Cortes at this period
to make a large remittance to the king, that it
is highly probable those concealments were not
of great consequence.

THia total fum amassed by the Spaniards bears Reasons

why gold

no proportion to the ideas which might be wa, Couna
formed, either by reflecing on the descriptions. small qun.
given by hiflorians of the ancient splendour of
Mexico, or by confidering the productions of
its mines in modern times. But, among the
ancient Mexicans, gold and silver were not the

Z 4 standards

BooK V. standards by which the worth of other commo-
is dities was effimated; and destitute of the arti-

ficial value derived from-this circumstance, were
no farther in request than as they furnished ma-
terials for ornaments and trinkets. These were
either consecrated to the gods in their temples,
or were worn as marks of distinction by their
princes and some of their most eminent chiefs.
As the consumption of the precious metals was
inconsiderable, the demand for them was not
such as to put either the ingenuity or industry
of the Mexicans on the stretch, in order to aug-
ment their fore. They were altogether unac-
quainted with the art of working the rich mines
with which their country abounded. What
gold they had was gathered in the beds of ri-
vers, native, and ripened into a pure metallic
late . The utmost effort of their labour in
search of it was to waih the earth carried down
hy torrents from the mountains, and to pick
out the grains of gold which subsided; and even
this simple operation, according to the report
of the persons whom Cortes appointed to survey
the provinces where there was a profpec' of
finding mines, they performed very unfkil-
ifllvy . From all those causes, the whole mass

Cc::es Relar. p. ;36. F. E. Di.z. c. 12a , 1I3. Go-
.-.-ra C -on. c. 9°.

B B. Diaz. c. ic;.

Of

of gold in pofleffiqor., ofthe.Mexicaps was not,. BooK.V.
great. As.filver, is arely foun4.pure, and .the ~

.... ..... · ..... - 15.- ,

Mexican art was. too. rude .to cgndu& the.:pro.
cess for refining, it in..a proper manner, the
quantity of this metal was still less confider-.
able '. Thus, though the Spaniards had ex-.
erted all the power which they poffefled in
Mexico, and often with indecent rapacity, in
order to gratify their predominant paflion, and
though Montezuma had fondly exhausted his
treasures, in hopes of satiating their thirst for
gold, the produc of both, which probably in-
cluded a great part of the bullion in the empire,
did not rife in value above what has been.men,
tioned m,

BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in Montezuma

other matters, with refpe& to one point he was with refpea
inflexible. Though Cortes often urged him, to'religio
with the importunate zeal of a missionary, to
renounce his false gods, and to embrace the
Christian faith, he always reje&ed the propo-
fition with horror. Superstition, among the
Mexicans, was formed into such a regular and
complete system, that its institutions naturally
took fast hold of the mind; and while the rude

' !lerera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 4.
Sec NOTE LXXXV.

tribes

Booc V. tribes in other parts of America were easily in-
-"'" duced to relinquish a few notions and rites, so

loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the name
of a public religion, the Mexicans adhered te-
naciufly to their mode of worihip, which, how-
ever barbarous, was accompanied with such or-
der and bllemnity as to render it the object of
veneration. Cortes, finding all his attempts
ineffectual to fflake the conSancy of Mon-
tezuma, was so much enraged at his obstinacy,
that in a transport of zeal he led out his soldiers
to throw down the idols in the great temple by
force. But the priests taking arms in defence
of their altars, and the people crowding with
great ardour to lupport them, Cortes's prudence
overruled his zeal, and induced him to defif':
from his rash attempt, after dillodging the idols
from one of the shrines, and placing in their
Rfead an image of the Virgin Mary ',
S.- - FRO.I that moment the Mexicans, who had

I. prr:i::ed the imprisonment of their sovereign,
. and lufi'red ithe exactions of firangers without a

f:ruggle, began to meditate how they might
expel or destroy the Spaniards, and thought
rhemrelves called upon to *avenge their insulted
deiies. The priests and leading men held fre-

. ?. N C T E LXXXVI.

quent

quent consultations with Montezuma for this BooK V.
purpose. But as it might prove fatal to the \1j.
captive monarch to attempt either the one' or
the other by violence, he was willing to try
more gentle means. Having called Cortes into
iis presence, he observed that now, as all the
purposes of his emrbaffy were fully accomplished,
the gods had declared their will, and the people
signified their desire that he and his followers
fiould instantly depart out of the empire. With
this he required them to comply, or unavoid-
able deflruEtion would fall suddenly on their
heads. The tenor of this unexpected recui-
fition, as well as the determined tone in which
it was uttered, left Cortes no room to doubt
that it was the result of some deep scheme con-
certed between Montezuma and his fubje6ts.
lHe quickly perceived that he might derive
more advantage from a seeming compliance
with the monarch's inclination, than from an
ill-timed attempt to change or to oppose it, and
replied, with great composure, that he had al-
ready begun to prepare for returning to his own
country; but as he had destroyed the vessels in
which he arrived, Iome time was requisite for
building other nfips. This appeared reasonable.
A number of Mexicans were. ent to Vera Cruz
to cue ,down timber, and some Spanish carpen,
tcrs Aw. rc anointed to superintend the work.

Cortes

BooK V. Corres flattered himself that during this inter.

L5o. val, he might either find means to avert the

threatened danger, or receive such reinforce-
ments as would enable him to despise it.

A-.l'c .d AtLMOST nine months were elapsed since Por-
a-it' of tocarrero and Montejo had failed with his dif-

patches to Spain; and he daily expeEted their
return with a confirmation of his authority from
the king. Without this, his condition was
insecure and precarious, and after all the great
things which he had done, ir might be his doom
to bear the name and susser the punifiment of
a traitor. Rapid and extensive as his progress
had been, he could not hope to complete the
reduction of a great empire with so finall a body
of men, which by this time the diseases of the
climate had considerably thinned; nor could he
apply for recruits to the Spanish settlements in
the islands until he received the royal approba-
tion of his proceedings,

71e i-

c \WHILE he remained in this cruel situation,
^,is2 anxious about what was past, uncertain with

refped to the future, and, by the late declara-
tion of Montezuma, oprpeffed with a new ad-
dition of cares, a Mexican courier arrived with
An account of tome ships having appeared on
the coa;. Cortes, wilh fond credulity, ima-

gininln
-I

gining that his messengers were returned from Bod' V.
Spain, and that the completion of all his wishes -5.
and hopes was at hand, imparted the glad
tidings to his companions, who received them
with transports of mutual gratulation. Their
joy was not of long continuance. A courier
fromi Sandoval, whom Cortes had appointed to
iuccced Efcalante in command at Vera Cruz,
brought certain information that the armament
was fitted out by Velasquez, governor of Cuba,
and instead of bringing the aid which they ex-
peced, threatened them with immediate de-
llTruftion.

THE motives which prompted Velasquez to Fittedout

by ve1af.

this violent measure are obvious. From the quez.
circumstances of Cortes's departure, it was im-
possible not to fufpecl his intention of throwing
off all dependence upon him. His neglecting
to transmit any account of his operations to
Cuba, strengthened this suspicion, which was
at last confirmed, beyond doubt, by the indif-
cretion of the officers whom Cortes sent to
Spain. They, from some motive, which is not
clearly explained by the contemporary hiftori-
ans, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary to
the peremptory orders of their general °. By

° B. Diaz. c. 54, 55. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14.
(;omara Cron. c. 96.

this

Boor V. this means Velasquez not only learned that

t. Cortes and his followers, after formally re-

nouncing all conne&cion with himj had efla-
blifhed an independent colony in New Spain,
and were soliciting the king to confirm their
proceedings by his authority; but he obtained
particular information concerning the opulence
of the country, the valuable presents which Cor-
tes had received, and the inviting prospects of
success that opened to his view. Every pafifon
which can agitate an ambitious mind shame,
at having been so grossly overreached; indig-
nation, at being betrayed by the man whom he
had felefted as the object of his favour and con-
fidence; grief, for having wafted his fortune to
aggrandize an enemy; and despair of recovering
so fair an opportunity of eftablifhin, his fame
and extending his power, now raged in the bo-
fom of Vrlafquez. All these, with united force,
excited him to make an extraordinary effort in
order to be a:-'enre on the author of his wrongs,
and to wrclt from him his usurped authority and
conquefs. Nor d:d he wan: the appearance of
a good title to u! iFv iinch an attempt. The
agent whoiml he lfnt to Spain with an account
of Grijalva's voyage, had net with a most fa-
vou-.ib!e reception, and from the specimens
which he produced, such high expectations were
,or.:e. con.cer.ing the' opulence of New Spain,

ót that

that Velasquez was authorised to prosecute the Boor V.
dlifcovery of the country, and appointed gover- Isr9.
nor of it during life, with more extensive power
.iMd privileges than had been granted to any ad-'
venturer from the time of Columbus q. Elated
by this diltinguifhing mark of favour, and war-
ranted to confider Cortes not only as intruding
upon his jurifdition, but as disobedient to the
royal mandate, he determined to vindicate his
own rights and the honour of his sovereign by
force of arms'. His ardour in carrying on his Underthe
preparations were such as might have-been ex- N'..,,.
pected from the violence of the passions with
which he was animated; and in a short time an
armament was completed, confifling of eighteen
fliips, which had on board fourscore horse-men,
ci.lht hundred foot soldiers, of which eighty
wAere mulfketcers, and a hundred and twenty
cri-ofbow men, together with a train of twelve
pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's experience
,,f the fatal consequence of committing to
anothcr what he ought to have executed him-
i'lf, had not rendered him more enterprising,
he veflred the command of this formidable body,
which, in the infancy of the Spanish power in
America, merits the appellation of an army, in

- HIerrera, dec. z. lib. iii. c. i .
S See N 0 T E LXXXVII.

Papt phio

Boox V. Pamphilo de Narvaez, with inffrutions to
I'" seize Cortes and his principal officers, to fend

them prisoners to him, and then to complete
the discovery and conquest of the country in
his name.

The ro- AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed
N~rrE. his men without opposition near St. Juan de
A"rl. Ullua. Three soldiers, whom Cortes had sent

to search for mines in that diftric, immediately
joined him. By this accident, he not only
received information concerning the progress
and situation of Cortes, but as these soldiers
had made some progress in the knowledge of
the Mexican language, he acquired inter-
preters, by whose means he was enabled to
hold some intercourse with the people of the
country. But, according to the low cunning
of deserters, they framed their intelligence with
more attention to what they thought would be
agreeable, than to what they knew to be true;
and represented the situation of Cortes to be
so desperate, and the disaffection of his fol-
lowers to be to general, as increased the natural
confidence and presumption of Narvaez. His
first operation, however, might have taught
him not to rely on their partial accounts.
Having sent to summon the governor of Vera
Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a priest whom

he

he employed in that service, made the requifi BoOK V.
tion with such insolence, that Sandoval, an --rsoi-
officer of high spirit, and zealously attached to
Cortes, instead of complying with his demands,
seized him and his attendants, and sent them
in chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but Cortesdeep.

as friends, and condemning the severity of l"m""'d
Sandoval, set them immediately at liberty.
By this well timed clemency, seconded by
caresses and presents, he gained their confi-
dence, and drew from them such particulars
concerning the force and intentions of Nar-
vaez, as gave him a view of the impending
danger in its full extent. He had not to con-
tend now with half-naked Indians, no match for
him in war, and still more inferior in the arts
of policy, but to take the field against an army
in courage and martial discipline equal to his
own, in number far superior, acting under the
fantion of royal authority, and commanded
by an officer of known bravery. He was in-
formed that Narvaez, more iblicitous to gratify
the resentment of Velasquez, than attentive to
the honour or interest of his country, had begun
his intercourse with the natives, by represent-
ing him and his followers as fugitives and out-
laws, guilty of rebellion against their own

VOL. II. A a sovereign,

Boor V. sovereign, and of injustice in invading the

~5zc Mexican empire, and had declared that his

chief object in vifsting the country was to
puniff the Spaniards, and to rescue the Mexi-
cans from oppreffron. He soon perceived that
the fame unfavourable representations had been
conveyed to Montezuma, and that Narvaez
had found means to assure him, that as the
conduct of those who kept him under restraint
was highly displeasing to the king his master,
he had it in charge not only to rescue an in-
jured monarch from confinement, but to rein-
state him in the poffeflion of his ancient power
and independence. Animated with this pro-
fpet of being let free from fubjetion to firan-
gers, the provinces began openly to revolt from
Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as a deliverer
no le.s able than willing to save them. Mon-
tezuma himself kept up a secret intercourse
with the new commander, and seemed to court
him as a perlbn superior in power and dignity
to thole Spaniards whom he had hitherto re-
vered as the f.ri' of men'.

i, j-! :.- SU-CH were the various afpels of danger and
i'-' ..h. diificult- which presented themselves to the

c- view of Cortes. No situation can be conceived

N
Se N O T E LXXXVIII.

more

more trying to th' capacity and firmness of a BooK V.
general, or where the choice of the plan which IsO
ought to be adopted was more difficult. If
he should wait the approach of Narvaez in
Mexico, destruction seemed to be unavoidable;
for while the Spaniards prelTed him from with-
out, the inhabitants, whose turbulent spirit he
could hardly restrain with all his authority and
attention, would eagerly lay hold on such a
favourable opportunity of avenging all their
wrongs. If he should abandon the capital, set
the captive monarch at liberty, and march out
to meet the enemy; he muff at once forego
the fruits of all his toils and viEtories, and
relinquish advantages which could not be re-
covered without extraordinary efforts, and in-
finite danger. If, instead of employing force,
he should have recourse to conciliating mea-
fures, and attempt an accommodation with
Narvaez3 the natural haughtiness of that offi-
cer, augmented by confcioufinefs of his present
superiority, sorbad him to cherish any sanguine
hope of success. After revolving every scheme
with deep attention, Cortes fixed upon that
which in execution was most hazardous, but,
if fucceliful, would prove most beneficial to
his country; and with the decisive intrepidity
suited to desperate situations, determined to
make one bold effort for vicory under every

A a 2 difad-

Boor V. difadvanftage, rather than sacrifice his. o,wt

,..~- conquests and the Spaniff interest in Mexico;

H- n^:-c. Bl-T though he foresaw that the contest must

-tolinw.- be terminated finally by arms, it would have
z. o;2r- been not only indecent, but criminal, to have

marched against his countrymen, without at-
tempting to adjust matters by an amicable
negociation. In this service he employed 01-
medo, his chaplain, to whose character the
futnction was v.well suited, and who possesed,
besides, such prudence and address as qualified
him to cam- on the secret intrigues in which
Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narvaez
reiected, with fiorn, every scheme of accom-
i!-od:.-ion that Olmedo proposed, and was with
difcultv restrained from laying violent hands
on him and his attcndants, He mer, how-
ever, with a more favourable reception among
the followers of Narvaez, to many of whom
he delivered ler-crs, either from Cortes or his
officers, their an-cient friends and companions.
Cortes artfcll accompanied these with prcfents
of ring, chains of gold, and other trinkets of
value, which inspired those needy adventurers
wi.h high ideas of the wealth that he had ac-
q'.ircd, and with e..vv of their good fortune
who were engaged in his service. Some,' from
hooes of Lbco;mir. sharers in those rich spoils,

declared

declared for an immediate accommodation with BooK V.
Cortes. Others, from public spirit, laboured 4
to prevent a civil-war, which, whatever. party
ilbould prevail, muff shake, and perhaps sub-
vert the Spanilh power, in a country where it
was so imperfecly established. Narvaez diire-
garded both, and by a public proclamation
denounced-Cortes and his adherents rebels and
enemies to :their country. Cortes, it is pro-
bable, was-not much surprised at the untra&-
able arrogance of Narvaex; and, after having
given such a proof of his own pacific dilpofi-
tion as might justify his recourse to other
means,. he determined to advance towards an
enemy whom he had laboured in vain tg ap-
pease,

HE left a hundred and fifty men in the capi- Marche

against him.

tal, under the command of Pedro de Alva- Mlay.
rado, an officer of'diftinguifhed courage, for
whom the Mexicans had conceived a singular
degree of refpet. To the custody of this
slender garrison he committed a great city,
with all the wealth he had amaired, and, what
was till of greater importance, the person of
the imprisoned monarch, His utmost art was
employed in concealing from Montezuma the
real cause of his march. He laboured to per-
iuade him, that the strangers who had lately

A a 3 rrived

Boor V. arrived were his friends and felow-fubjecs;

and that, after a short interview with them,
they would depart together, and return to their
own country. The captive prince, unable to
comprehend the designs of the Spaniards, or
to reconcile what he now heard with the de-
clarations of Narvaez, and afraid go discover
any symptom of suspicion or diftrufl of Cortes,
prorniied to remain quietly in the Spanish
quarters, and to cultivate the fame friendship
with Alvarado which he had uniformly main-
tained with him. Cortes, with seeming con-
fidence in this promise, but relying principally
upon the injunctions which he had given Alva-
rado to guard his prisoner with the most fcru-
pulous vigilance, let out from Mexico.

:. .T;- Hs Hs frrength, even after it was reinforced
t -r :oo;, Z.

by tine linfion of Sandoval and the garrison
of Vera Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and
sift, men. As he hoped for success chiefly
from the rapidity of his motions, his troops
were not encumbered either with baggage or
artillery. But as lie dreaded extremely the
imireflon which the enemy might make with
their cavalry, he had provided against this
rncger with the foresight and fagaciry which
diifin'uifh a great commander. Having ob-
served that the Indians in the province of

Chinantia

Chinantla used spears of extraordinary length BooK V.
and force, he armed his soldiers with these, ,o.
and accustomed them to that deep and com-
pact arrangement which the use of this for-
midable weapon, the best perhaps that.ever was
invented for defence, enabled them to assume.

WITH this fi-nall but firm battalion, Cortes Contintes

to nlgoclte

advanced towards Zempoalla, of which Nar- as he ad-
vaez had taken possession. During his march, vaced
he made repeated attempts towards some ac-
commodation with his opponent. But Narvaez
requiring that Cortes and his followers ihould
initantly recognize his title to be governor of
New Spain, in virtue of the powers which he
derived from Velasquez; and Cortes refuting
to ifbmir to any authority which was not
founded on a commiflion from the emperor
himself, under whose immediate protetion he
and his adherents had placed their infant
colony; all these attempts proved fruidefs.
The intercourse, however, which this occa-
sioned between the two parties, proved of no
finall advantage to Cortes, as it afforded him
an opportunity of gaining lome of Narvaez's
officers by liberal presents, of softening others
by a semblance of moderation, and of dazzling
all by the appearance of wealth among his
troops, most of his soldiers having converted

A a 4 their

Boor V. their (hare of the Mexican gold into chains,

,^ bracelets, and other ornaments, which they

displayed with military ostentation. Narvaez
and a lirde junto of his creatures excepted, all
the army leaned towards an accommodation
with their countrymen. This discovery of
their inclination irritated his violent temper
almost to madness. In a transport of rage, he
set a price upon the head of Cortes, and of
his principal officers; and having learned that
he was now advanced within a league of Zem-
poalla with his finall body of men, he con-
fidered this as an insult which merited imme-
diate chaftiiement, and marched out with all
his troops to offer him battle.
nA-,~, BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities

.:, and experience than to fight on equal ground

an enemy so far superior in number, and so
much better appointed. Having taken his
station on the opposite bank of the river de
Canoas, where he knew that he could not be
attacked, he beheld the approach of the enemy
without concern, and disregarded this vain
bravade. It was then the beginning of the
wet fi-afon', and the rain had poured down,
during a great part of the day, with the violence
.: Iiactil:';. vol. iii. 47. Dc Lsae Deer. Ind. Occid 221.

pectui;a

peculiar to lthetorrid zone. The.followers:f B.oo.V.
Narvaez, un.ccuftQamed to. :the hardihips, -of i
military fervice,:.murmuured so much at being,
thus fruitlessly exp.osed, that, from their un;
foldier-like impatience, as well as his owri
contempt of his adversary, their general per-
mitted them to retire to Zempoalla. The
very circumltance which induced them-to quit
the field, encouraged Cortes to form a scheme,
by which he.hoped at once to terminate the
war. He otferved, that his hardy veterans,
though flanding under the torrents, which con,
tinued to. fall, without a single tent or any
iheltcr whatsoever to cover them, were so far
from repining at hardships which were become
familiar to them, that they were still fresh and
alert for service. He foresaw that the. enemy
would naturally give themselves up to repose
after their fatigue, and that, judging of.the
conduct of others by their own effeminacy;
they would.deem themselves perfectly secure
at a season so unfit for. action. He resolved,
therefore, to fall upon them in the dead of
night, when the surprise and terror of this un-
expcted attack might more than compensate
the inferiority of his numbers. His Ibldiers5
fenfiblc that no resource remained but in some
dcel-erate effort of courage, approved of the
rnalire with such warmth, that Cortes, in a

military

BooK V. military oration which he addrffeld to thenl

150.- before they began their march, was more soli-

citous to temper than to inflame their ardour.
He divided them into three parties. At the
head of the first he placed Sandoval; entrust-
ing this gallant officer with the molt danger-
ous and important service, that of seizing the
enemy's artillery, which was planted before
the principal tower of the temple, where Nar-
vaez had fixed his head-quarters. Chriftoval
de Olid commanded the second, with orders
to assault the tower, and lay hold on the gene-
ral. Cortes himielf conducted the third and
fmallelc division, which was to a& as a body
of reserve, and to support the other two as
there should be occasion. Having passed the
river de Canoas, which was much itvelled with
the rains, not without difficulty, the water
reaching almost to their chins, they advanced
in profound silence, without beat of drum, or
found of any warlike instrument; each man
armed with his sword, his dagger, and his
Chinanti-n spear. Narvaez, remils in propor-
tion to his fecurirv, had posted only two cen-
tinels to watch the motions of an enemy whom
he had such good cause to dread. One of
these was seized by the advanced guard of
Cortes's troops, the other made his elcape,
.iid hurrying to the town with all the precipi-

tatioa

tation of fear and zeal, gave such timely notice BooKc V;
of the enemy's approach, that there was full - '
leilure to have prepared for their reception.
But, through the arrogance and infatuation of
Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the
centinel, and treated with derision the idea of
being attacked by forces so unequal to his
own. The shouts of Cortes's soldiers, rushing
on to the assault, convinced him at last, that
the danger which he despised was real. The
rapidity with which they advanced was such,
that only one cannon could be fired, before
Sandoval's party closed with the enemy, drove
them from their guns, and began to force
their way up the steps of the tower. Narvaez,
no less brave in action than presumptuous in
condut, armed himtelf in haste, and by his
voice and example animated his men to the
combat. Olid advanced to sustain his compa-
nions; and Cortes himself, ruffing to the front,
conduced and added new vigour to the attack.
The compact order in which this finall body
prfeiied on, and the impenetrable front which
they presented with their long spears, bore
duown all opposition before it. They had now and ov.
reached the gate, and were struggling to burst comes him.
it open, when a soldier having set fire to the
reces with which the tower was covered, com-

pelled

BooD V. pelled NTarvae to sally our. In the first en-

counter he was wounded in the eye with a
spear, and filling to the ground, was dragged
down the feps, and in a moment clap; in
fetters. The cry of viYcory resounded among
the troops of Cortes. Those who had sallied
out with their leader now maintained the con,
fiic feebly, and began to surrender. Among
the remainder of his loldiers, fationed in two
finaller towers of the temple, terror and con-
fuiion prevailed. The darkness was so great,
that they could not distinguish between their
friends and foes. Their own artillery was
pointed against them. Wherever they turned
their eyes, they beheld lights gleaming through
the obscurity of night, which, though proceed-
ing only from a variety of shining infects, that
abound in moist and sultry climates, their
affrighted imaginations represented as nume-
rous bands of musketeers advancing with
kindled matches to the attack. After a short
refiitance, the soldiers compelled their officers
to capitulate, and before morning all laid
down their arms, and submitted quietly to
their conquerors.

T'r ,-T:! THIS complete victroi proved more accept-
t°.:j able, ;s it was gained almost without blood-.

;hcc, only two fildiers being killed on the fide

of

of Cortes, and two' officers, with fifteen private Boor V.
men; of the adverse fastion. Cortes treated .
the vanquished not like enemies, but as couin-
tr;vmen and friends, and offered either to fend
them back directly to Cuba, or to take them
into his service, as partners in his fortunes on
equal terms with his own soldiers. This latter
proposition, seconded by a seasonable diftribu-
ton of some presents from Cortes, and liberal
promiles of mores opened prospects so agree-
able to the romantic expectations which in-
vited them to engage in this services tlat alli
a few partizans of Narvaez excepted, closed
with it, and vied with each other in profeflions
of fidelity and attachment to a general whole
recent success had given them such a striking
proof of his abilities for command. Thus, by
a fcries of events no less fortunate than un-
colnmon, Cortes not only escaped from perdi-
tion which seemed inevitable, but, when he
had least reason to expect it, was placed at the
head of a thousand Spaniards, ready to follow.
wherever he should lead them. Whoever re-
tlccs upon the facility with which this victory
was obtained, or confiders with what sudden
and unanimous transition the followers of Nar-
vacz ranged themselves under the standard of
his rival, will be apt to ascribe both events as
much to the intrigues as to the arms of Cortes,

and

BooK V. and cannot but fufpec' that the ruin of Nar-

vaez was occasioned, no less by the treachery
of his own followers, than by the valour of
his enemy .

The Me- BUT, in one point, the prudent condu&
ans take
rn agai and good fortune of Cortes were equally con-
traS , fspicuous. If, by the rapidity of his operations

after he began his march, he had not brought
matters to such a speedy iflue, even this de-
cifive viCtory would have come too late to
have saved his companions whom he left in
Mexico. A few davs after the discomfiture of
Narvaez, a courier arrived with an account
that the Mexicans had taken arms, and having
seized and deftro-ed the two brigantines, which
Cortes had built in order to secure the com-
mand of the lake, had attacked the Spaniards
in their quarters, had killed leveral of them
and wounded more, had reduced to asses their
magazine of provisions, and carried on hofti-
lities with such fury, that, though Alvarado
and his men defended themselves with un-
daunted resolution, they mult either be soon
cut off by famine, or fink under the multitude
of their enemies. This revolt was excited by

Coe.: Relat. 24t. D. B. Diaz. c. Io-125. Her-
re:x, ec :. L. ix. c. i , &c. Gumara Cron. c. 97, &c.

motives

motives which rendered it fill more alarming. BOOK V.
On the departure of Cortes for Zempoalla, the i ,O
Mexicans flattered themselves, that the long-
expeced opportunity of restoring their fove-
reign to liberty, and of vindicating their coun-
try from the odious dominion of trrangers, was
.i length arrived; that while the forces of
their opprelfors were divided, and the arms of
one party turned against the other, they might
triumph with greater facility over both. Con-
fultations were held, and schemes formed with
this intention. The Spaniards in Mexico, con-
icious of their own feebleness, suspected and
dreaded those machinations. Alvarado, though
a gallant officer, possesed neither that extent
of capacity, nor dignity of manners, by which
Cortes had acquired such an ascendant over
ile minds of the Mexicans, as never allowed
them to form ajuft estimate of his weakness or
of their own strength. Alvarado knew no
mode of supporting his authority but force.
Instead of employing address to disconcert the
plans or to tooth the spirits of the Mexicans,
he waited the return of one of their solemn
festivals, when the principal persons in the
cmpire were dancing, according to custom, in
the court of the great temple; he seized all
the avenues which led to it, and, allured
partly by the rich ornaments which they wore

in

BooK V. in honour of their gods, and partly by the faci.

a.~' lity of cutting off at once the authors of that

conspiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon
them, unarmed and unfufpicious of any danger,
and massacred a great number, none escaping
but such as made their way over the battle-
ments of the temple. An action so cruel and
treacherous filled not only the city, but the
whole empire, with indignation and rage. All
called aloud for vengeance; and regardless of
the safety of their monarch, whose life was at
the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their own
danger in assaulting an enemy who had been
so long the object: of their terror, they com-
mitted all those ats of violence of which
Cortes received an accoun:.
h- rr;r'-s To him the danger appeared so imminent,

'-' as to admit neither of deliberation nor delay.

l:e set out inftantlv with all his forces, and
rrc:rned from Zempoalla with no less rapidity
than i:e had advanced thither. At Tlaicala
he wu.s iolned by two thousand chosen war-
riors. On entering the Mexican territories,
he found that difafiection to the Spaniards was
not confined to the capital. The principal
inhabitants had deserted the towns through
which he pased; no pcrfon of note appearing
to meet him with the usual refpecai no provi-

sion

sion was made for the fubfiltence of his troops; BOOK V.
and though he was permitted to advance with- .11.
out opposition, the solitude and fllence whichli
reigned in every place, and the horror with
which the people avoided all intercourse with
him, discovered a deep-rooted antipathy, that
excited the most just alarm. But, implacable
as the enmity of the Mexicans was, they were
ib unacquainted with the science of war, that
they knew not how to take the proper mea-
fures, either for their own safety or the. de-
ftruaion of the Spaniards. Uninftruced by
their former error in admitting a formidable
enemy into their capital, instead of breaking
down the causeways and bridges, by which
they niight have inclosed Alvarado and his
party, and have effeaually ftopt the career of June 24,
Cortes, they again suffered him to march into
the city without molestation, and to take quiet
poffeflion of his ancient fiation.

THE transports of joy with which Alvarado Improper

and his soldiers received their companions can- Co",t,
not be expressed. Both parties were so much
elated, the one with their seasonable deliver-
ance, and the other with the great exploits
which they had achieved, that this intoxica-
tion of success seems to have reached Cortes
himfelfi' and he" behaved on this occasion nei-

VOL. II. B b ' ther

Boos V. ther with his usual sagacity nor attention. He

not only neglected to visit Montteuma, but
embittered the insult by exprefflons full of
contempt for that unfortunate prince and his
people. The forces bs which he had now the
command, appeared to him so irreffltible, that
he might assume an higher tone, and lay aside.
the maik of moderation, under which he had
hitherto concealed his designs. Some Mexi-.
cans who understood the Spanish language,
heard the contemptuous words which Cbrtes
uttered, and reporting them to their country-
men, kindled their rage anew. They were
now convinced that the intentions of the ge-
neral were equally bloody with those of Alva-
rado, and that his original purpose in visiting
their country, had not been, as he pretended,
to court the alliance of their sovereign, but to

T-''ri-i:.t attempt the conquest of his dominions. They
tr :.:c- resumed their anns with the additional fury

c. . which this difcoverv inspired, attacked a con-

fiderable body of Spaniards who were marching
towards the great square in which the public
market was held, and compelled them to retire

ith some loss. Emboldened by this success,
and delighted to find that their oppressors were
not invincible, they advanced next day with
extraordinary martial pomp to assault the Spa-
;aafds in their quarters. Their number was

formidable,

formidable, and their undaunted courage still BooK V.
more so. Though the artillery pointed against ' T, .
their numerous battalions, crowded together in
narrow streets, swept off multitudes at every
discharge; though every blow of the Spanish
weapons fell with mortal effect upon their
naked bodies, the impetuosity of the assault
did not abate. Fresh men rushed forward to
occupy the places -of the slain, and meeting
with the fame fate, were succeeded by others
no less intrepid and eager for vengeance. The
utmost cffort of Cortes's abilities and expe-
rience, seconded by the disciplined valour of
his troops, were hardly sufficient to defend the
fortifications, that surrounded the post where
the Spaniards were itationed, into which the
enemy were more than once on the point of
forcing their way.

CORTES beheld, with wonder, the impla- Diflrefsof

cable ferocity of a people, who seemed at first niardp.
to submit tamely to the yoke, and had con-
tinued so long passive under it. The soldiers
of Narvaez, who fondly imagined that they.
followed Cortes to share in the spoils of a con-
quered empire, were astonished to find that
thev were involved in a dangerous war, with
an enemv whose vigour was till unbroken,
and loudly execrated their own weakness, in

B b 2 giving

Bo:K V. giving such easy credit to the delusive pro-

i. miles of their new leader'. But surprise and
complaints were of no avail. Some immediate
and extraordinary effort was requisite to extri-
cate themselves out of their present situation.
As soon as the approach of evening induced
the Mexicans to retire, in compliance with
their national custom of ceasing from hostilities
with the letting fun, Cortes began to prepare
for a sally, next day, with such a considerable
force, as might either drive the enemy out of
the city, or compel them to liften to terms
of accommodation.

co. -t. - TE conducted, in person, the troops destined
,o::bo=r for this important service. Every invention

" known in the European art of war, as well as

every precaution, luggefted by his long ac-
quaintance with the Indian mode of fighting,
were employed to ensure success. But he found
an enemy prepared and determined to oppose
him. The force of the Mexicans was greatly aug-
mented by fresh troops, which poured in con-
tinually from the country, and their animosity
was in no degree abated. They were led by
their nobles, inflamed by the exhortations of
their priefls, and fought in defence of their

B. Diaz. c. i:6.

temples

temples and families, under the eye of their BooK V.
ocds, and in presence of their wives and ,
children. Notwithstanding their numbers, and
enthusiastic contempt of danger and death,
wherever the Spaniards could close with them,
the superiority of their discipline and arms
obliged the Mexicans to give way. But in
narrow streets, and where many of the bridges
of communication were broken down, the
Spaniards could seldom come to a fair ren-
counter with the enemy, and as they advanced,
vwere expoled to flowers of arrows and stones
from the tops of the houses. After a day of
incefrant exertion, though vast numbers of the
Mexicans fell, and part of the city was burnt,
the Spaniards, weary with the slaughter, and
ha.rassed by multitudes which fucceflvely re-
lieved each other, were obliged at length to
retire, with the mortification of having ac-
complifhed nothing so decisive as to compen-
Isite the unusual calamity of twelve soldiers
killed, and above sixty wounded. Another
Lilly, made with greater force, was not more
cffectual, and in it the general himself was
wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal Montzuma

slain,

error into which he had been betrayed by his
own contempt of the Mexicans, and was satis-

Bb 3 fled.

Boor V. sied that he could neither maintain his present
-, f' ifation in the centre of an hostile city, nor

retire from it without the most imminent
danger. One resource still remained, to try
what effect the interposition of Montezuma
might have to sooth or overawe his fubjets.
W'hen the Mexicans approached next morning
to renew the aftault, that unfortunate prince,
at the mercy of the Spanialds, and reduced to
the iad necefiity of becoming ite instrument of
his own dilgrace, and of the slavery of his
people , advanced to the battlements in his
royal robes, and with all the pomp in which
he used to appear on solemn occasions. At
fight of their sovereign, whom they had long
been accustomed to honour, and almost to
revere as a god, the weapons dropt from their
hands, every tongue was silent, all bowed
their heads, and many prostrated themselves
on the ground. Montezuma addressed them
vi:h every argument that could mitigate their
rage, or periuade them to cease from hoftili-
tice. When he ended his difcourle, a fullen
murmur of dif'ipprobation run through the
r.nks; to this fuccec.i':d reproaches and threats;
and the ftur o; the muilttltie rising in a mo-
mrent above eve ci- r rainit of decency or

S - N OTE LXXXIX.

refpe&r

.retpet, flights of arrows and volleys of stones B°o? Y-
poured in so violently upon the ramparts, that 1sio.
before the Spanilh soldiers, appointed to cover
Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to
lift them in his defence, two arrows wounded
the unhappy monarch, and the blow of a stone
on his temple struck him to the ground. On
feeing him fall, the Mexicans were so much
astonished, that, with a transition not uncom-
mon in popular tumults, they passed in a mo-
ment from one extreme to the other, remorse
succeeded to insult, and they fled with horror,
as if the vengeance of Heaven were pursuing
the crime which they had committed. The
Spaniards, without molestation, carried Mon-
tezuma to his apartments, and Cortes hastened
thither to console him under his misfortune.
But the unhappy monarch now perceived how
low he was funk, and the haughty spirit which
feeened to have been so long extint, return-
ing, he scorned to survive this last humiliation,
and to protract an ignominious life, not only
as the prisoner and tool of his enemies, but as
the object of contempt or detestation among
his subje&s. In a tranrport of rage he tore
the bandages from his wounds, and refused,
with such obstinacy, to take any nourifhmena,
that lie soon ended Isis wretched days, rejecting

B b4 with

Boor V. with disdain all the solicitations of the Spani-

,5-- ards to embrace the Christian faith.
NFw Cn. UPo,; the death of Montezuma, Cortes

having loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans
to an accommodation, saw no profpet of safety
but in attempting a retreat, and began to pre-
pare for it. But a sudden motion of the Mexi-
cans engaged him in new conflits. They took
poflefion of a high tower in the great temple
which overlooked the Spanish quarters, and
placing there a garrison of their principal war-
riors, not a Spaniard could stir without being
exposed to their misfile weapons. From this
post it was necessary to difodge them at any
risk, and Juan de Efcobar, with a numerous
detachment of chosen soldiers, was ordered to
make the attack. But Efcobar, though a gal-
lant officer, and at the head of troops accustomed
to conquer, and who now fought under the
eves of their countrymen, was thrice repulsed.
Cortes, sensible that not only the reputation but
the safety of his army depended on the success
of this assault, ordered a buckler to be tied to
his arm, as he could not manage it with his
wounded hand, and rulhed with his drawn sword
into the thickest of the combatants. Encou-
raged by the presence of their general, the Spa-
niards returned to the charge with such vigour,

that

that they gradually forced their way up the steps, BooK V..
and drove the Mexicans to the platform at the
top of the tower. There a dreadful carnage
began, when two young Mexicans of high rank,
observing Cortes as he animated his soldiers by
his voice and example, resolved to sacrifice their
own lives in order to cut off the author of all
the calamities which desolated their country.
They approached him in a supplicant posture,
as if they had intended to lay down their arms,
and seizing him in a moment, hurried him to-
wards the battlements, over which they threw
themselves headlong, in hopes of dragging him
along to be dafled in pieces by the fame fall.
But Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke
loose fiom their grasp, and the gallant youths
perished in this generous, though unluccefsful,
attempt to save their country. As soon as the
Spaniards became masters of the tower, they set
fire to it, and without farther molefRation, con-
tinued the preparations for their retreat.

THIS became the more necessary, as the The Spani-

Mexicans were so much aftonilhed at the lait 'd, 'abh-
cffort of the Spanish valour, that they began to city.
change their whole fyitem of hostility, and in-
stead of incessant attacks, endeavoured, by bar-
ricading the streets, and breaking down the
causeways, to cut off the communication of the

Spaniards

Boor V. Spaniards with the condtient, arid thus to farve

an enemy whom they could not subdue. The
sirs point to be determined by Cortes and his
followers, was whether they lhould march out
openly in the face of day, when they could dif-
cern every danger, and fee how to regulate their
own motions, as well as how to resist the afaults
of the enemy; or whether they should endeavour
to retire secretly in the night. The latter was
preferred, partly from hopes that their national
fuperfition would restrain the Mexicans, from
venturing to attack them in the night, and
partly from their own fond belief in the pre-
'diaions of a private soldier, who having ac-
quired universal credit by a smattering of learn-
ing, and his pretensions to astrology, boldly
afiired his countrymen of success, if they made
their retreat in this manner. They began to
move, towards midnight, in three divifipns.
Sandoval led the van; Pedro Alvarado, and
\Vclafquiez de Leon, had the condut of the
rcear; and Cortes commanded in the centre,
where he placed the prisoners, among whom
ivere a son and two daughters of Montezuma,
togeher wk th several Mexicans of diftin&ion,
t.-e artillery, the baggage, and a portable bridge
of timber, jntended to be laid over the breaches
in the cai-:way. They. marched in profound
ilkrn.c along the caurewav which led to Tacuba,

because

because it wasfihorter than any of the reft, and, BooK V.
lying most remote from the road towards Tlaf- ,o,
cala and the sea-coast, had been left more en-
tire by the Mexicans. They reached the first
breach in it without molestation, hoping that
their retreat was undiscovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not Attacked

only watched all their motions with attention, ;xii.s.
but had made proper dispositions for a most for-
midable attack. While the Spaniards were in-
tent upon placing their bridge in the breach,
and occupied in condu&ing their horses and ar-
tillery along it, they were suddenly alarmed
with the tremendous found of warlike inftru-
ments, and a general shout from an innumerable
multitude of enemies; the lake was covered
with canoes; flights of arrows, and showers of
fRones poured in upon them from every quar-
ter; the Mexicans rushing forward to the charge
with fearless impetuosity, as if they hoped in
that moment to be avenged for all their wrongs.
Unfortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight
of the artillery, was wedged so salt into the
stones and mud, that it was impoTible to re-
move it. Dilinayed at this accident, the Spa-
niards advanced with precipitation towards the
second breach. The Mexicans hemmed them
in on every fide, and though they defended

thellmflves

Boor V. themselves with their usual courage, yet crouded

together as they were on a narrow causeway,
x$~o.

their discipline and military skill were of little
avail, nor did the obscurity of the night permit
them to derive great advantage from their fire-
arms, or the fuperioriy of their other weapons.
All Mexico was now in arms, and so eager
were the people on the deftruation of their op-
pressors, that they who were not near enough
to annoy them in person, impatient of the de-
lav, pressed forward with such ardour, as drove
on their countrymen in the front with irresistible
violence. Fresh warriors instantly filled the
place of such as fell. The Spaniards, weary
with slaughter, and unable to sustain the weight
of the torrent that poured in upon them, began
to give way. In a moment the confusion was
universal; horse and foot, officers and soldiers,
friends and enemies, were mingled together;
and while all fought, and many fell, they could
hardly distinguish from what hand the blow
camr.e.
Tz--. c- CORTzS, with about a hundred foot soldiers

and a few horse, forced his way over the two
remaining breaches in the causeway, the bodies
of the dead serving to fill up the chasms, and
reached the main land. Having formed them
as soon as they arrived, he returned with such

*a

as were yet capable of service, to assist his BooK V.
friends in their retreat, and to encourage them, L
by his presence and example, to persevere in the
efsurts requisite to effect it. He met with part
of his soldiers, who had broke through the ene-
my, but found many more overwhelmed by the
multitude of their aggressors, or perifing in
the lake; and heard the piteous lamentations
of others, whom the Mexicans, having taken
alive, were carrying off in triumph to be facri-
siced to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escaped assembled at Tacuba. But when
the morning dawned, and discovered to the view
of Cortes his shattered battalion, reduced to
lets than half its number, the survivors dejeced,
and most of them covered with wounds, the
thoughts of what they had suffered, and the re-
membrance of so many faithful friends and gal-
lant followers who had fallen in that night of
sorrow', pierced his foul with such anguish,
that while he was forming their ranks, and
issuing some necessary orders, his soldiers ob-
served the tears trickling from his eyes, and re-
marked, with much fatisfaaion, that while at-
tentive to the duties of a general, he was not
insensible to the feelings of a man.

z Nscte T.ife is the name by which it is still diftin-
guiflied in New Spain.

5 I

BooK V. Ix this fatal retreat many officers of diftincA

tion periifed', and among these Veiafquez de
" i~:! Leon, who having forsaken the party of his

kinsman, the governor of Cuba, to follow the
fortune of his companions, was, on that ac-
count, as well as for his superior merit, refpe&ed
by them as the second person in the army. All
the artillery, ammunition, and baggages were
loft; the greater part of the horses, and above
two thousand Tlafcalans, were killed, and only
a very small portion of the treasure which they
had amrafed was saved. This, which had been
always their chief object, proved a great cause
of their calamitvy for many of the soldiers
having so overloaded the;nfelves with bars of
gold as rendered them unfit for astien, and re-
tarded their flight, fell, ignominiouny, the
victims of their own inconsiderate avarice.
AmindfI so man, difalters, it was bome confola-
tion to find that Aguilar and Marina, whose
function as interpreters was of such essential im-
portance, had made their efcapeb.

D' S-L~ .- THE first care of Cortes was to find some fhel-
si jt,:' ter for his wear!id troops; for as the Mexicans

See NOTE X .

b Cortes Rei:t. p. z;3. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara
Cron. c. i:J. H{.t.a-.l, dec. :. lib. x. c. 11, 12.

infested

infested them oh'eveiy fide, and the people of Boot V.,
Tacuba began to take arms, he could not con- IZ
tinue in his present station. He direted his
march towatds the riling ground, and having
fortunately discovered a temple situated on an
eminence, took possession of it. There he
fotind not only the Ihelter for which he wished,
but, what was io less wanted, fomne provisions
to refresh his men; and though the enemy did
not intermit their attacks throughout the day,
they were with less difficulty prevented from
making any imprefFori. During this time
Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with
his officers, concerning the route which they
ought to take in their retreat. They were now
on the weft fide'of the lake. Tlafcala, the only
place where they could hope for a friendly re-
C:epnion, lay about fixty-four miles to the east
of Mexico'; to that they were obliged to go
round the north end of the lake before they
:outld fall into the road which led thither. A
ilafcalan soldier undertook to he their guide,
and conducted them through a country in some
places niarlhy, in others mountainous, in all
ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They marched
tlr fix days with little respite, and under con-

Villa Segnor Teatro Americanos, lib. ii. c. 1 .

Yg^~~~~~ tinual

Boor V. tinual alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexi-
15--. cans hovering around them, sometimes harassing

them at a distance with their misfile weapons,
and Sometimes attacking them closely in front,
in rear, in flank, with great boldness, as they
now knew that they were not invincible. Nor
were the fatigue and danger of those inceflant
conflicts the worst evils to which they were ex-
posed. As the barren country through which
they palsed afforded hardly any provisions, they
were reduced to feed on berries, roots, and the
ialks of green maize; and at the very time
that famine was depressing their spirits and
wafting their strength, their situation required
the most vigorous and unremitting exertions of
courage and ativity. AmidRf those compli-
cated diftreftes, one circumstance supported and
animated the Spaniards. Their commander
sustained this fad reverse of fortune with un-
shaken magnanimity. His pretence of mind
never forsook him; his sagacity foresaw every
event, and his vigilance provided for it. He
was foremost in every danger, and endured
every hardship with cheerfulness. The difficul-
ties with which he was surrounded seemed to
call forth new talents; and his soldiers, though
delpairing themselves, continued to follow him
with increasing confidence in his abilities.

ON

0:' the sixth day they arrived near to Otum- Boor V.

ha, not far from the road between Mexico and O
Tlafcala. Early next morning they began to B"lobs
advance towards it, flying parties of the enemy
frill hanging on their rear; and amidit the in-
silts with which they accompanied their hoftili-
ties, Marina remarked that they often exclaimed
with exultation, " Go on, robbers; go to the
place where you shall quickly meet the ven-
geance due to your crimes." The meaning of
this threat the Spaniards did not comprehend,
until they reached the summit of an eminence
before them. There a spacious valley opened
to their view, covered with a vast army, ex-
tending as far as the eye could reach. The
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harassed the Spaniards in their retreat, had
assembled their principal force on the other fide
of the lake; and marching along the road which
led directly to Tlafcala, pofled it in the plain
of Otumba, through which they knew Cortes
must pass. At the fight of this incredible mul-
titude, which they could survey at once from
the rising ground, the Spaniards were astonished,
and even the boldest began to despair. But
Cortes, without allowing leisure for their fears
to acquire strength by reflection, after warning
them briefly that no alternative now remained but
to conquer or to die, led them instantly to the

VOL. II. C c charge.

BooK V. charge. The Mexicans waited their approach

i-0. with unusual fortitude. Such, however, was

the superiority of the Spanish discipline and
arms, that the imprelilon of this finall body was
irresistible; and whichever way its force was
directed, it penetrated and dilperled the molt
numerous battalions. But while these gave
way in one quarter, new combatants advanced
from another, and the Spaniards, though fuc-
cefsful in every attack, were ready to fink under
those repeated efforts, without feeing any end
of their toil, or any hope of victory. At that
time Cortes observed the great standard of the
empire, which was carried before the Mexican
general, advancing; and fortunately recollecting
to have heard, that on the fate of it depended
the event of every battle, he assembled a few of
his bravest officers, whose horses were frill ca-
pable of service, and placing hiiminlf at their
heai, puflied forward towards the standard with
an imn;ptuofiy v..i:;ch bore down every thing
before it. A cl,.!:n bod! of nobles, who
uar.d ;i.e sitar..d r.J,l ' ';' c'"ine, but
were loonr broke,. Co:'te, w.hh a itrok ot his
lance, vwounded t.e MIxican gencrJ, and
threw ;him to the ,.. :nd. Or .'- the Spanilh
c,,ncers aligiiting , i.-: n (!i ;.. i. ., lif and
laid hold of the im::cr;il itan.i-rd. The ino-

en: i':t their leaid.' -
fc!, and the fiandard,

*; to.wards

towards which all directed their eyes, difap- Boor V.
pcared, an universal panic struck the Mexi- 5i0.
cans, and, as if the bond which held them to-
gether had been dissolved, every ensign was
lowered, each soldier threw away his weapons,
and all Red with precipitation to the mountains.
The Spaniards, unable to pursue them far, re-
turned to colle&t the spoils of the field, which
were so valuable as to be Ibme cdmpenfation for
the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for
in the enemy's army were most of their princi-
pal warriors, drefled out in their richest orna-
ments, as if they had been marching to assured
vicory. Next day, to their great joy, they
entered the Tlafcalan territories d. July .

BuTr, amid t their fatisfaftion in having got Reception

bcv ond the precincts of an hostile country, they ol,'lh SPa
'r;)ld not look forward without solicitude, as Tlacala.
t'.rv were still uncertain what reception they
l:'. ht meet with fi-om allies, to whom they re-
.::'ncl in a condition very different from that in
. hich they had lately set out from their domi-
r.i.)s. IHappily for them, the enmity of the
''Ill::lans to the M-'x:i:.n name was so inve-
.:;.;i', their desire to avenge the death of their

nrt:' Rc!.i. p. :ig. B. Diaz. c. 1z8. Gomara

, :. . 1

.' I .
i l rrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 12, 13.

C c ^ coun-

Boor V. countrymen so vehement, and the ascendant

sicJ . which Cortes had acquired over the chiefs of

the republic si complete, that, far from enter-
taining a thought of taking any advantage of
the distressed situation in which they beheld the
Spaniards, they received them with a tender-
ness and cordiality which quickly dissipated all
their Iulpicions.

Sew iC; - ,SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence
i ..... was now ablblutely necessary; not only that the

Spaniards might give attention to the cure of
their wounds, which had been too long ne-
gleeted, but in order to recruit their strength,
exhausted by such a long fucceEfion of fatigue
and hardships. During this, Cortes learned
that he and his companions were not the only
Spaniards who had felt the effects of the Mexi-
can enmity. A considerable detachment, which
was marching from Zempoalla towards the ca-
pit.l, had been cut of by the people of Te-
pcaca. A finaller party, returning from Tlaf-
calj to Vera Cruz, with the C,1:re of the Mexi-
can gold allotted to the garrilon, had been fur-
pri:cd and deftroved in the mountains. At a
iuncture when the life of every Spaniard was of
importance, such losses were deeply felt. The
Ichernes which Cortes was meditating rendered
themn peculiarly afflictive to him. While his

,~5 ~ enemies,

enemies, and even many of his own followers, BOOK V.
confidered the difafltrs which had befallen him o.
:is sat.i! to the progress of his arms, and ima-
ined that nothing now remained but speedily
to abandon a country which he had invaded
with unequal force, his mind, as eminent for
pereverance as for enterprise, was frill bent on
;accomplishing his original purpose, of subject-
ing the Mexican empire to the crown of Castile.
Severe and unexpected as the check was which
ie had received, it did not appear to him a sus-
ficient reason for rclinquifhing the conquests
which he had already made, or against resuming
his operations with better hopes offuccefs. The
colony at Vera Cruz was not only safe, but had
remained unmoleffed. The people of Zem-
pc.alla and the adjacent diftri&s had discovered
no symptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans
continued faithful to their alliance. On their
martial spirit, easily rouzed to arms, and in-
Haamed with implacable hatred of the Mexi-
cans, Cortes depended for powerful aid. He
had frill the command of a body of Spaniards,
equal in number to that with which he had
opened his way into the centre of the empire,
end had taken poffefilon of the capital; so that
with the benefit of greater experience, as well
.1s more perfect knowledge of the country, he

C c3 did

BocK V. did not despair of quickly recovering all that
-,;~~ he he ad been deprived of by untownard events.

r2 FULL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan
;,,." chiefs with such a:ren:ion, and distributed

among them so liberally the rich spoils of
Otuirba, that he was secure of obtaining what-
ever he should require of the republic. He
drew a finall supply of ammunition, and two
or three field-pieces, from his ltores at Vcra
Cruz. He difpa:chetd an offccr of confidence
v.';:i four ships of Nar'.aez's flc't to Hispaniola
a.J J-a,.ica, to engage ad\e.nturcrs, and to
purchac h!orses, gunpowder, and other mili-
tary iLores. As he ;;,nv that it would be vain
to a:tc:Ur.; the reduc;ion us IMexico, unless he
ccu'l .'cure the command ut the lake, he gave
orders to prepare in tihel nountdins of Tlafcala
mt'-:eri;ls for buii.dig te elve brigantines, so

:, :.ci.' m:iht be carried thicher in pieces ready

rj bS r".i rcgcts:hc, and launched when he tsood
in r.c.l cf their ifcrvicc .

Bi. B' '..ile, wvih rroviden. attention, he was
·

;: K.iR;n t-,rc necefarv lteps towards the execu-
tion ,f i h1 mealures, an obitacle arole in a

::: R a:. p. 2;i, E. Gonara Cron. c. 117.

qu ar:cr

quarter where it was least expeated, but most BOOK V.
formidable. The spirit of discontent and mu- 10.
tiny broke out in his own army. Many of
Narvaez's followers were planters rather than
Ibldiers, and had accompanied him to New
Spain with sanguine hopes of obtaining fettle-
inents, but with little inclination to engage in
the hardships and dangers of war. As the fame
motives had induced them to enter into their
new engagements with Cortes, they no sooner
became acquainted with the nature of the ser-
vice, than they bitterly repented of their choice.
Such of thein as had the good fortune to fur-
vive the perilous adventures in which their own
imprudence had involved them, happy in
having made their escape, trembled at the
thoughts of being exposed a second time to
similar calamities. As soon as they discovered
t-e intention of Cortes, they began secretly to
murmur and cabal, and waxing gradually more
audacious, they, in a body, offered a remon-
!'rance to their general against the imprudence
of attacking a powerful empire with his shattered
iorces, and formally required him to lead them
back directly to Cuba. Though Cortes, long
praCtdild in the arts of command, employed ar-
guments, entreaties, and presents, to convince
or to sooth them; though his own soldiers,
.r;imated with the spirit of their leader, warmly

C c seconded

Boor V. seconded his endeavours; he found their fears

i too violent and deep-rooted to be removed,

and the utmost he could effec was to prevail
with them to defer their departure for some
time, on a pronife that he would, at a more
proper juncture, dismiss such as Ihould desire
it.

*r;. t. ± THAr tle malcon:ents might have no leisure
*,..'-..' o brood over the cauies of their disaffection,

* ;, re:foved initantlv to call forth his troops into
?aior.. I-le proposcd to chastise the people of
Tepeaca for the outrage which they had coIn-
;nit;ed, and as the detachment which they had
c'.: c happened to be composed mostly of fol-
ui:ers who had ierved under Narvaez, their
c.;i.palonis, f.-onl ;1he desire of vengeance, en-
- gaged niurc w iiiir:l; in this war. IHe took
;iCe conr-lar.d in person, accompanied by a nu-
1:eroi;s bcd; of Tlalcalans, and in the ipace of
: few. e acks, after various encounters, with
great llugitcr ot the Tepeacans, reduced that
province to :;boc.tion. During several months,
whil e

he waied for the supplies of men and

ammunition which he expeted, and was car-
rving on his preparations for conftrucing the
brigantines, he kept his troops constantly em-
ployed in various expeditions against the adja-
cent pro;-':;ces, all of which were conducted

with

with an uniform tenor of success. By these, his BOOK V.
men became again accustomed to vi&ory, and -
.

1510.

resumed their wonted sense of superiority; the
Mexican power was weakened; the Tlafcalan
warriors acquired the habit of acting in con-
junction with the Spaniards; and the chiefs of
the republic delighted to fee their country en-
riched with the spoils of all the people around
them, and astonished every day with fresh dif-
coveries of the irresistible prowess of their allies,
declined no effort requisite to support them.

ALL. those preparatory arrangements, how- Strengthen.

ever, though the molt prudent and efficacious d.by('e-ral
which the situation of Cortes allowed him to mcnts.
make, would have been of little avail, without
a reinforcement of Spanifl soldiers. Of this he
was 1f deeply sensible, that it was the chief ob-
iect of his thoughts and wifles; and yet his
only prolpect of obtaining it fiom the return of
the oilicer whom he had tent to the isles to so-
licit aid, was both distant and uncertain. But
what neither his own sagacity nor power could
have procured, he owed to a series of fortunate
and untorcieen incidents. The governor of
Cuba, to whom the success of Narvaez appeared
an event of infallible certainty, having sent two
fInall ships after him with new inftru&ions and
. uipply of men and military stores, the officer

whom

BooE v. whom Cortes had appointed to command on

rhe coast, artfully decoyed them into the har-
bour of Vera Cruz, seized the vessels, and
eafilv perlfuaded the soldiers to follow the ftan-
dard of a more able leader than him whom they
were deltined to jo;n'. Soon after, three {hips
of more considerable force came into the har-
botr fepararely. Thele belonged to an arma-
in: Sfitted out by Francisco de Garay, gover-
nor of J:namaca, who, being poffelTed with the
rage ofdifcoverv and conquest which animated
every Spaniard fettled in America, had long
aimed at intruding into some diftrift of New
Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glory and
eain of annexing that empire to the crown of
Cas'!e. They unadv;isedly .m-ade their attempt
on the northern provinces, where the country
was poor and the people fierce and warlike;
and, after a cruel fuccefion of disasters, fa-
mine compelled them to venture into Vcra
Cruz, and cast thentclves upon the mercy of
cn*-:- . their countrymen. Their fidelity was not proof

against the fplencid hopes and promises which
had fcduced other adventurers, and as if the
fpiri. of revolt had been contagious in New
Snain, they likewise abandoned the master
whom they were bound to serve, and inlifted

f B. D;az. c. u11.

under

under Cortesg. Nor was it America alone that BooK V..
furnilhed such unexpected aid. A ship arrived ---0.
from Spain, freighted by some private mer-
chants with military stores, in hopes of a pro-
fitable market in a country, the fame of whose
opulence began to spread over Europe. Cor-
tes eagerly purchased a cargo which to him was
inv:Llu;able, and the crew, following the general
example, joined him at Tlafcalah.

FIROM those various quarters, the army of

Cortcs was augmented with an hundred and
c:ghty men, and twenty horses, a reinforce-
ment too inconsiderable to produce any confe-
quence which would entitle it to have been
mentioned in the history of other parts of the
£lobc. But in that of America, where great
revolutions were brought about by causes which
fc-emcd to bear no proportion to their effects,
Inlch linall events rife into importance, because
they were sufficient to decide with relpecf to
the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the least re-
markable inllance of the singular felicity con-
fpicuous in many passages of Cortes's story,
that the two persons chiefly instrumental in
t'urii!lling him with those seasonable supplies
flho.:!d be an avowed enemy who aimed at his

e Cir:-c Rc lat. 253, F. B. Diaz. c. 133.
' Ib . . c. 135.

deftr-,ction,

Boor V. detfruction, and an envious rival who wished

;,. to supplant him.
-s -Sn of THE first effect of the junCtion with his new

followers was to enable him to difinifs such of
Narvaez's soldiers as remained with reluctance
in his service. After their departure, he still
mustered five hundred and fifty infantry, of
which fourscore were armed with muskets or
cross-bows, forty horsemen, and a train of nine
field-pieces'. At the head of these, accom-
panied by ten thousand Tlalcalans and other
friendly Indians, Cortes began his march to-
wards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth of De-
cember, fix months after his dififtrous retreat
iro-n trht ciry K.
P '--:: - - o'. diJ he advance to attack an enemy un-

:* .- prepared to receive him. Upon the death of
f.,'. - Montezumia, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the

right of elccting the emperor wa.s vested, had
initantl- rai;id his brother Qtetlavaca to the
throne. His avowed and inveterate enmity to
t.e Sp:aniar'd wo;!d have been tufficient to
g:;;i tneir fufrrages, although he had been less
fti-r.gu:fhed for cou-rage and capacirt. 1-e

,had an immediate opportunity of flewing that BooK V.
hr was worthy of their choice, by conduting, I5so.
in pc-rfbn, those fierce attacks which compelled
the Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as
lion as their retreat afforded him any respite
fromn acion, he took measures for preventing
their return to Mexico, with prudence equal
to the spirit which he had displayed in driving
them out of it. As from the vicinity of Tlalf
c.ila, he could not be unacquainted with the
motions and intentions of Cortes, he observed
the storm that was gathering, and began early
to provide againi: it. I-e repaired what the
Spaniards had ruined in the city, and strength-
ened it with such new fortifications as the skill
of his subjects was capable of ereting. Betide
filling his magazines with the usual weapons of
war, he gave directions to make long spears
headed with the swords and daggers taken from
the Spaniards, in order to annoy the cavalry.
He fuinmoned the people in every province of
the empire to take arms against their oppreflors,
and as an encouragement to exert themselves
with vigour, he promised them exemption from
all the taxes which his prcdecefforshadimpofed'.
But what he laboured with the greatest earnest-
ness was, to deprive the Spaniards of the ad-

Curtes Relat. p. 253, E. 254, A. B. Diaz. c. 140.

vantages

BoosK V. vantages which they derived from the friend-
-,~ ship of the Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to per-

fiade that people to renounce all connection
with men who were not only avowed enemies
of the gods whom they worlhipped, but who
would not fail to fubjejt them at last to the
fame yoke, which they were now inconfider-
ately lending their aid to impose upon others.
Theie reprelenrations, no less striking than
well-founded, were urged so forcibly by his
ambassadors, that it required all the address of
Cortes to prevent their making a dangerous
imprefiloo '.

BUT while Qtjetlavaca was arranging his plan

of defence, with a degree of foresight un-
common in an American, his days wyCVe cut
filort by the finall-pox. This dillemper, which
raged at that time in New Spain with fatal ma-
lignitV, wUs unknown in that quarter of the
globe, until it v..s inrroJuced by th Euro-
peans, anid :m.a- Ir r-co aond g tih g-eatei
calamities brou 'ii[ up'on them by tlhir in-
.iuers. I.1 Ii. ical ti;h Melxicans raied to
t:-. t:.trone G !is.:t ozin, n.'pne;v and lon-in-law
-o ,;,':c. i,., a vo'un' m:.1' of iltch hih re-
p:;.:: o. n l r a- i:i;:ics and v.alour, that in this

..c.....
c . .: . ..:.

. .lid. c.

C ;.
.C s

danc :'.s

i.tlngcrous crisis, his countrymen, with one BooK V.
-voic, called him to the supreme command ". S0.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's terri- s521.

Cor.es :d-
tories, he discovered various preparations to v..cesto-

wards

obilruct his progress. But his troops forced Mc.ico.
lIteir way with little difficulty, and took pof-
lieion of Tezeuco, the second city of the em-
pire, situated on the banks of the lake about
twenty miles from Mexico o. Here he deter-
mined to establish his head-quarters, as the
most proper station for launching his brigan-
lines, as well as for making his approaches to
the capital. In order to render his residence
there more secure, he deposed the cazique or
chief, who was at the head of that community,
under pretext of some defect in his title, and
fubfitiuted in his place a person whom a faction
of the nobles pointed out as the right heir of
that dignity. Attached to him by this benefit,
the new cazique and his adherents served the
Spaniards with inviolable fidelity P

As the preparations for conftruting the bri- ;:;-orr .
7antines advanced slowly under the unskilful t..n',,n-

B. Diaz . 130.
Vilia S3nor Thentro .Amcrica.:n, i. If6.

P Cortes Rclat. 256, &c. B. Diaz. c. -. Gormara
Cron. c. jzl. Herrcra, dec. 3. c. I.

hands

Boor V. hands of soldiers and Indians, whom Cortei

, was obliged to employ in affifling three or four

carpenters who happened fortunately to be in
his service, and as he had not yet received the
reinforcement which he expected from Hifpa-
niola, he was not in a condition to turn his arms
directly against the capital. To have attacked,
at this period, a city To populous, so well pre-
pared for defence, and in a situation of such pe-
culiar strength, must have expolfd his troops
to inevitable deflru tion. Three months elapsed
before the materials for the brigantines were
finished, and before he heard any thing with
respect to the success of the officer whom he
had sent to Hispaniola. This, however, was
not a leaton ofinaftion to Cortes. lie attacked
successively several of the towns situated around
the lake; and though all the Mexican power
was exerted to obifruSt his operations, he either
compelled them to submit to the Spanish crown,
or reduced them to ruins. Other towns he en-
deavoured to conciliate by more gentle means,
and though he could not hold any intercourse
with the inhabitants but by the intervention of
interpreters, vet, under all the diiadvantage of
that tedious and imperfeci mode of communi-
cation, he had acquired such thorough know-
ledge of the slate of the country, as well as of
the dispositions of the people, that he con-

duSted

utled his negociations and intrigues with Boo V.
aftonilhing dexterity and success. Most of the 15,.
cities adjacent to Mexico were originally the
capitals of finall independent states; and forne
of them having been but lately annexed to the
IMexican empire, still retained the remembrance
of their ancient liberty, and bore with impa-
tience the rigorous yoke of their new masters.
Cortes having early observed symptoms of their
clil:fti;:ion, availed hmifelf of this knowledge
to gain their confidence and friendship. By
otiL-rin , with confidence, to deliver them from
the odious dominion of the Mexicans, and by
liberal promises of more indulgent treatment,
it thcy would unite with him against their op-
prcirors, he prevailed on the people of several
confidcrable diflrits not only to acknowledge
the king of Caltile as their fbvereign, but to
.fi:po, the Spanilh camp with provisions, and
to ftrcnigthen his army with auxiliary troops.
G.iatiminzin, on the first appearance of defection
among his subjects, exerred hilmfelf with vigour
t.) prevent or to punifhi their revolt; but in
ti:re of his ebforts, the spirit continued to
spread. Tie Spaniards gradually acquired new
allies, and with deep concern he beheld Cortes
armning anginft his empire those very hands
wlhic:i cught to have been active in its defence;

VoL. II. D d and

Boor V. and ready to advance against the capital at the
,, . head of a numerous body of his own fubjetsq

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes

was gradually circumscribing the Mexican
power within such narrow limits that his pro-
ipect of overturning it teemed neither to be
uncertain nor remote, all his schemes were
well nigh defeated, by a conspiracy no less un-
expected than dangerous. The soldiers of
Narvaez had never united perfetly with the
original companions of Cortes, nor did they
enter into his measures with the fame cordial
zeal. Upon every occasion that required any
extraordinary effort of courage or of patience,
their spirits were apt to fink; and now, on a
near v:ew of what they had to encounter, in
attemptirg to reduce a city so inaccessible as
Mexico, and defended by a numerous army,
the re:ulution even of thole among them who
:ad a'.hcrcd to Core;s -when he was dcferted
bv t'i.:' ":.': ..., bezan to fail. Their fears
lc. l t';, : r<o ; :c:i.;i-,n:uiois anid unlbldier-like
,- i' . ;c.n.rng, th' propriety of their
--.n r; i's ;r.i. ;;.::-, an;i i;; iiiprobability of

: C -: _ R '.i:. .:'- -. :. Di'7. c. 137-140.

" -,,, :.3r C'C::. C. i:', -':. ':.:'.Ci utdec. 3. lib. i.
C. !, .

their

their success. From there they proceeded to BOOK V.
cenilre and invectives, and at last began to ,5z1.
deliberate how they might provide for their
own safety, of which they deemed their com-
mander to be totally negligent. Antonio Vil-
lef'gna, a private soldier, but bold, intriguing,
and strongly attached to Velasquez, artfully
fomented this growing spirit of difaffeation.
Ilis quarters became the rendezvous of the
malcontents, where, after many consultations,
they could discover no method of checking
Cortes in his career, but by assassinating him
and his molf considerable officers, and con-
'erring the command upon rome person who
would relinquish his wild plans, and adopt
measures more consistent with the general fe-
curity. Despair inspired them with courage.
'The hour for perpetrating the crime, the per-
sons whom they destined as vitims, the officers
to lucceed them in command, were all named;
and the conspirators signed an association, by
v. hich they bound themielves with most solemn
o.iths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening
bbfore the appointed day, one of Cortes's an-
c:e.nt f!lowers, who had been seduced into the
connl]iracv, touched with compunLtion at the
i:;ninent danger of a man whom he had long
:i en accufoomed to revere, or Itruck with
o-rror at his own treachery, went privately to

Dd 2 his

BooK V his general, and revealed to him all that he

b't- ' kknew. Cortes, though deeply alarmed, dif-

cerned at once what conducE was proper in a
situation so critical. He repaired instantly to
Villefagna's quarters, accompanied by some of
his msof truftv officers. The astonishment and
confusion of the man at this unexpected visit
anticipated the confc.Tion of his guilt. Cortes,
while his attendants seized the traitor, snatched
from his bosom a paper containing the allbcia-
tion, signed by the conspirators. Impatient to
know how far the defection extended, he retired
to read it, and found there names which filled
him with surprise and sorrow. But, aware how
dangerous a ftricn scrutiny might prove at such
a juncture, he confined his judicial inquiries to
Villefagna alone. As the proofs of his guilt
were manifelt, he was condemned after a flort
trial, and next morning he was seen hanging
before the door of the houfc in which he had
lodged. Cortes called his troops together, and
having explained to them the atrocious p-urpouf
of the conspirators, as well as the justice of the
punishment inflicted on Villefagna, he added,
with an appearance of satisfaction, that he was
entirely ignorant with refpeet to a2ll the cir-
cumfIances of this dark tranfacion, as the
traitor, when arrested, had suddenly torn and
iwallowed a paper, which probably contained

an

,;il account of it, and under the severest tor- BOOK V.
itres polieffed 1uch constancy as to conceal ,,.
the names of his accomplices. This artful de-
ciaration restored tranquillity to many a breast
that was throbbing, while he spoke, with con-
iciuulifli; of guilt and dread of detection ; and
Lv this prudent moderation, Cortes had the
advantage of having discovered and of being
able to obfcrve such of his followers as were
tiil:lf tcdl; while they, flattering themselves
that their pasr crime was unknown, endea-
volreld to avert any suspicion of it, by re-
,idoubling their activity and zeal in his service'.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to rumi- His .ingular

nte on vwhat had happened; and as the most f'ebuiPldng,
c';-tt!.il means of preventing the return of a brigantines
Imtinous spirit, he determined to call forth
his troops immediately to acion. Fortunately,
a proper occasion for this occurred without
his steming to court it. He received intelli-

ncncc that the materials for building the bri-

:-antines were at length completely finished,
.ind v;aired only for a body of Spaniards to
conduiict them to Tezeuco. The command of
,':s con:voy, conrifting of two hundred foot

: C)r:C. :.elat. Zj3, C. B. Diaz. c. 145. Herrern,
* *.'. : C. ..

D d ^ fidiers,

BoOK V. soldiers, fifteen horsemen, and two field-pieces,
'""I ' he gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance,

activity, and courage which he manifested on
every occasion, was growing daily in his con-
fidence, and in the estimation of his fellow-
soldiers. The service was no less singular than
important; the beams, the planks, the masts,
the cordage, the fails, the iron-work, and all
the insnite variety of articles requisite for the
construction of thirteen brigantines, were to
be carricd sixty miles over land through a
mountainous country, by people who were
unacquainted with the ministry of domestic
ar.in.ai, or the aid of machines to facilitate
an'y wc-:; of labour. The Tlafcalans furnished
eig;ht toufand Ta;rn;:rs, an inferior order of
men de'inrd for fervlle tasks, to carry the
rrater..ls on their Pfoulders, and appointed
,iccen thouland warriors to accompany and
deftnd them. Sandoval made the disposition
fo.r ;';ci' rogrefs wi:i great propriety, placing
the T,1 , ;;;s in tL.e cc;ntre, one body of war-
r:ors in .:e .:on:, a:,o-:cr in the rear, with
Lonfiderabie oarties to cover rlthe frnks. To
each of the e

he jo;rled lume Sipaniards, not

..ly to a.iT, t !r., in danger, bu;t rt accustom
t:ie;n to reularity an:d !!bordination. A body
:; i::;.!: -r a::s, and il mluch cncuiimncred, ad-

v.i,: ;. i h::,:re ':, L':- ;n ex-.riicnt or;er; and

i.

in tome places, where it was confined by the BooK V.
woods or mountains, the line of march ex- .
tended above fix miles. Parties of Mexicans
frequently appeared hovering around them on
the high grounds; but perceiving no profpe't
of filcccls in attacking an enemy continually
on his guard, and prepared to receive them,
thev did not venture to molest him; and San-
doval had the glory of conducting safely to
Tczeuco a convoy on which all the future
operations of his countrymen depended '.

THIS was followed by another event of no Recie.s a

new rein-

icts moment. Four ships arrived at Vera for.eni;.u
Cruz from Hispaniola, with two hundred fol-
iiers, eighty horses, two battering cannon,
and a considerable supply of ammunition and
arms'. Elevated with observing that all his
preparatory schemes, either for recruiting his
own army, or impairing the force of the ene-
my, had now produced their full effeEt, Cortes,
impatient to begin the siege in form, hastened
the launching of the brigantines. To facili-
tate this, he had employed a vast number of
Indians for two months in deepening the finall
rivulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake,

Cr:c? Rclat. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 140.
Corte Re!at. 259, F. 262, D. Gomara Cron. c. 129.

D d 4 and

Boot V. and in forming it into a canal near two miles in

ieng:h.; and though the Mexicans, aware of
his intentions, as v. ll as of the danger which
threatened them, endeavoured frequently to
interrupt the iabourers, or to burn the brigan-

Th- .r- tines, the work was at last completed . On
Fa 2 .. the twentv-eighth of April, all the Spanish

troops, together with the auxiliary Indians,
were drao n up on the banks of the canal; and
with extraordinary military pomp, heightened
and rendered more solemn by the celebration
ot the molt lacred rites of religion, the brigan-
ti,es we:e laurched. As they fell down the
canal in ordtr, Father Olmedo blessed them,
and gave each its name. Every eve followed
them with wonder and hope, until thesy en-
tered the lake, when they hoifsed their tails,
and bore aw-ay before the wind. A general
!hout of joy was rai!ed; all admiring that bold
inventive genius, which, by means so extra-
ordirnars that their success almolt exceeded
belief, had acquired the command of a fleet,
without the aid of which Mexico would have
continued to fct the Spanioh power and arms
at defiance.

See NOTE XCI. ' B. Diaz. c. i+c.
' Ccr::e Re:at. :66;, C. I'rre-a, dec. -. i. . c.

CORTES determined to attack the city from BOOK V.

three different quarters; from Tezeuco on the 15,-.
east fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft, fport"nfs,.
and from Cuyocan towards the south. Those
rowns were situated on the principal causeways
which led to the capital, and intended for their
defence. He appointed Sandoval to command
in the first, Pedro de Alvarado in the second,
and Chriftoval de Olid in the third; allo:ting
to each a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries,
together with an equal division of Spaniards,
who, by the juntion of the troops from His-
paniola, amounted now to eighty-fix horse-
.men, and eight hundred and eighteen foot
soidiers; of whom a hundred and eighteen
v :rc armed with mufliets or cross-bows. The
train of artillery consisted of three battering-
tannon, and fifteen field-pieces Z. He reserved
for himself, as the station of greatest import-
ance and danger, the condua of the brigan-
tines, each armed with one of his finall cannon,
iani manned with twenty-five Spaniards.

As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards May o

tile polls assigned them, they broke down the
;:.qucduts which the ingenuity of the Mexi-
Ci ii! h!.d erected for conveying water into the

Cortcs Rciat. z66, C.

capital,

Boos v. caDiEal, and by the dif'refs to which this re-

z $ duced the inhabitants, gave a beginning to

the calamities which they were destined to sus-
ser . Alvarado and Olid found the towns of
which they were ordered to take pofleflion de-
ferted by their inhabitants, who had fled for
i.fetv to the capital, where Guatimozin had
collected the chief force of his empire, as there
alone he could hope to make a successful stand
agair.ft the formidable enemies who were ap
proaching to afault him.

i,:3'-! THE first effort of the Mexicans was to de-
,.-:...' ft.rov the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effecs

of whole operations they foresaw and dreaded.
Thout:h the brigantines, after all the labour
and merit of Cortes in forming them, were of
ir.conriderable bulk, rudely conftruc6ed and
manned chiefly wi:h landmen, hardly poffefled
of i1;iil enouii:h to cond.:: r them, they must
have been ob.-ctrS of terror to a people unac-
cuain:ed wi}h any navtiation but that of their
i.;e, .:'J .d3!ii, ofi oi no vesTel larger than a
c.'noC. Ncc:..i., o:'c:'.evcr, urged Guatimo-
zin :', i:azarci the a:;.-.:< andi hoping to supply
b; :ri;.mbrs w har he wanctd in force, he

- '.:: .- R . :z'-, R. :"- . iaz. c. 10o. Herrera,
c' :..-.6
. c. cmbl

~6 ~ assembled

aiTcenbled such a multitude of canoes as covered BOOK V.
the face of the lake. They rowed on boldly lJs
to the charge, while the brigantines, retarded
by a dead calm, could scarcely advance to
meet them. But as the enemy drew near, a Repulsed,
breeze suddenly sprung up; in a moment the
fails were ip'read, the brigantines, with the
urmoft ease, broke through their feeble oppo-
nents, overeft many canoes, and dissipated the
whole armament with such slaughter, as con-
vinced the Mexicans, that the progress of the
luropeans in knowledge and arts rendered
their lupcriority greater on this new element
than they had hitherto found it by land b.

FROnM that time Cortes remained masser of s'ngular

plan of con-

the lake, and the brigantines not only pre- dua&ig heb
iervcd a communication between the Spaniards siege.
iii their different stations, though at confider-
::bie dilsance fiom each other, but were em-
1p!'o'id to cover the causeways on each fide,
iani kcip off the canoes, when they attempted
!o .n;!, v the troops as they advanced towards
t.Uc city. lIe formed the brigantines in three
.;vi;:ions, allotting one to each station, with
;J:l.rs to second the operations of the officer

h C'i:.~, Relat. 267, C. B. Diaz. c. izo. Gomara

:. i.
-. . i;. Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. i.c. 17.

who

Booc V. who commanded there. From all the three
1';21I stations he pushed on the attack againlt the

city with equal vigour; but in a manner
Ib very difecrent from the conduct of sieges
in regular war, that he hiinlclf eeems afraid
it would appear no less improper than fingu-
lar, to persons unacquainted with his situ-
a:ion . Each morning his troops afaulted
the barricades which the enemy had erected
on the caulcwavs, forced their way over the
trenches which they had dug, and through
the canals where the bridges were broken
down, and endeavoured to penetrate into the
heart of the cirt, in hopes of obtaining fbine
dec'lcve advantage, which might force the
enemy to iurrender, and terminate the war at
once; but when the ob.:inate valour of the
Mexicans rendered the efforts of the day in-
effectual, the Spaniards retired in the evening
to their former quarters. Thus their toil and
dang er were, in some measure, continually
renewel; the Mexicans repairing in the night
what the Spaniards had dellroved through the
day, and recovering the polls from which they
had driven then. But neceftity prelcribed
:his fiow and untoward mode of operation.
i' :e numTrber of his troops was ib finall, that

C-r:e: Rel:-. :-., F.

Cortes

Cortes durst not, witr :. handful of men, at- BooS V.
tempt to make a lc.'. ent in a city where he '
might be furrounri.-- and annoyed by such a
multitude of enl.: es. The remembrance of
what he had already fuiffered by the ill-judged
confidence with which he had ventured into
such a dangerous situation, was still frcfh in
his mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with
fatigue, were unable to guard the various ports
which they daily gained; and though their
camp was filled with Indian auxiliaries, they
durlt not devolve this charge upon them, be-
caule they were so little accustomed to dif-
cipline, that no confidence could be placed in
their vigilance. Betides this, Cortes was ex-
tremely solicitous to preserve the city as much
as poflible from being destroyed, both because
he deltincd it to be the capital of his conquelts,
and wilhed that it might remain as a monu-
ment of his glory. From all theie confider-
ations, he adhered obstinately, for a month
after the siege was opened, to the system which
he had adopted. The Mexicans, in their own
defence, dilplayed valour which was hardly in-
fcrior to that with which the Spaniards at-
tacked them. On land, on water, by night
and by day, one furious conflic succeeded to
another. Several Spaniards were killed, more
wounded, and all were ready to fink under the

toils

Boor V. toils of unintennitting service, which were

z'i' Jrendered more intolerable by the injuries of

the season, the periodical rains being now set
in with their usual violence '.

Ende.vons ASTOxISHED and disconcerted with the length
to tke hec
.,r byh and difficulties of the siege, Cortes deter-
flor' mined to make one great efort to get posses-

sion of the city before he relinquished the plan
which he had hitherto followed, and had re-
course to anv other mode of attack. With
this view, he sent inftrucfions to Alvarado and
Sandoval to advance with their divisions to a
general aflaul, and took the command in per-
son of that posted on the cauleway of Cuyocan.
I!: 3. Animated by his pretence, and the expectation

of some decisive cvenr, the Spaniards pulfhed
forward with irrefiltible impetuosity. They
broke through one barricade after another,
forced their way o- er the ditches and c-nals,
and having enterc; the cit-, gained ground
incefiintly, in !pire of the multitude and fero-
ci'v of thcir opponents. Corrcc, though de-
lighrte vwith the rapidiry of his prorre!s, did
not forget that he might flill find it nccifrary
to retreat; and in order to lectre ir, appointed
Julian de Alderctc, a captain of chief note irn

* B. D.^z. c. 1;!.

thc

the troops which he had received from Hifpa- BOOK V.
niola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the '57,
causeway as the main body advanced. That
oficcr, deeming it inglorious to be thus em-
ployed, while his companions were in the heat
of acion and the career of victory, neglected
the important charge committed to him, and
hurried on inconsiderately to mingle with the
combatants. The Mexicans, whose military
attention and skill were daily improving, no
oboner oblerved this, than they carried an ac-
count of it to their monarch.

GUATIMOZrN instantly discerned the confe- Repuirad

quences of the error which the Spaniards had
committed, and, with admirable presence of
mind, prepared to take advantage of it. He
commanded the troops posted in the front to
tlacken their efforts, in order to allure the
S;paniards to push forward, while he dispatched
a large body of cholen warriors through dif-
f-rent streets, some by land, and others by
water, towards the great breach in the cause-
way, which had been left open. On a signaL
which he gave, the priests in the principal
temple itruck the great drum consecrated to
the god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans
hear its doleful solemn found, calculated to
i;;il;ire them with contempt of death and en-

thufiaftic

Boos V. thufiaftic ardour, than they rushed upon the

enemy with frantic rage. The Spaniards, un-
able to resist men urged on no less by religious
fury than hope of success, began to retire, at
first leifurelv, and with a good countenance;
but as the enemy pressed on, and their own
impatience to efaape increaied, the terror and
confusion became ib general, that when they
arrived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards
and Tlafcalans, horf:men and infantry, plunged
in promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed
upon them fiercely from every fide, their light
canoes carrying them through shoals which
the brigantines could not approach. In vain
did Cortes attemp. ro flop and rally his flying
troops; fear rendered them regardiefs of his
entreaties or commands. Finding all his en-
deavours to renew the combat fruitless, his
next care * :s to lave tome of those who had
thrown themcilves into the v. ater; but while
thus employed, with more atten:ion to their

;i:hcnfi- situation than to h;s own, fx Ml:xican cap-
,.,lc'i' tains iiddenly laid h !ld of him, and were

hurrying him of in tri. mph ; and though two
of his ofnccrs rcicued him at the expence of
their own iives, he received flveral dangerous
wounds before he could break loo:e. Above
sixty Spaniards periihed in the rout and what
rendered the hdi:;ler more ai'icti;r-, fJrty of

tlirct:

these fell alive into the hands of an enemy BooK V.
never known to shew mercy to a captive. .

THE approach of nights though it delivered Those who

the dejected Spaniards from the attacks of the lacrificed to
enemly, ushered in, what was hardly less griev- 'wa
ous, the noise of their barbarous triumph, and
of the horrid festival with which they cele-
brated their victory. Every quarter of the
city was illuminated; the great temple flone
with such peculiar Splendour, that the Spa-
niards could plainly fee the people in motion,
and the priests busy in hastening the prepara-
tions for the death of the prisoners. Through
the gloom, they fancied that they discerned
their companions by the whiteness of their
Wkins, as they were ffript naked and compelled
to dance before the image of the god to whom
they were to be offered. They heard the
Ihrieks ofthofe who were sacrificed, and thought
that they could dillinguifh each unhappy
'vi&im, by the well-known found of his voice.
Imagination added to what they really saw or
heard, and augmented its horror. The most
unfeeling melted into tears of compafnion, and

Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz. c. i;z. Gomara
.'ron. c. I3S. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. . . c. o.

V, . if17 e the

Boos V. the stoutest heart trembled at the dreadful

. ipecacle which they beheld'.

Ns-', CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in
so" .f' common with his soldiers, was oppressed with
tc'"'5 the additional load of anxious reflections na-

tural to a general on such an unexpected cala-
mity, could not, like them, relieve his mind
by giving vent to its anguish. He was obliged
to assume an air of tranquillity, in order to
revive the spirit and hopes of his followers.
The juncture, indeed, required an extraordi-
nary exertion of fortitude. The Mexicans,
elated with their victory, sallied out next morn-
ing to attack him in his quarters. But they
did not rely on the efforts of their own arms
alone. They sent the heads of the Spaniards
whom they had sacrificed to the leading men
in the adjacent provinces, and assured them
that the god of war, appeared by the blood
of their invaders,which had been fled so plenti-
fully on his altars, had declared with an audible
voice, that in eight days time those hated
enemies should be finally destroyed, and peace
and prosperity re-established in the empire.

See NOTE XC;.

A PRE-

A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, BOOK V.

and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained ,5.
univerlal credit among a people prone to Crrt'd bdy
superstition. The zeal of the provinces, which Iany of his
had already declared against the Spaniards, aIi".
augmented, and several, which had hitherto
remained inactive, took arms with enthusiastic
ardour to execute the decrees of the gods. The
Indian auxiliaries who had joined Cortes, ac-
customed to venerate the fame deities with the
Mexicans, and to receive the responses of their
prielts with the fame implicit faith, abandoned
the Spaniards as a race of men devoted to cer-
tain deltruction. Even the fidelity of the
Tlafcalans was shaken, and the Spanish troops
were left almost alone in their stations. Cortes
finding that he attempted in vain to dispel the
superstitious fears of his confederates by argu-
ment, took advantage, from the imprudence
of thufol who had frrmed the prophecy, in fix-
ing its acco-nplifi n.ent so near at hand, to
.ive a fliiking d :-.:onflr.tion of its falsity.
}le lulicnded all military operations during
the period tmarked out by the oracle. Under
cvc!r ofi the briganti!les which kept the enemy
t :at allance, his troops lay in safety, and the
f;ital trrill expired without any difaftcr q

s Diaz. c. 13. Gomn ar Cron. c. 138.

E c 2 IHs

Boor V. His allies, aflamed of their own credulity,

A, returned to their station. Other tribes, judg-
,t,;="'"^ ing that the gods who had now deceived the
sl:?. Mexicans, had decreed finally to withdraw

their protection from them, joined his stand-
ard; and such was the levity of a simple people,
moved by every flight imprefflon, that, in a
short time after such a general defection of his
confederates, Cortes saw himself, if we may
believe his own account, at the head of a hun-

2nda!'rtsi dred and fifty thoulind Indians. Even with
! ia:::. s.uch a numerous army, he found it necessary

to adopt a new and more wary system of ope-
ration. Instead of renewing his attempts to
become maiter of the city at once, by such
bold but dangerous efforts of valour as he had
already tried, he made his advances gradually,
and with every poflible precaution against ex-
posing his men to any calamity similar to that
which the s(till bewailed. As the Spaniards
pushed forward, the Indians regularly repaired
the causeways behind them. As soon as they
got pofTefllon of any part of the town, the
houses were instantly levelled with the ground.
Dav by day, the Mexicans, forced to retire as
their enemies gained ground, were hemmed
in mwihin more narrow limits. Guatimozin,
though unable to Crop the career of the enemy,
oen'.n.:', .o de'fen.i his c.apital with obstinate

relblution,

resolution, and disputed every inch of ground. BOOK V.
The Spaniards not only varied their mode of 5,.
attack, but, by orders of Cortes, changed the
weapons with which they fought, They were
again armed with the long Chinantlan spears,
which they had employed with such success
againfi Narvaez, and, by the firm array in
which this enabled them to range themselves,
they repelled, with little danger, the loose
afault of the Mexicans: incredible numbers
of them fell in the confliCts which they re-
newed every day h. While war wafted with-
out, famine began to consume them within the
city. The Spanish brigantines, having the en-
tire command of the lake, rendered it almost
impoflible to receive any supply of provisions
by water. The vast number of his Indian
auxiliaries enabled Cortes to shut up the ave-
nues to the city by land, The Ilores which
Guatimlozin had laid up were exhausted, by
the multitudes which crouded into the capital,
to defend their sovereign and the temples of
their gods. Not only the people, but persons
of the highest rank felt the utmost diftrefles of
want. What they suffered brought on insec-
tious and mortal distempers, the last calamity

Ccortie Relat. p. 275, C. 276, F. B. Diaz. c. 153.

E e 3 that

Boor V. that visits besieged cities, and which filled up
' .. . the measure of their woes .

Coargired BUT, under the pressure of so many and such
cGuaOa. various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained
zim

firm and unfubdued. He rejeted, with scorn,
every overture of peace from Cortes, and dif-
daining the idea offubmitting to the oppressors
of his country, determined not to survive its
J;Y :-7- ruin. The Spaniards continued their progress.

At length all the three divisions penetrated into
the great square in the centre of the city, and
made a secure lodgrrent there. Three-fourths
of the city were now reduced, and laid in ru-
ins. The remaining quarter was so closely
pressed, that it could not long withstand aflail-
ants who attacked it from their new flation
with superior advantage, and more assured ex-
pectation of success. The Mexican nobles,
solicitous to save the life of a monarch whom
they revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to re-
tire from a place where refiance was now
vain, that he might route the more distant pro-
vinces of the empire to arms, and maintain
there a more successful struggle with the pub-
lic enemy. In order to facilitate the execu-

: Cor:es Relat. 276, E. 277, F. B. Diaz. 155.
Gom. Cron. c. a11.

tion

tion of this measure, they endeavoured to BooK'V.
amuse Cortes with overtures of fubmiflion, 1s5.
that, while his attention was employed in ad-
jiuting the articles of pacification, Guatimozin
might escape unperceived. But they made
this attempt upon a leader of greater sagacity
and discernment than to be deceived by their
arts. Cortes fufpeaing their intention, and
aware of what moment it was to defeat it, ap-
pointed Sandoval, the officer on whose vigi-
lance he could molt perfectly rely, to take the
command of the brigantines, with ftri& in-
junctions to watch every motion of the enemy.
Sandoval, attentive to the charge, observing
some large canoes crouded with people rowing
across the lake with extraordinary rapidity, in-
ftantly gave the signal to chace. Garcia Hol-
guin, who commanded the fleetest brigantine,
loon overtook them, and was preparing to fire
on the foremost canoe, which seemed to carry
some person whom all the reft followed and
obeyed. At once the rowers dropt their He ;s taken
oars, and all on board, throwing down their prfo
arms, conjured him with cries and tears to
forbear, as the emperor was there. Holguin
eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin, with
a dignified composure, gave himself up into
his hands, requesting only that no insult might

Ee 4 be

Boo V. be offered to the emprers or his children.

.When conducted to Cortes, he appeared nei-

ther with the fullen fierceness of a barbarian,
nor with the dejection of a supplicant. " I
have done," said he, addressing himself to the
Spanish general, " what became a monarch.
I have defended my people to the last extre-
mity. Nothing now remains but to die. Take
this dagger," laying his hand on one which
Cortes wore, " plant it in my breast, and put
an end to a life which can no longer be of

use .
_"'. I;' As soon as the fate of their sovereign was

known, the resistance of the Mexicans ceased;
and Cortes took possession of that ifmall part
of the capital which yet remained undeftroyed.
Thus terminated the siege of Mexico, the most
memorable event in the conquest of America.
It continued feventy-five days, hardly one of
which passed without some extraordinary effort
of one party in the attack, or of the other in
the defence of a city, on the fate of which
both knew that the fortune of the empire de-
pended. As the frruggle here was more ob-
flinate, it was likewise more equal than any

Cortes Relat. 2-9. B. Diaz. c. 156. Gomara Cron.
c. 142. Hcrrer , dec. 3. lib. ii. c. .

between

between the inhabitants of the Old and New BooKV.
Worlds. The great abilities of Guatimozin, I~, .
the number of his troops, the peculiar fitua-
tion of his capital, so far counterbalanced the
superiority of the Spaniards in arms and difci-
pline, that they must have relinquished the en-
terprife, if they had trusted for success to
themselves alone. But Mexico was overturned
by the jealousy of neighbours who dreaded its
power, and by the revolt of fubjecs impatient
to shake off its yoke. By their effe&tual aid,
Cortes was enabled to accomplish what, with-
out such support, he would hardly have ven-
tured to attempt. How much soever this
account of the reduction of Mexico may de-
tract, on the one hand, from the marvellous
relations of some Spanish writers, by ascribing
that to simple and obvious causes which they
attribute to the romantic valour of their coun-
trymen, it adds, on the other, to the merit and
abilities of Cortes, who, under every difad-
vantage, acquired such an ascendant over un-
known nations, as to render them instruments
towards carrying his schemes into execution '

THE exultation of the Spaniatds, on accom- Smnlnfer of
plilhing this arduous enterprise, was at firlt [d 'l,'

plolnrmrnt
i See NO T E XCIII. of he Sra.

excessive. i'ards.

Boon V. excefIive. But this was quickly damped by
''J the cruel disappointment of those sanguine

hopes, which had animated them amidst so
many hard.hips and dangers. Instead of the
inexhaustible wealth which they expected from
becoming masters of Montezuma's treasures,
and the ornaments of so many temples, their
rapaciousness could collea only an inconfider-
able booty amidst ruins and desolation '. Gua-
timozin, aware of his impending fate, had
ordered what remained of the riches amassed
by his ancestors to be thrown into the lake.
The Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards
were engaged in conflict with the enemy, had
carried off the most valuable part of the spoil.
The fum to be divided among the conquerors
was so finall, that many of them disdained to
accept of the pittance which fell to their share,
and all murmured and exclaimed; some,
against Cortes and his confidents, whom they
suspected of having secretly appropriated to
their own use, a large portion of the riches
which should have been brought into the com-
mon tfock; others, against Guatimozin, whom

The gold and filler, according to Corte;, amounted

c ;'.- to lzc,oao peos, Rela;. :So, A. a fum much infe-
rior to that which the Spaniards had formerly divided in

they

they accused ofobftinacy, in refusing to discover BboK V.
the place where he had hidden his treasure.

ARGUMENTS, entreaties, and promises were Gutimozin

employed in order to sooth them, but with so torturd.
little effelt, that Cortes, from solicitude to
check this growing spirit of discontent, gave
way to a deed which stains the glory of all his
great ations. Without regarding the former
dignity of Guatimozin, or feeling any reverence
for those virtues which he had displayed, he
fubjecled the unhappy monarch, together with
his chief favourite, to torture, in order to force
from them a discovery of the royal treasures,
which it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatimozin bore whatever the refined cruelty
of his tormentors could inflic, with the invin-
cible fortitude of an American warrior. His
fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of
the anguish, turned a dejeted eye towards his
master, which seemed to implore his permission
to reveal all that he knew. But the high-
spirited prince, darting on him a look of au-
thority mingled with scorn, checked his weak-
ness by asking, " Am I now reposing on a bed
of flowers ?" Overawed by the reproach, he
persevered in his dutiful silence, and expired.
Cortes, ashamed of a scene so horrid, rescued

the

Boor V. the royal victim from the hands of his tortur-

ers, and prolonged a life reserved for new in-
dignities and sufferings .
Ai the oo- THE fate of the capital, as both parties had

?rrfsI. foreseen, decided that of the empire. The

provinces submitted one after another to the
conquerors. Small detachments of Spaniards
marching through them without interruption,
penetrated in different quarters to the great
Southern Ocean, which, according to the ideas
of Columbus, they imagined would open a
short as well as easy passage to the East Indies,
and secure to the crown of Castile all the envied

ca-rfotr.. wealth of those fertile regions a; and the active
cnrm.eC- of

, 'O.t- mind of Cones began already to form schemes
"~=' for attempting this important discovery o.

':;h or HE did not know, that during the progress

coim;ted
r ,.g- of his victorious arms in Mexico, the very

scheme, of which he began to form some idea,
had been undertaken and accomplished. As
this is one of the most splendid events in the

= B.Diaz. c. iS7. Gomara Cron. c. 146. HIerrera,
rec. 3. lib. ii. c. S. Torquem. MOn. Ind. i. 574.

Cor:es Relat. -So, D, &c. B. Diaz. c. 157.
Herer.a, cec. . ib. ii. c. ui. Gomara Cron.
c. '-o9.

history

hiiiory of the Spanish discoveries, and has been BOOK V.
productive of effets peculiarly intereiing to s
zhole extensive provinces which Cortes had now
subjected to the crown of Castile, the account
of its rife and progress merits a particular de-
tail.

IERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth,
having served several years in the East Indies,
with difinguifhed valour, under the famous
Albuquerque, demanded the recompence which
he thought due to his services, with the bold-
nels natural to a high-fpirited soldier. But,
fur tome reason which is not explained, both
his general and his sovereign rejected his suit
with a disdainful coldness, that was intolerable
to a man conscious of what he had done, and of
what he deserved. In a transport of resent-
ment, he formally renounced his allegiance to
an ungrateful maiter, and fled to the court of ,.
Castile, in hopes that there his worth would
be more justly estimated. He endeavoured to
recommend himself by proposing to execute a
scheme, the accomplishment of which, he knew,
would wound the monarch against whom he
v:as exasperated in the most tender part. He

1 revived

Boo V.. revived Columbus's original and favourite pro-
,L,. ject, of discovering a passage to India by a

westerly course, and without encroaching on
that portion of the globe which was allotted to
the Porruguefe by the line of demarcation.
He founded his hopes of success on the ideas of
that great navigator, cohfirmed by many ob-
servations, the result of his own naval expe-
rience, as well as that of his countrymen, in
their intercourse with the East. The under-
taking, he acknowledged, was both arduous
and expensive, as it could not be attempted
but with a squadron of considerable force, and
victualled for at leat two years. Fortunately,
he applied to a minifler who was not apt to be
deterred, either by the boldness of a design, or
the expence of carrying it into execution.
Cardinal Ximenes, who at that time directed
the affairs of Spain, discerning at once what an
increase of wealth and glory would accrue to
his country by the success of Magellan's pro-
pofal, listened to it with a mofd favourable ear.
Charles V. on his arrival in his Spanish domi-
nions, entered into the measure with no less
ardour, and orders were issued for equipping
a proper squadron at the public charge, of
which the command was given to Magellan,

3 whom

whom the king honoured with the habit of St. BooK V.
Jago and the title of Captain-General P. 1 x,

Ox, the tenth of August one thousand five His voyage.

hundred and nineteen, Magellan failed from
Seville with five ships, which, according to the
ideas of the age, were deemed to be of confi-
derable force, though the burden of the largest
did not exceed one hundred and twenty tons.
The crews of the whole amounted to two hun-
dred and thirty-four men, among whom were
some of the most skilful pilots in Spain, and
several Portuguese sailors, in whose experience,
as more extensive, Magellan placed frill greater
confidence. After touching at the Canaries,
he flood direcly south towards the equinoctial
line along the coast of America, but was so
long retarded by tedious calms, and spent so
much time in searching every bay and inlet for
that communication with the Southern Ocean
which he wiffied to discover, that he did not
reach the river De Ia Plata till the twelfth of
January. That spacious opening through 12.
which its vast body of water pours into the
Atlantic allured him to enter; but, after fail-

F THerrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 9 lib. iv. c. 9. Go-
narn Hilt, c, 91.

ing

Boor V. ing up it for iome days, he concluded, from
L'-"--' the shallowness of the stream and the frefihnefs

of the water, that the wifhed-for strait was noc
situated there, and continued his course to-
wards the south. On the thirty-firft of March
he arrived in the port of St. Julian, about forty-
eight degrees iuuth of the line, where he re-
bolved to winter. In this uncomfortable fta-
tion he loft one of his squadron, and the
Spaniards fujicred o much from the exceflive
rigour of the cli:mate, that the crews of three
of his fiips, headed bv- their officers, rose in
open mutiny, and infifled on relinquishing the
vifionar' projeft of a delperate adventurer, and
returning directly to Spain. This dangerous
infurrect:on Magellan fiipprerfed, by an effort
of courage no less prompt than intrepid, and
Inrliited exm;-plary punifihment on the ring-
leaders. VWith the remainder of his followers,
overawed but no: reconciled to his flhene, he
continued his voyage towards the south, and at
length discovered, near the tifrv-third degree
of latitude, the nmoiutl of a firair, into which
he entered, notiv.itihanding the murmurs and
remonfirar.ces of the people under his com-
mand. After flaiing twenty davs in that wind-
ing dangerous channel, to which le gave his
own nzn:.e, .:;?d where oi:: of his lkips deserted

him,

iiim, the great Southern Ocean opened to his BooK V.
vietw, and with tears of joy he returned thanks s.
to Heaven for having thus far crowned his en-
deavours with success 9.

BUT he was frill at a greater distance than he

imagined from the object of his wishes. He
failed during three months and twenty days in
an uniformn direction towards the north-west,
without discovering land. In this voyage, the
longelt that had ever been made in the un-
bounded ocean, he furifered incredible diltrefs.
I-Iis !tock of provisions was almost exhausted,
the water became putrid, the men were reduced
to the ihorteft allowance with which it was
:offible to sustain life, and the scurvy, the most
dreadful of all the maladies with which fea-far-
ing people are afflited, began to spread among
the crew. One circumstance alone afforded
then loIme conlblation ; they enjoyed an unin-
terrupted course of fair weather, with such fa-
vourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on
l.iat ocean the name of Pacific, which it still
retains. When reduced to lsch extremity that
tliey mull: have funk under their sufferings,

ilerrera, dec. A. lib iv. c. Io. lib. ix. c. 10, &c.

<;oiara Ii!t. c.* z. Pi^::.ctra Viaggio ap. Ramul'. ii.

. 2. &c.
G\OL. II. F f thev

Bocr V. the.- fell in with a cluster of inall but fertile

',7H. il!ands, which affbrded them refreflments in
Main 6. such abundance, that their health was soon re-

elfablifl-ed. From theft isles, which he called
De ics Lc'drsnes, he proceeded on his voyage,
and toon made a more important discovery of
the iilands now known by the name of the
Phl;ippi;:e. In one of these he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who at-
tacked him with a numerous body of troops
well armed; and while he fought at the head
AY-:: :. of his men with his usual valour, he fell by the

hands of thole barbarians, together with several
of his principal officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other

commanders. After visiting many of the
:naller isles icattered in the ealtern part of the
Indian ocean, they touched at the great illand
N--. s. of Borneo, and at length landed in Tidore, one

of the Moluccas, to the aItonifhment of the
Pcrtuguefe, who could not comprehend how
the Spaniards, by holding a wefrerly course,
had arrived at that fequefiered feat of their
inoft valuable commerce, which they them-
fclves had discovered by failing in an opposite
t..:-e -on. There, and in the adiacent isles,
the Spaniards found a people acquainted with

the

the benefits of extensive trade, and willing to BOOK V.
open an intercourse with a new nation. They ,
took in a cargo of the precious spices, which
are the distinguished production ofthofe ifands;
and with that, as well as with specimens of the
rich commodities yielded by the other coun-
tries which they had visited, the FiBory, which, J"' 1522.
of the two Ihips that remained of the squadron,
was most fit for a long voyage, set fail for Eu-
rope, under the command of Juan Sebastian
del Cano. He followed the course of the Por-
tugciicf by the Cape of Good Hope, and, after
many dilafters and sufferings, he arrived at St.
Lucar on the seventh of September one thou-
Ilm d five hundred and twenty-two, having failed
round the globe in the space of three years and
twenty-eight days q.

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magel-

lan of the Iatisfaition of accomplishing this
great undertaking, his contemporaries, jult to
his nmemory and talents, ascribed to him nor
onl the honour of having formed the plan, but
of h!iing ifurmounted almost every obstacle to
t:l cCmnpletion of it; and in the present age his

Il 'rrcrn, dic. 5. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. i. Go-

mnar.n Con. . c. 9, &. Pigafetta Lp. Ramus . i. p. 361,
& C.

J f 2 name

EcOK V. name is ftiil ranked among the highest in the

roll of eminent and successful navigators. The
naval glory of Spain now eclipsed that of every
other nation; and by a singular felicity she
had the merit, in the courle of a few years,
of diicovering a new continent almost as large
as that p-: of the earth which was formerly
known, a:.d o. alcer:aining by experience the
sorn and extent of the whole terraqueous
globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the

elory of having firit encompassed the earth;
they expected to derive great commercial ad-
vantages from this new and boldest eflort of
their maritime skill. The men of science
among t:hm co.nten ed, that the spice islands,
and fecv rrl of the richlft countries in the East,
were iu situated as to breong of right to the
crown of Castile, in confelquence of the parri-
:ion m.lde by Alexander Vl. The merchants,
Wirho'.;. .attending to this dilcuflion, engaged
eagerly in thri lucr.live and alluring com-
merce, which was now c(.-ened to them. The
Portuzaelsc, alarmeld a. the intrusion of ifch
:.ron;:."ible rivz.!.. r':;).i' rated an-d negoci-
at..l in Euro;r, v.hiie in Asia they obftrucscd

,'-e t:z of :he SpanirJ.ds bv force of arms.

ir<~~ ~Ch :.r'is,

Charles, not sufficiently instructed with refpe& BooK V.
to the importance of this valuable branch of ,-.
commerce, or distracted by the multiplicity of
his schemes and operations, did not afford his
fubjedts proper protection. At last, the low
ifare of his finances, exhausted by the efforts
of his arms in everypart of Europe, together
with the dread of adding a new war with Por-
tugal to those in which he was already engaged,
induced him to make over his claim of the Mo-
luccas to the Portuguefc for three hundred and
fiftv thousand ducats. He reserved, however,
to the crown of Castile the right of reviving its
prtc nions on repayment of that furn, but
other objeL-s engrolfed his attention and that
of his successors and Spain was finally cx-
tluded from a branch of commerce in which
i: was engaging with sanguine expectations of
irof ' .t

'F!lc,-I14 the trade with the Moluccas was

relinauifhed, the voyage of Magellan was fol-
lowed by commercial effets of great moment
in Spain. Philip II. in the year one thousand
live hundred and fixry-four, reduced those

r IHerrcra, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 5, &c. dec. iv. lib. v.
. -, &C.

F f 3 islands

Poor V. islands which he discovered in the Eastern

..-~._ Ocean to fubieEcon, and established fettle-

ments there; between which and the kingdom
of New Spain, a regular intercourfc, the na-
turc of w.hich fh.il be explained in its proper
place, is carr:ie on. I retirn nuw to the
tran:'a,;i3ns in New SFain.
A.. r-: .o AT the time ti:at Cortes was acquiring such

so'' i
;:la terrircr:cs ior his native country, and pre-

paring the way for i-ture conquests, it was his
singular fate not only to be destitute of any
conmmi,;on or authority from the sovereign
whom he w as irvin-g with such successful zeal,
but to be regarded as an undutiful and fedi-
tiou> iubject. B\ the influence of Fonseca,
biflop of Burgos, his conducr in assuming the
government of New Spain was declared to be
an irrcgular ulurpation, in contempt of the
royal a 'rhoritv; and Chriftoval de Tapia re-
ceived a conmilTion, inpowering him to -u-
rer.eLe Corres, to seize his person, to confif-
cate his ef.*cts, to make a firi:A scrutiny into
his proccedings, .n d to tranfinit the result of
all the inquirics c.iricd on in New Spain to the
cou.c:il of t: e Jr d ;, of which the bishop of
Bu:rgos s as preiident. A few weeks after the
re'j.:cn of Icxico, TaFpa landed at Vera

,7jZ~~ Cruz

Cruz with the royal mandate to firip its con- BooK V.
queror of his power, and to treat him as a cri-
ninal. But Fonseca had chosen a very im-
proper instrument to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor
the talents that suited the high command to
which he was appointed. Cortes, while he which he
publickly expressed the most refpecful vene- 'l"de5.
ration for the emperor's authority, secretly took
measures to defeat the effet of his commission;
and having involved Tapia and his followers
in a multiplicity of negociations and confer-
ences, in which he sometimes had recourse to
threats, but more frequently employed bribes
and promises, he at length prevailed on that
weak man to abandon a province which he was
unworthy of governing'.

BUT notwithstanding the fortunate dexte- Apics

rity with which he had eluded this danger, i'.. ' ,h'
Cortes was so sensible of the precarious tenure My' ,;
by which he held his power, that he dispatched
deputies to Spain, with a pompous account of
the success of his arms, with farther specimens
of the produftions of the country, and with

' Ilcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. i-. c. i. Cort.
Relat. 2SI, E . B.Diaz. c. I58.

F f 4 rich

BoOK V. rich presents to the emperor, as the earnest of

iuture contributions from his new conquest;
requefling, in recompence for all his services,
the approbation of his proceedings, and that
he might be entrusted with the government of
those territories, which his conduci, and the
valour of his followers, had added to the crown
of Castile. The juncture in which his deputies
reached the court was favourable. The in-
ternal commotions in Spain, which had dif-
quieted the beginning of Charles's reign, were
jufR appeased . The ministers had leisure to
turn their attention towards foreign affairs.
The account of Corres's victories filled his
countr)'men with admiration. The extent and
value of his conquests became the object of
v_';l a-. interCt'sing hopes. Whatever stain he
;:,;:r h;lave contracted, by the irregularity of
the steps which he took in order to attain
S-ower, wvas 1o fully erfaced by the fplcndor and
-e!it: of the great actions which this had en-
a;ob: i-in to peribrm, that every heart re-
v-o':d. at the thought of inflicting any censure
on a man, whose services entitled him to the
higihci: marks of diifinócion. The public voice
cd-ciared war;l- in favour of his pretensions,

H:. of Charles V. vol. ii. b. iii.

and

.nd Charles arriving in Spain about this time, BooK V.
adopted the sentiments of his fubje.ts with a 5~2.
youthful ardour. Notwithstanding the claims and isap-
of Velasquez, and the partial representations Captain.
of the bishop of Burgos, the emperor appointed Goe'er.. ,n
Cortes captain general and governor of New NewSpain.
Spain, judging that no person was so capable
of maintaining the royal authority, or of efta-
blifhling good order both among his Spanifi
and Indian fubjetes, as the commander whom
the former would willingly obey, and the lat-
ter had long been accustomed to fear and to
refpet ".

EVEN before his jurisdiction received this Hiis rcieiw,

legal fanEion, Cortes ventured to exercise all ann ....'-
thc powers of a governor, and, by various ar-
rangements, endeavoured to render his con-
quell a secure and beneficial acquisition to his
country. He determined to establish the feat
of government in its ancient station, and to
raise Mexico again from its ruins; and having
conceived high ideas concerning the future
grandeur of the state of which he was laying
the foundation, he began to rebuild its capital

x Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Goniara Cron. c. 164,
165. B. Diaz. 167, 168.

on

BooK V. on a plan which hath gradually formed the
-.--w most magnificent city in the New World. At

the fame time, he employed skilful persons to
search for mines in different parts of the coun-
try, and opened some which were found to be
richer than any which the Spaniards had hither-
to discovered in America. He detached his
principal officers into the remote provinces,
and encouraged them to fettle there, not only
by bestowing upon them large tracts of land,
but by granting them the fame dominion over
the Indians, and the fame right to their ser-
vice, which the Spaniards had assumed in the
islands.

I;,,. IT was not, however, without difficulty that
-os cli`' cthe Mexican empire could be entirely reduced
..c.i;r into the form of a Spanish colony. Enraged
ni-ds. ' and rendered desperate by oppreflion, the na-

tives often forgot the superiority of their ene-
mies, and ran to arms in defence of their li-
berties. In every contest, however, the Eu-
ropean valour and discipline prevailed. But,
fatally for the honour of their country, the Spa-
niards sullied the glory redounding from these
repeated v:ctories by their mode of treating
the vanquished people. After taking Guati-
mozin, and becoming masters of his capital,

they

they supposed that the king of Castile entered BooK V.
on possession of all the rights of the captive Z*
monarch, and asse6ted to confider every effort
of the Mexicans to assert their own independ-
ence, as the rebellion of vassals against their
sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves against their
master. Under the fanaion of those ill-founded
maxims, they violated every right that fhpuld
be held sacred between hostile nations. After
each infurreftion, they reduced the common
people in the provinces which they subdued,
to the most humiliating of all conditions, that
of personal servitude. Their chiefs, supposed
to be more criminal, were punished with greater
severity, and put to death in the most ignoini-
nious or the most excruciating mode, that the
insolence or the cruelty of their conquerors
could dcvife. In almost every diftri& of the
Mexican empire, the progress of the Spanish
arms is marked with blood, and with deeds so'
atrocious as disgrace the enterprising valour
that conduted them to success. In the country
of Panuco, sixty caziques, or leaders, and four
hundred nobles were burnt at one time. Nor
was this flocking barbarity perpetrated in any
sudden sally of rage, or by a commander of infe-
rior note. It was the aa of Sandoval, anofficer

whose

Boor V. whose name is entitled to the second rank in

-2 the annals of New Spain, executed after a so-

lemn consultation with Cortes; and to com-
plete the horror of the icene, the children and
relations of the wretched victims were assem-
bled, and compelled to be fpecators of their
dying agonies Y. It seems hardly possible to
exceed in horror this dreadful example of fe-
verity; but it was followed by another, which
affected the Mexicans still more sensibly, as it
gave them a most feeling proof of their own
degradation, and of the finall regard which
their haughty masters retained for the ancient
dignity and splendour of their fiate. On a
llight suspicion, confirmed by very imperfect
evidence, that Guatimozin had formed a
scheme to Ihake off the yoke, and to excite his
former fubjets to take arms, Cortes, without
the formality of a trial, ordered the unhappy
monarch, together with the caziques of Tezeu-
co and Tacuba, the two persons of greatest
emi:nence in the empire, to be hanged; and the
Mexicans, with astonishment and horror, be-
held this dihgraceful punilhment infiicRed upon
perrons, to whom they were accustomed to look
up with reverence, hardly inferior to that which

Cortes RE-:. 21, C. Gomara Cron. c. 1;5.

they

they -paid to the gods themselves . The ex- BooK V.
ample of Cortes and his principal officers en- .
couraged and justified persons of subordinate
rank to venture upon committing greater ex-
ceffcs. Nuno de Guzman, in particular, stained
an illustrious name by deeds of peculiar enor-
mity and rigour, in various expeditions which
Ihe condurcted'.

O;-E circumstance, however, saved the Mex- Sirs ohict

o£ indultry
icans t;omn farther consumption, perhaps from ..nnng the

conquerors.

one as complete as that which had depopu-
lated the ifands. The firfl conquerors, did
not attempt to search for the precious metals
in the bowels of the earth. They were neither
frficientlyv wealthy to carry on the expensive
works, which are requisite for opening those
'cc(pi rcccefcs where Nature has concealed the
veins of .onld and silver, nor sufficiently ifilful
ro p rirln the ingenious operations by which
t!ey are separated from their refpetive ores.
'The', were satisfied with the more finple me-
·h )!, pra'tifed by the Indians, of washing the
c.i rlh carried down rivers and torrents from the

m' (;nar Cron. . -. . . c.

B. Di c. . Herrera,
. '. . li. \v.ii. c. 9. Se. NOTE XCI`.'.

i- Icircr.a, dec. 4 anld pnafini.

nV~een'oos.}^*le

Boor V. mountains, and collecting the grains of native

5-,.. metal deiofired there. The rich mines of

New Spain, w.hich have poured forch their
treasures with ilch profusion on every quarter
155j &c. of the globe, were not discovered for several

xvers a.tcr the conquest . By that time, a
more orderly govenrment and police were in-
troduced into lthe colony ; experience, derived
from former errors, had fuggelted many use-
ful and humane regulations for the protection
and prelcrva;:on of the Indians; and though
it then became necelTary to increale i.he number
of those employed in the mines, and they were
engaged in a species of labour more pernicious
to the human constitution, they fufrtred less
hardship or diminution than from the ill-judged,
but less extensive, `chemes of the firlt con-

querors.
'Thr. THIS extraordi-.ar.v ror:a;:v among the In-

dians dilappoinirc thie hopes of their new
maiters. Few fItem to have de.-i.vd an con-
fiderable wcalth from the;r ill-conducced re-
searches. Accor.dng to the ui::al fate of firfi
settlers in new. colo.:s, ;: was ther lot to en-
counter danger and to :.;r:ggie w::h cinFculties;

b t' --:;. ' . s
'_2. S. 2.ib.x . c. :.

the

the fruits of their viEtories and toils were re- BooK V.
fcrved for times of tranquillity, and reaped by -;,
successors of greater industry, but of inferior
merit. The early historians of America abound
with accounts of the sufferings and of the po-
verty of its conquerors'. In New Spain,
their condition was rendered more grievous by
a peculiar arrangement. When Charles V. ad-
vanced Cortes to the government of that coun-
try, he, at the fame time, appointed certain
commillioners to receive and administer the
royal revenue there, with independent jurif-
dition d. These men, chosen from inferior
stations in various departments of public bufl-
ness at Madrid, were so much elevated with
their promotion, that they thought they were
called to ac a part of the first consequence.
But being accustomed to the minute forma-
lities of office, and having contra&ced the nar-
row ideas suited to the sphere in which they
had hitherto moved, they were astonished, on
arriving in Mexico, at the high authority which 1514.
Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that
the mode of adminiflration, in a country re-
cently subdued and fettled, must be different

Cortes Relat. 283, F. B. Diaz. c. 209.
IIerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3.

from

Boor V. from what took place in one where tranquillity

:~.T and regular government had been long efta-

blilhed. In their letters, they represented
Cortes as an ambitious tyrant, who having
usurped a jurifdicion superior to law, aspired at
independence, and by his exorbitant wealth
and extensive influence, might accomplish those
difioval schemes which he apparently medi-
tated'. Thefc insinuations made such deep
impreffon upon the Spanish ministers, most of
whom had been formed to business under the
jealous and rigid administration of Ferdinand,
that unmindful of all Cortes's past services,
and regardless of what he was then suffering in
conducting that extraordinary expedition, in
which he advanced from the lake of Mexico to
the western extremities of Honduras ', they in-
fuled the lame f1ulicions into the mind of their
nmarer, and prevailed on him to order a so.
lemn inquest to be made into his conduct, with
powers to the liceciatc Ponce de Leon, en-
trusted with th:.t commilffon, to seize his per-
son, if he ihoulld fend that expedient, and fend
him priloncr to Spain.

i ere . ec. 3- ! . v. c. 1,.
Sec NOTE XCV.

ii.rr-era, C ;. :. ' l C. 1i.
": . c. n 15.

T1 l

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few BOOK V.

days after his arrival in New Spain, prevented IS,
the execution of this commission. But as the cor"""-

turns to

object of his appointment was known, the spain.
mind of Cortes was deeply wounded with
this unexpeced return for services which far
exceeded whatever any fubje& of Spain had
rendered to his sovereign. He endeavoured,
however, to maintain his station, and to recover
the confidence of the court. But every per-
son in office, who had arrived from Spain since
the conquest, was a spy upon his conduct, and
with malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable
representation of all his actions. The appre-
hcnfions of Charles and his ministers increased.
A new commifiion of inquiry was issued, with 152S:
more extensive powers, and various precautions
were taken in order to prevent or to punish
him, if he should be so presumptuous as to at-
tempt what was inconsistent with the fidelity of
a subject h. Cortes beheld the approaching
crisis of his fortune with all the violent emo-
tions natural to a haughty mind, conscious of
high desert, and receiving unworthy treatment.
But though some of his desperate followers
urged him to afeert his own rights againif his

1 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. i.

lib. iv. c. 9, 1o. B. Diaz. c. 172. 196. Gomara Chron.
c. 166.

VOL. II. G g ungrateful

BooK V. ungrateful country, and with a bold hand to
' 5, seize that power which the courtiers meanly

accused him of coveting', he retained such
felf-command, or was actuated with such fen-
timents of loyalty, as to reject their dangerous
counsels, and to chufe the only course in which
he could secure his own dignity, without de-
parting from his duty. He resolved not to
expose himself to the ignominy of a trial, in
that country which had been the scene of his
triumphs j but without waiting for the arrival
of his judges, to repair directly to Castile, and
commit himself and his cause to thejuftice and
generosity of his sovereign k.
':s rar. CORTES appeared in his native country with

the splendour that suited the conqueror of a
mighty kingdom. He brought with him a
great part of his wealth, many jewels and
ornaments of great value, feveral'curious pro-
ductions of the country ', and was attended by
folne Mexicns of the firt rank, as well as
by the mo": considerable of his own officers.
His arrival in S;an removed at once every
suspicion and fear that had been entertained
with refpe& to his intentions. The emperor,

B. Di.z. c. ?i. k Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 8.
See NOTE XCV'I.

3 having

having now nothing to apprehend from the BooK V.
designs of Cortes, received him like a person ,s9.
whom confcioufilefs of his own innocence had
brought into the presence of his master, and
who was intitled by the eminence of his ser-
vices, to the highest marks of diftinftion and
refpecr. The order of St. Jago, the title of
Marquis'del Valle de Guaxaca, the grant of a
vast territory in New Spain, were successively
bestowed upon him; and as his manners were
correct and elegant, although he had passed
the greater part of his life among rough ad-
venturers, the emperor admitted him to the
fame familiar intercourse with himself, that was
enjoyed by noblemen of the first rank .

BUT, amidst those external proofs of re- sttrtmetit

gard, symptoms of remaining distrust appeared. ofthe go.
I hough, Cortes earnestly solicited to be rein- New Spaln.
stated in the government of New Spain,
Charles, too sagacious to commit such an im-
portant charge to a man whom he had once
lufpecded, peremptorily refused to invest him
a;ain with powers which he might find it im-
poFnble to controul. Cortes, though dignified
with new titles, returned to Mexico with x53o,

I Icrrr.n, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i. lib. vi. c. 4. B. Diaz.
r. ] -.'. (;om. Chron. c. gl .

G g diminified

Boor V. diminished authority. The military depart-
155:, menr, with powers to attempt new difcove-

ries, was left in his hands; but the supreme
direction of civil affairs was placed in a board
called The Audience of New Spain. At a sub-
sequent period, when, upon the increase of the
colonv, the exertion of authority more united
and extensive became necessary, Antonio de
Mendoza, a nobleman of high rank, was sent
thither as I-icero', to take the government into
his hands.

I.-is di-vision of power in New Spain
c.- . .;f provej, as was unavoidable, the iource of

pevir'tual dilTenrion, which embittered the life
of Cortes, and thwarted all his li-hemcs. As

ihe .a now nio oppor:unity to dipl.ay his

ar:ve utients but in attempting newv diicove-
ries, :,c foimed various fchc;rcs for that pur-
po.c5, ial of which bear impreiiiuns of a genius
that dcirighted in v.':lt v.'as bold and fIilndid.
He e..rl; entertah;cd an idea, that, either by
i;'-:r.:;,- i .; '

.L; h thic uir otf F orida aiong the

.a;t' co..it of North tAmeric; , ili:e litili-t ould
be i;.nd tiat coninriica:cd vwir th e wcitern
,* -._5' ; or tiit, bv cxa;i.:ning the i.'}lil.'s of
ID -:y-', :nrre r'.i ; e would b, d.i'ov(r- be-
twec;: . e N.orth and So:th Seas '. 1Bt having

C ... Ra ... .been. B.

been

been disappointed in his expectations with re- Boot V.
I)ec:- to both, he now confined his views to 5le.
such voyages of discovery as he could make
from the ports of New Spain in the South Sea.
There he fitted out fucceflively several frmall
squadrons, which either perished in the at-
tempt, or returned without making any disco-
very of moment. Cortes, weary of entrusting
the co;ndut of his operations to others, took 1ss6.
the command of a new armament in person,
and, after enduring incredible hardships, and
encountering dangers of every species, he dif-
covered the large peninsula of California, and
surveyed the greater part of the gulf which
separates it from New Spain. The discovery
of a country of such extent would have re-
flected credit on a common adventurer; but it
could add little new honour to the name of
Cortes, and was far from satisfying the fan-
guine expectations which he had formed°.
Disgusted with ill success, to which he had not
been accustomed, and weary of contesting with
adversaries to whom he confidered it as a dif-
grace to be opposed, he once more fought for 1540.
redress in his native country,

° Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9, 1o. dec. 8. lib. vi.

c. 14. Venegas Hilt. of Californ. i. Iz5. Lorenzana
[liti . p. 22, &c.

G g 3 BUT

Boos V. BUT his reception there was very different

,;,~ fro. that which gratitude, and even decency,
.. ;. ' ought to have secured for him. The merit of

his ancient exploits was already, in a great mea-
sure, forgotten, or eclipsed by the fame of re-
cent and more valuable conquerls in another
quarter of America. No service of moment
w as now expected from a man of declining
years, and who began to be unfortunate. The
e:.pcror behaved to him with cold civility; his
m.nilters treated him, sometimes with neglet,
iometimes with insolence. Hlis grievances re-
ceived no rcdrefs; his claims were urged with-
out efTcr;; and after several years spent in fruit-
Icis application to minilters and judges, an
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to
a man of high Ivirit, who had moved in a sphere
where he was more accuromied to command
t'in to Iobicir, Cortes ended his days on the
second of December one thousand five hundred
and forty-fieven, in the fixtv-fecond year of his
age. His fate was the fame with that of all the
pcrfor.s iwho diilinguifhed t4emielves in the
difcoveD., or conquest of the New World. En-
vied by his contemporaries, and ill requited by
the co::rt which he served, he has been ad-
n-i r-.l and cclcr.acd by succeeding ages.

>'hich !:-as sor'ned the molt just eflimate of his
iharacrtcr, an impartial consideration of his
--ac;'. ...- e, -

-...
Y

.. ~... . .. ......e.

N 0 T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

Gg4

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 4.
T HE height of the moRs elevated point in the

Pyrenees is, according to M. Caflini, fix thou-

find fix hundred and forty-fix feet. The height of
the mountain Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten
thousand one hundred and ten feet. The height of
the Pike of Teneriffe, according to the measurement
cf P. Feuill:, is thirteen thousand one hundred and
feventy-eight feet. The height of Chimborazzo, the
most elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand
t.vo hundred and eighty feet. Voyage de D. Juan
'lloa, Obfcrvations Astron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p.
114. The line of congelation on Chimborazzo, or
that part of the mountain which is covered perpetually
with snow, is no less than two thousand four hundred
feet from its summit. Prevot. Hilt. Gener. des Voy-
agcs, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 4.
AS a particular description makes a fironger impref-

sion than general assertions, I hall give one of Rio
.'- a Plata by an eye-witness, P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe

jesuit,

jesuit, landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749, who thus re-
presents what he felt when such new objects were first
presented to his view. " WVhile I resided in Europe,
and read in books of history or geography that the
mouth of the river De la Plata was an hundred and
fifty miles in breadth, I confid.red it as an exaggera-
tion, because in this hemisphere we have no example
of such vast rivers. WVhen I approached its mouth, I
had the most vehement desire to ascertain the truth
with my own eyes; and I have found the matter to
be exactly as it was represented. This I deduce par-
ticularly from one circumstance: When we took our
departure from hMonte-Video, a fort situated more
than a hundred miles from the mouth of the river, and
where its breadth is considerably diminished, we failed
a complete day before we dilcovered the land on the
opposite bank of the river; and when we were in the
middle of the channel, we could nor difeern land on
either fide, and saw nothing but the sky and water, as
if we had been in some great ocean. Indeed, we
hould have taken it to be sea, if the fresh water of
the river, which was turbid like the Po, had not satis-
fled us that it was a river. Moreover, at Buenos
Ayres, another hundred miles up the river, and where
it is frill much narrower, it is not only impossible to
discern the opposite coast, which is indeed very low
and flat; but one cannot perceive the houses or the
tops of the fteepies in the Portuguese settlement at
Co!onia on the other fide of the river." Lettera pri-
ma, pub!ifhed by Muratori, 11 Chriftianefimo Felice,
c, i. ,. 25-.

NOTE

NOTE III. p. 8.
N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and

Cana:d., are the countries which lie in the fame

parallel of latitude with the kingdom of France; and
in: every parr of there the water of the rivers is frozen
during linter to the thickness of several feet; the
carth is covered with snow as deep; almost all the
birds fly, during that season, from a climate where
they cCld not live. The country of the Efkimaux,
part cf Labrador, and the countries on the south of
Iludfim's Bay, are in the fame parallel with Great
Britain; and yet in all there the cold is so intense, that
even the industry of Europeans has not attempted cul-
tivation.

NOTE IV. p. ir.
ACOSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I

know, who endeavoured to account for the dif-

ferent degrees of heat in the old and new continents,
by the agency of the winds which blow in each. Hist.
Moral. &c. lib. ii. & iii. M. de Buffon adopts this
theory, and has not only improved it by new obferva-
tions, but has employed his amazing powers of de-
fcriptive eloquence in embellishing and placing it in
the mot striking light. Some remarks may be added,
which tend to illustrate more fully a dotrine of much
importance in every inquiry concerning the tempera-
ture of various climates.

WHEN

WHEN a cold wind blows over land, it must in its

paflage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means
of this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it
continue to blow in the fame direction, it will come,
by degrees, to pats over a surface already cooled, and
will susser no longer any abatement of its own keen-
ness. Thus, as it advances over a large tract of land,
it brings on a!! the severity of intense frost.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

sea; the superficial water mutt be immediately cooled
to a certain degree, and the wind proportionally
warmed. But the superficial and colder water be-
coming specifically hea-icr than the warmer water be-
low it, descends ;what is warmer supplies its place,
w-hic, as i: co-:e: t:, ic cooled in its turn, continues
to warm the air which rp.Tr over it, or to diminlfh its
c-.i. Th;' c.z ze c: the superficial water, and fuc-
c::ise afcen; of :i!i:t h;:h is warmer, and consequent
:cc.cise aba-m:rn-tn cf co'dnefs in the air, is aided by
::e agitation caused in the sea by the mechanical
a*'on of the wind, and alto by the motion of the
:'dCs. Th:, w.11 go rn, and the rigour of the wind
wi' cc.,:in'.; to di'inifh until the whole water is to
fr- coo!ed, that the water on the surface is no longer
removed frem the acsion of the wind, fafl enough to
h.inrer it from lein ar;efted by froll. Whenever the
fittace freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the
a:t:r from bf't.-, a;;d it g£ecs on with undiminished

FR o

FiROM those principles may be explained the severity

of winter frosts in extensive continents; their mild-
ncfs in small islands; and the superior rigour of winter
in those parts of North America with which we are
belt acquainted. In the north-west parts of Europe,
the severity of winter is mitigated by the weft winds,
which usually blow in the months of November, De-
cember, and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which must therefore cease
to abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind
blowing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder
water from below, and thus is continually losing
somewhat of its own heat.

BUT the great power of the Cea to mitigate the heat

of the wind or air passing over it, proceeds from the
following circumstance, that on account of the tranf-
parency of the sea, its surface cannot be heated to a
great degree by the fun's rays; whereas the ground,
fubjeced to their influence, very soon acquires great
heat. When, therefore, the wind blows over a torrid
continent, it is soon raised to a heat almost intolerable;
but during its paflage over an cxtenfive ocean, it is
gradually cooled ; so that on its arrival at the farthelr
shore, it is again fit for respiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats

of large continents in the torrid zone; for the mild
climate of islands in the fame latitude; and for the
superior warmth in summer which large continents,

5 situated

situated in the temperate or colder zones of the
earth, enjoy, when compared with that of islands.
The heat of a climate depends not only dpon the im-
mediate effct of the fun's rays, but on their continued
operation, on the effec which they have formerly
produced, and which remains for rome time in the
ground. This is the reason why the day is warmefl
about two in the afternoon, the summer warmest
about the middle of July, and the winter coldtfe about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the

sun-beams from heating the ground, are a great cause
of the temperate climate in the equatorial parts. The
ground, not being heated, cannot heat the air; and
the leaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
ground, have not a mats of matter sufficient to absorb
heat enough for this purpose. Besides, it is a known
fact, that the vegetative power of a plant occasions a
perspiration from the leaves in proportion to the heat
to which they are exposed; and, from the nature of
evaporation, this perspiration produces a cold in the
leaf proportional to the perspiration. Thus the effect
of the leaf in heating the air in contact with it, is pro-
digioufly diminished. For those obfervazions, which
throw much additional light on this curious fuhjer, I
am indebted to my insenious friend, Mr. Robifon,
profeffir of natural philosophy in the university of
Edinburgh.

NOTE

NOTE V. p. I2.

H E climate of Brasil has been described by two
eminent naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who ob-

served it with a philosophical accuracy, for which we
search in vain in the accounts of many other provinces
in America. Both represent it as temperate and mild,
when compared with the climate of Africa. They
ascribe this chiefly to the refreshing wind which blows
continually from the sea. The air is not only cool,
but chilly through the night, in so much that the na-
tives kindle fires every evening in their huts. Pifo de
Mcdicina Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. i, &c. Margravius
Hiitor. Rerum Natural. Brafilie, lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264.
Nieuhoff; who resided long in Brasil, confirms their
dcecription. Churchill's Colleclion, vol. ii. p. 26.
Gumilla, who was a missionary many years among the
Indians, upon the river Orinoco, gives a similar de-
scription of the temperature of the climate there.
I-It. de l'Orenoquc, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a
very considerable degree of cold in the countries on
the banks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56.
M. Bier, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne,
gives a similar account of the temperature of that cli-
mate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage de
1. France, Equinox, p. 330. Nothing can be more
different from there descriptions than that of the burn-
inr heat of the African coast given by M. Adanfon.
V:-'yic to Senegal, pafinm.

NOTE

NOTE VI. p. 13.
T W 0 French frigates were sent upon a vboyge'of

discovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44.

south, they began to feel a considerable degree of cold.
In latitude 48, they met with islands of floating
ice. Hifloire des Navigations aux Terres Australes,
tom. ii. 256, &c. Dr. Halley fell in with ice in lati-
tude 59". Id. tom. i. p. 47. Commodore Byron,
when on the coast of Patagonia, latitude 50° 33'south,
on the fifteenth of December, which is midsummer in
that part of the globe, the twenty-firft of December
being the longest day there, compares the climate to
that of England in the middle of winter. Voyages by
Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks having landed on
Terra del Fuego in the Bay of Good Success, latitude
55', on the sixteenth of January, which corresponds
to the month of July in our hemisphere, two of his
attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and
211 the party were in the most imminent danger of
perishing. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of
AMarch, corresponding to September in our hemisphere,
winter was set in with rigour, and the mountains were
covered with snow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cook, in his
voyage towards the South pole, furnishes new and
striking infiances of the extraordinary predominance of
cold in this region of- the globe. " Who would have
thought (fays he) that an island, of no greater extent
than seventy leagues in circuit, situated between the lati-
tude of 54: and 55, should in the very height of Sum-
mer be, in a manner, wholly covered, many fathoms

deep,

deep, with frozen snow; but more especially the
S. NV. coast ? The very summits of the lofty moun-
tains were cased with snow and ice; but the quantity
that lay in the valleys is incredible; and at the bottom
of the bays, the coast was terminated by a wall of
ice of considerable height." Vol. ii. p. 217.

IN rome places of the ancient continent, an extraor-

dinary degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mr.
Bogle, in his embassy to the court of the Delai Lama,
pased the winter of the year 1774 at Chamnanning,
in latitude 31° 39' N. He often found the thermo-
meter in his room twenty-nine degrees under the freez-
ing point by Fahrenheit's scale; and in the middle
of April the Randing waters were all frozen, and
heavy ihowers of snow frequently fell. The extra-
ordinary elevation of the country seems to be the
cause of this excessive cold. In travelling from In-
doftan to Thibet, the ascent to the summit of the
Boutan Mountains is very great, but the descent on
the other fide is not in equal proportion. The king-
dom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely bare
and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart,
read in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary
cold in low latitudes in America cannot be accounted
for by the fame cause. Those regions are not remark-
able for elevation. Some of them are countries de-
pressed and level,

TnE most obvious and probable cause of the fu-

perior degree of cold, towards the southern extremity
of America, seems to be the form of the continent

VOL. II. H h there.

there. Its breadth gradually decreases as it stretches
from St. Antoniu southwards, and from the bay of
St. Julian to the Straits of Magellan its dimensions
are much contraced. On the east and weft fides,
it is wafred by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. From
itb fojthein point it is probable that an open sea ex-
tends to th- An:arctic pole. In whichever of these
directions the wind blows, it is cooled before it ap-
proaches the Mael!ianic regions, by pafling over a
vast bo.v of water, nor it the land there of such ex-
tent that it can recover any considerable degree of heat
in its progrecs over it. These circumflances concur
in rendering the tempcrature of the air in this diftria
of A ner:ca, more similar to that of an insular, than
to th;a of a continental climate, and hinder it from
acquiring the flame degree of summer heat, with
places in Europe and Asia, in a corresponding north-
ern latitude. The nrrth wind is the only one that
reaches this part of AXmeica, after blowing over a
reat continent. But from an attentive survey of its
spoition, t'hi will be found to have a tendency, ra-
ther to dimiui.lh than augment the degree of heat.
'Ihe fou:hern cx;:emity of America is properly the
termination oi the immense ridge of the Andes, which
ilrctches neailv in a direc line from north to south,
thr;u-h the whole cxtent of the continent. The
mollt lu':t- re:ons in Soutii-America, Guiana, Brasil,
P-r. ua., _ni Tu.curma, lie ni-y degrees to the east

:: I - ic - ;i 'r-'iiu ic level country of

lc.u, v.::ch c;;ijo i the tropical heats, is situated con-
:.derwioy tu the wvtr of them. 'lhe north wind then,
iao.u- it b'o.vs o,-cr i;iJ, does not bring to, the

.uutherri

foutlern extremity of America, an increase of heat
collected in its passage over torrid regions; but before
it arrives there, it must have swept along the summits
of the Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold
of that frozen region.

THOUGH it be now demonstrated that there is no

southern continent in that region of the globe which
it was supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain
from Captain Cook's discoveries, that there is a large
tract of land near the south pole, which is the source
of most of the ice spread over the vast foutlern ocean,
vol. ii. p. 230. 239, &c. Whether the influence of
this remote frozen continent may reach the southern
extremity of America, and affest its climate, is an
inquiry not unworthy of attention.

NOTE VII. p. 16.
^ CONDAMINE is one of the latest and most

accurate observers of the interior state of South-

America. " After descending from the Andes (fa:s
he) one beholds a vast and uniform profpe of water
and verdure, and nothing more. One treads upon
the earth, but does not fee it; as it is so entirely co-
'ered with luxuriant plants, weeds, and shrubs, that
i; would require a considerable degree of labour to
clear it, for the space of a foot." Relation abrc.:
t'un Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the singularities in
the forests is a fort of oflics, or withs, ca!!ed bl i.'C6
by the Spaniards, lianes by the French, and nibbees
1v the Indians, which are usually employed as ropes
i:: America. This is one of the para.i:':': i.,ants,

H h 2 w'il

which twists about the trees it meets with, and rising
above the;r highest branches, its tendrils descend per-
pendicLlarly, strike into the ground, take root, rife
up around another tree, and thus mount and descend
alternately. Other tendrils are carried obliquely by
the wind, or some accident, and form a confusion
of interwoven cordaee, which resembles the rigging
of a ship. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 99. These
with- arc often as thick as the arm of a man. Ib.
p. 75. M. Bougucr's account of the soress in Peru
perfectly resembles this description. Voyage au Peru,
p. IA. Ovicdo gives a similar description of the so-
refts in other parts of America. Hist. lib. ix. p. I44,
D. The country of the Moxos is so much overflowed,
that thes are obliged to reside on the summit of some
rising ground during some part of the year, and have
no communication with their countrymen at any dif-
tance. Let;:cs Edifiante;, tom. x. p. I87. Garcia
gives a full and jufi description of the rivers, lakes,
wood;, and marshes in those countries of America
which lie between the tropics. Origen de los Indios,
: ii. c. 5. § 4, 5. The incredible hardships to
which Goncalez Pizarro was exposed in attempting
to march into the country to the east of the Andes,
convey a ery striking idea of that part of America
in its original uncultivated state. Garcil. de ]a Vega,
Royal. Comment, of Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

NOTE

NOTE VIII. p. 19.
T H E animals of America seem not to have been al-

ways of a size inferior to those in other quarters

of the globe. From antlers of the moofe-deer which
have been found in America, it appears to have been
an animal of great size. Near the banks of the Ohio,
a considerable number of bones of an immense mag-
nitude have been found. The place where this dif-
covery has been made lies about one hundred and
ninety miles below the juntion of the river Scioto
with the Ohio. It is about four miles diflant from
the banks of the latter, on the fide of the marsh called
the Great Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quanti-
ties about five or fix feet under ground, and the fira-
tum is visible in the bank on the edge of the Lick.
7Journal of Colonel George Croglan, AIS. penes me.
This spot seems to be accurately laid down by Evans
in his map. These bones must have belonged to ani-
mals of enormous bulk; but naturalists being acquaint-
ed with no living creature of such size, were at first
inclined to think that they were mineral substances.
Upon receiving a greater number of specimens, and
after inspecting them more narrowly, they are now
allowed to be the bones of an animal. As the ele-
phant is the largest known quadruped, and the tusks
which were found nearly resembled, both in form
and quality, the tusks of an elephant, it was con-
cluded that the carcases deposited on the Ohio were
of that species. But Dr. Hunter, one of the persons
of our age best qualified to decide with refpea to

H h 3 this

th;s paint, having accurately examined several parcels
of tufcs, and grinders, and jaw-bones, sent from the
Ohio to London, gives it as his opinion, that they
did not belong to an elephant, but to some huge car-
r.ivorous animal of an unknown species. Phil. Tranf-
a.o. vo!. iiip.p. 3. Bones of the fame kind, and
as remrarkabe for their size, have been found near the
mouths of the great rivers Obv, Jenifeia, and Lena,
in Siberia. Srao.'.r:;!l.r-, Dcfrript. of nrrth and eall
P-:; fEartPe acd. ;Ds, p. 402, &c. The elephant
seems to be confined in his range to the torrid zone,
and rne.r multiplies beyond it. In such cold regions
as ;':: bordering on the frozen sea, he could not
l:ve. T-c existence of such large animals in Ame-
rica might open a wide si-ld for conjecaure. The
more we contemplate the face of nature, and confider
the variety of her productions, the more we must be
f;iFr.ej that aflonifhing changes have been made in
the terraqueous globe by convufions and revolutions,
cf which n> account is prtefrvcd in hiltory.

NOTE IX. p. 20.
'T H IS e deneracv of the dmelic European nimals

mn America ought to he imputed partly to each

of t'r . caufi:. in ;he Spa:.i:h fettrements, which
are G:uated c:'hcr w; in t;^e to:;i' zone, or in coun-
tri-s borderin ; cen it, th i.-ce;a:e of heat, and di-
ve:firy of fooJ. prce:n:f i:ep and horned cattle from

*::' .in.i the l"ae 1.. : . :.i Eur.'?:. They seldom
becc -e f f., anj h;-; finiill i- not so juicy, or of
fc: . '':-r.':e a;'our. i;' North America, where the
c.::ate is ..:s :"' :.:'e';:, and similar to that of

Europe,

Europe, the quality of the grafles which spring up na-
turally in their pafture-grounds is not good. Mitchell,
p. 15r. Agriculture is still so much in its infancy,
that artificial food for cattle is not raised in any quan-
tity. During a winter, long in many provinces, and
rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of their cattle.
The general treatment of their horses and horned cat-
tie is injudicious and harsh in all the English colonies.
Thele circumstances contribute more, perhaps, than
any thing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to
the degeneracy of breed in the horles, cows, and
fhccp, of many of the North American provinces.

NOTE X, p. 2r.
j N the year 15 8, the island of Hispaniola was as-

s:i rcd with a dreadful visitation of those deflructive

in:'i-ts, the particulars of which Herrera defcribct,
and mentions a singular infl.nce of the fupcrfitiion of
the Spanish planters. After trying various methods
c' cxtcrminating the ants, they rcflIved to implore
protection of the faints ; but as the calamity was new,
thev were at a loss to find out the faint who could
g;c them the most effectual aid. They cast lots in
oidrr tu discover the patron whom they should in-
noe;c. The lots decided in favour of St. Saturninus.
They celebrated his feflival with great solemnity, and
iinmcidiatcly, adds the hiflorian, the calamity began
to ab:.e. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 15. p. 107.

IIhA NOTE

NOTE XI. p. 24.

H E author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les
Americains supposes this diff-rence in heat to be

equal to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty de-
grees from the equator in the old continent, is as
warm as one situated eighteen degrees from it in Ame-
rica, tom. i. p. ir. Dr. .Mitchell, after observations
carried on during thirty years, contends that the dif-
ference is equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of la-
titude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 24.

TANUARY 3j, i7'5, Mr. Bertram, near the head
- J f St. John's river in East Florida, observed a
tr.- so in:cnfe, that in one night, the ground was
frozen an inch thick upon the banks of the river.
Th:r ime5, citrons, and banana trees, at St. Auguf-
t:in were deftrcved. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other
in:. es of the extraordinary operations of cold in
the southern pravinces of North America are colleced
b) Dr. Mltchell. Present State, p. 206, &c. Fe-
brua-v 7th, 1747, the frost at Charleltown was so
intense, that a p-rfon having carried two quart bot-
t:es of hot wa:er to bed, in the morning they were
spit to p:eces, and the water converted into solid
lun.zs of ice, In a kitchen, where there was a fire,
;te wraer in a jar, in which there was a large live
el], w-.s frozen to :he b ,ttom. Almost all the orange
.nid u:ive trees were defro ed. Deicription of South-
Carol/:-t, Svo. Lond. 1761.

NOTE

NOTE XIII. p.$25.
A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch

Guiana, a country every where level, and so low,

that during the rainy seasons, it is usually covered
with water near two feet in height. This renders
the foil so rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches
in depth, it is a itratum of perfect manure, and as such
has been transported to Barbadoes. On the banks of
the Eflequebo, thirty crops of rattoon canes have been
raised successively, whereas in the WeR-Indian islands
more than two is never expected. The expedients by
which the planters endeavour todiminilh this exceflive
fertility of foil are various. Bancroft, Nat. Hist, of
Guiana, p. Io, &c.

NOTE XIV. p.39.
M ULLER seems to have believed, without fuffi.

cient evidence, that the Cape had been doubled,

tom. i. p. II, &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St.
Peterfburgh give rome countenance to it, by the man-
ner in which Tfchukotkoi-nofs is laid down in their
charts. But I am assured, from undoubted authority,
that no Ruffian velfel has ever failed round that cape,
and as the country of Tfchutki is not fubje& to the
Ruffian empire, it is very imperfecly known.

NOTE

NOTE XV. p.43.
WtVERE this the place for entering into a long

and intricate geographical disquisition, many

curious observations might arise from comparing the
accounts of the two Ruffian voyages, and the charts
of their refpelive navigations. One remark is appli-
cable to both. We cannot rely with absolute cer-
tainty on the position which they alfign to several of
the places which they visited. The weather was so
extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the fun or stars,
and the position of the islands and fuppo'cd continents
was commonly determined by reckoning, not by ob-
servation. Behring and Tschirikow proceeded much
farther towards the Pif: thal, Kreni zi.. Thc ';..r.
(,:;covereJ by Bc'hi ,g3 which h inr;ag:n :. to be part
ci ;-he Ame'ican ctaltincIt, is in: t:- 235th dcgree of

they supposed them to be promontories belonging to
fnme part of the American continent, which, as they
fancied, firetched as far south as the latitude 56. In
this manner they are laid down in the chart published
b. Muller, and likcwvife in a manuscript chart drawn
b! a mate of Bchring's ship, communicated to me by
Mr. Pro'eflor Rcbifon. 'But in 1769, Krenitzin,
aftcr w:intcring in the island Alaxa, flood so far towards
the north in his return, that his course lay through
the middle of what they had supposed to be a conti-
nc:;:, which he found to be an open sea, and that they
h.i!l miflaken rock\ iflcs for the head-lands of a conti-
recnt. It is probable, that the countries discovered in

4 r, towards the east, do not belong to the American
contincnt, but are only a continuation of the chain of

i;.'::1i a. J UltIt til:¢ e.xul_: , * tU...... , t :d ta v ;; slu;Iu
i;lh:., cr:e is led to cljCtlur' t.hat no large contiaentt
lies e!i'. neea to themn. The number of volcanos in

NOTE XI. p. 24.

H E author of Recherches Pbilofophiques fur les
Americains supposes this difference in heat to be

equal to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty de-
grees from the equator in the old continent, is as
warm as one situated eighteen degrees from it in Ame-
rica, tom. i. p. It. Dr. Mitchell, afterobfervations
carried on during thirty years, contends that the dif-
ference is equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of la-
titude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 24.

JANUARY 3d, 1755, MIr. Bertram, near the head
J of St. John's river in East Florida, observed a
fraft o intense, that in one night, the ground was
frozen an inch thick upon the banks of the river.
The limes, citrons, and banana trees, at St. Auguf-
t:ne were destroyed. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other
in ances of the extraordinary operations of cold in
the southern provinces of North America are colle&ed
by Dr. Mitchell. Present State, p. 2o6, &c. Fe-
bruary 7th, 1747, the frost atCharleftown was so
intense, that a person having carried two quart bot-
tles of hot water to bed, in the morning they were
split to pieces, and the water converted into solid
lurrps of ice. In a kitchen, where there was a fire,
the water in a jar, in which there was a large live
etl, was frozen to the b ttomr. Almost all the orange
and uoive trees were deftroved. Description of South-
Carolin2, Svo. Lund. 1761.

NOTE

NOTE XII.: p.-25.
A Remarkable instance of this occurs in buSch

Guiana, a country every where level, and so low,

that during the rainy seasons, it is usually covered
with water near two feet 'in height. This renders
the foil so rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches
in depth, it is a stratum of perseEt manure, and as such
has been transported to Barbadoes. On the banks of
the Effequebo, thirty crops of rattoon canes have been
railed fuccefflively, whereas in the Weft-Indian islands
more than two is never expeced. The expedients by
which the planters endeavour todiminifh this excessive
fertility of foil are various. Bancroft, Nat. Hit. of
Guiana, p. Io, &c.

NOTE XIV. p.39.
M UL L E R seems to have believed, without fuffi-

cient evidence, that the Cape had been doubled,

tom. i. p. i , &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St.
Peterfburgh give some countenance to it, by the man-
ner in which Tfcbukotjkoi-nofs is laid down in their
charts. But I am assured, from undoubted authority,
that no Ruffian vessel has ever failed round that cape,
and as the country of 2fjhutki is not subjet to the
Ruffian empire, it is very imperfealy known.

NOTE.

NOTE XV. p.43.;
W ERE this the place for entering into a long

and intricate geographical disquisition, many

curious observations might arise from comparing the
accounts of the two Ruffian voyages, and the charts
of their respective navigations. One remark is appli-
cable to both. We cannot rely with absolute cer-
tainty on the position which they assign to several of
the places which they visited. The weather was so
extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the, fun or stars,
and the position of the islands and fuppoled continents
was commonly determined by reckoning, not by ob-
servation. Behring and Tfchirikow proceeded much
farther towards the east than Krenitzin. The land
discovered by Behring, which he imagined to be part
of the American continent, is in the 236th degree of
longitude from the first meridian in the iile of Ferro,
and in 58' 28" of latitude. Tfchirikow came upon
the fame coast in longit. 241, lat. 56'. Muller, i.
248, 249. The former muff have advanced 60 de-
grees from the port of Petropawlowfka, from which
he took his departure, and the latter 65 degrees. But
from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it appears that
he did not fail farther towards the eafl than the 208th
degree, and only 32 degrees from Petropawlowfka. In
1741, Behring and Tfchirikow, both in going and
returning, held a course which was mostly to the south
of that chain of islands, which they discovered ; and
observing the mountainous and rugged aspea of the
head-lands which they descried ;owards the north,

they
i

they supposed them to be promontories belonging to
some part of the American continent, which, as they
fancied, Wretched as far south as the latitude 56. In
this manner they are laid down in the chart published
by MAuller, and likewise in a manuscript chart drawn
by a mate of Behring's ship, communicated to me by
Mr. Proleflor Rcbifon. 'But in 1769, Krenitzin,
after Vintcring in the island Alaxa, stood so far towards
the north in his return, that his course lay through
the middle of what they had supposed to be a conti-
nent, which he found to be an open sea, and that they
hn1 mitfaken rocky isles for the head-lands of a conti-
nent. It is probable, that the countries discovered in
74 , towards the east, do not belong to the American
continent, but are only a continuation of the chain of
islands. From the extreme summer cold of all those
isles, one is led to conjecure that no large continent
lies very near to them. The number of volcanos in
this region of the globe is remarkable. There are fe-
vcrai in Kamchatka, and not one of the islands, great
or finail, as far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is
wi:hout them. Many are atually burning, and the
naorlntains in all bear marks of having been once in a
slate of eruption. Were I disposed to admit such con-
jecures as have found place in other inquiries con-
cerning the peopling of America, I might suppose that
this part of the earth, having suffered violent convul-
lions from earthquakes and volcanos, an isthmus,
which may have formerly united Asia to America, has
been broken, and formed into a clutfer of islands by
the shock.

Ir

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian na-

v gators were attempting to make discoveries in the
north-west of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting
the fame design from another quarter. In 1769, two
small vefiels failed from Loretto in California to ex-
plore the coafls of the country to the north of that pe-
ninfula. They advanced no farther than the port of
Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But, in several successive
expeditions fitted out from the port of St. Bias in New
Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as far as the la-
titude 58. Gazta de Madrid, March 19, and May
14, I776. But as the journals of those voyages have
not yet been published, I cannot compare their pro-
grefs with that of the Ruffians, or shew how near the
navigators of the two nations have approached to each
other. It is to be hoped, that the enlightened miniifer,
who has now the direcion of American affairs in
Spain, will not withhold this information from the
public.

NOTE XVI. p. 6r.
FTEW travellers have had such opportunity of ob-

serving the natives of America, in its various

diftrics, as Don Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately
published by him, he thus describes the charaóteriflical
features of the race: " a very small forehead, covered
with hair towards its extremities, as far as the middle
of the eye-brows; little eves; a thin nose, small and
bending towards the upper lip; the countenance broad;
the ears large; the hair very black, lank, and coarse;
the limbs well turned, the feet small, the body ofjuft
proportion; and altogether smooth and free from hair,

7 until

until old age, when they acquire some beard, but
never on the cheeks." Noticias Americanas, &c.
p. 3c7. M. le Chevalier de Pinto, whorefided several
years in a part of America which Ulloa never visited,
gives a (ketch of the general aspea of the Indians
there. " They are all of copper colour, with fomr
diversity of shade, not in proportion to their distance
from the equator, but according to the degree of ele-
vation of the territory which they inhabit. Those
who live in a high country are fairer than those in the
marshy low lands on the coast. Their face is round,
farther removed, perhaps, than that of any people
from an oval shape. Their forehead is small, the ex-
tremity of their ears far from the face, their lips thick,
their nose flat, their eyes black, or of a chefnut colour;
small, but capable of discerning objecs at a great
distance. Their hair is always thick and sleek, and
without any tendency to curl. They have no hair on
any part of their body but the head. At the first as-
pet, a southern American appears to be mild and in-
nocent, but on a more attentive view, one discovers in
his countenance Something wild, distrustful, and fullen."
MS. penes me. The two portraits drawn by hands
very different from those of common travellers, have
a near resemblance.

NOTE XVII. p. 62.
A MAZING accounts are given of the perfever.

ing specd of the Americans. Adair relates the

adventures of a Chikkafah warrior, who run through
woods and over mountains, three hundred computed

miles

miles in a day and a half and twonights. Hiss. of
Amer. Ind. 396.

NOTE XVITI. p. 68.
M GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years

among the Indians of Peru and Quito, and

twenty years in the French colony of Cayenne, in
which there is a constant intercourse with the Galibis
and other tribes on the Orinoco, observes, that the
vigour of conffitution among the Americans is exaaly
in proportion to their habits of labour. The Indians,
in warm climates, such as those on the coasts of the
South Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river
Orinoco, are not to be compared for strength .with
those in cold countries; and yet, fays he, boats daily
set out from Para, a Portuguese settlement on the river
Amazons, to ascend that river againit the rapidity of
the fiream, and with the fame crew they proceed to
San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues distant.
No crew of white people, or even of negroes, would
be found equal to a taf of such persevering fatigue, as
the Portuguese have experienced, and yet the Indians,
being accufiomed to this labour from their infancy,
perform it. \IS. penes me.

NOTE XIX. p. 75.
DON ANTCOs L ULLOA, who viilted a great part

of Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Grana-

da, and several of the provinces bordering on the
Mexican gulf, while emp!lacd in the fame service
with the French mathematicians during the space &f

tell

ten years, and whoafterwards had'an opportunity of
viewing the North-Americans, asserts; "' that if we
have fee-cn one American, we may be said to have seen
them all, their colour and make are so nearly the
fame." Notic. Americanus, p. 308. A more early
observer, Pedro de Cieca de Leon, one of the conquer.
ors of Peru, who ,had likewise traversed many pro-
vinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and
women, although there is such a multitude of tribes or
nations as to be almost innumerable, and such diversity
of climates, appear nevertheless like the children of
one father and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i.
c. 19. There is, no doubt, a certain combination of
features, and peculiarity of aspec, which forms what
may be called a European or Asiatic countenance.
There muff likewise be one that may be denominated
American, common to the whole race. This may be
supposed to itrike the traveller at first fight, while the
various shades, which distinguish people of different
regions, efcapc his observation. But when persons
who had resided so long among the Americans concur
in bearing testimony to the similarity of their appear-
ance in every climate, we may conclude that it is
more remarkable than that of any other race. See
likewise Garcia Origen de los Indies, p. 54. 242.
Torquemada Monarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

NOTE XX. p. 77.
. LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in

the interior parts of Brasil, he had been in-

formed that some persons resembling the white people
of Darien have been found; but that the breed did not

continue,
2

continue, and their children became like other Ameri-
cans. This race, however, is very imnirfely known,
MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p.83.
T H E testimonies of different travellers, concerning

the Patagonians, have been cdlleted and ftatd

with a considerable degree of accuracy by the author of
Recherches Philofophiques, &c.tom.-i. 28r, &c. iii. 8r,
&c. Since the publication of his work, several navigators
have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their pre-
deceffors, differ very widely in their accounts of its in-
habitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew, who
failed through the Straits in 1764, the common size of
the Patagonians was eflimated to be eight feet, and
many of them much taller. Phil. TranfaR. vol. Ivii.
p. 78. By Captains Wallis and Carteret, who actually
measured them in 1766, they were found to be from
fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height.
Phil. Tranf. vol. Ix. p. 22. These seem to have been
the very people whose size had been so much over-
rated in the year 1764; for several of them had beads
and red baize of the fame kind with what had been
put aboard Captain Wallis's ship, and he naturally
concluded that they had got there from Mr. Byron.
Hawkefw. i. In I767 they were again ineafured by
M. Bougainville, whose account agrees nearly with that
of Captain Wallis. Voy. 129. To thiefe I hall add
a testimony of great weight. In the year 1762, Don
Bernardo Ibagnez de Echavarri accompanied the Mar-
quis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres, and resided there

several

Several years. He is a very intelligent author, and his
reputation for veracity unimpeached among his coun-
trymen. In speaking of the country towards the
southern extremity of America, ct By what Indians,"
fays he, "i is it pofrefled ? Not certainly by thb fabu-
lous Patagonians, who are'fippofed to occupy this dif-
tri&. I have from many eye-witnefies, who haive
lived among those Indians, and tradedimuci with them,
a true and accurate description of their perfohs. They
are of the fiie Rlature with-Spaniards. I never saw
dnie who role in height two varas and two or three
inches," i. e. about 80 or 81.332 iiclies Englifl, if
Echavarri makes his computation according to thebara
of Madrid. This agrees nearly With the meafurerhent
of Captain Wallis. Reyno Jefuitito, 238. Mr.
Falkner, who resided as a miflionary forty years in the
southern parts of America, fays, that " the Patago-
nians, or Puelchesf are a large-bodied people; but I
never heard of that gigantic race which others have
mentioned, though I have seen persons of all the dif-
ferent tribes of southern Indians." Introd. p. 26.

NOTE k Ii. p. 8.

ONTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and in-

genious physician, published a diflertation in the

year 1765, in which he endeavours to prove, that this
disease was not introduced from America, bit took its
rife in Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical
and malignant disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a
disquisition ori this subjet, which I lhould not have
mentioned, if it had not been intimately conneted with

VOL. II. Ii this

this part of my inquiries, it would not be difficult td
point out Come mistakes with refpel to the faats upon
which he founds, as well as some errors in the confe-
quences which he draws from them. The rapid come
munication of this disease from Spain over Europe,
seems however to resemble the progress of an epidemic,
rather than that of a disease transmitted by infeeion.
The first mention of it is in the year I493, and before
the year 1497 it had made its appearance in most coun-
tries of Europe, with such alarming symptoms as ren-
dered it necessary for the civil magistrate to interpose,
in order to check its career. Since the publication of
this work, a second edition of Dr. Sanchez's Differta-
tion has been communicated to me. It contains feve-
ral additional facEs in confirmation of his opinion,
which is supported with such plausible arguments, as
render it a subjec of inquiry well deserving the atten-
tion of learned physicians.

NOTE XXIII. p. 92.
T HE people of Otaheite have no denomination for

any number above two hundred, which is fuffi-

cient for their transactions. Voyages, by Hawkef-
worth, ii. 2z8.

NOTE XXIV. p. 1oo.
AS the view which I have given of rude nations is

extremely different from that exhibited by very

refpeaable authors, it may be proper to produce some
of the many authorities on which I found my de-

icription.

hlL.L · ·
'

1 L ' -
G:5 25 cl s ~tL~ £5

E U

c

ii.P

B ~ ~~~~~~~
Cs Q
PiEs~P~Ddsa~~mdmSh~~ b:s'. LrZ7 £

scription. The manners of the savage tribes in Ame-
rica have never been viewed by persons more capable
of observing them with discernment, than the philofo-
phers employed by France and Spain, in the year I735,
to determine the figure of the earth. M. Bouguer,
D. Antonio d'Ulloa, and D. Jorge Juan, resided long
among the natives of the leafs civilized provinces in
Peru. M. de la Condamine had not only the fame ad-
vantages with them for observation, but, in his voyage
down the Maragnon, he had an opportunity of in-
specsing the itate of the various nations feated on its
banks, in its vast course across the continent of South
America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their
representation of the characrer of the Americans.
" They are all extremely indolent," fays M. Bou-
guer, " they are stupid, they pass whole days fitting in
the fame place, without moving, or speaking a single
word. It is not easy to describe the degree of their in-
difference for wealth, and all its advantages. One
does not well know what motive to propose to them,
when one would persuade them to perform any ser-
vice. It is vain to offer them money; they answer,
that they are not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. roz.
" If one confiders them as men, the narrowness of
their understanding seems to be incompatible with the
excellence of the foul. Their imbecility is so visible,
that one can hardly form an idea of them different
from what one has of the brutes. Nothing diffurbs
the tranquillity of their fouls, equally insensible to
disasters and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they
are as contented as a monarch in his most splendid

i 2 array.

array. Riches do not attra& them in the smalley de-
gree, and the authority or dignities to which they may
aspire, are so little the objeas of their ambition,, that
an Indian will receive with the fame indifference the
office of a judge (Alcalde) or that of a hangman,. if
deprived of the former and appointed to the latter.
Nothing can move or change them. Interest has no
power over them, and they often refuse to perform a
small service, though certain of a great recompence.
Fear makes no impression upon them, and refpe, as
little. Their disposition is so singular, that there is no
method of influencing them, no means of rouzing them
from that indifference, which is proof againit all the
endeavours of the wifeit persons; no expedient which
can induce them to abandon that gross ignorance, or
lay aside that careless negligence, which disconcert the
prudence and disappoint the care of such as are atten-
tive to their welfare." Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. 335.
3;6. Of those singular qualities he produces many
extraordinary inrances, p. 336-347. " Infnfibility,"
fays M. de la Condamine, " is the bails of the Ame-
rican character. I leave others to determine, whether
this fliould be dignified with the name of apathy, or
di:-raced with that of frupidity. It arises, without
doubt, from the small number of their ideas, which do
not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons even to vor
racity, when they have wherewithal to satisfy their
appetite. Temperate, when necessity obliges them,
to such a degree that they can endure want without
seeming to desire any thing. Pusillanimous and cow-
ardly to excess, unless when they are rendered defpe-

6 rate

rate by drunkenners. Averse to labour, indifferent to
every motive of glory, honour, or gratitude; occupied
entirely by the obje& that is present, and always de-
termined by it alone, without apy` solicitude about
futurity; incapable of foresight or ot refleaion; aban-
doning themselves, when under no reitraint, to a pue-
rile joy, which they express by frilking about, and
immoderate fits of laughter; without object or design,
they pass their life without thinking, and grow old
without advancing beyond childhood, of which they
retain all the defeas. If this description were appli-
cable only to the Indians in some provinces of Peru,
who are saves in every refpeat but the name, one might
believe, that this degree of degeneracy was occasioned
by the servile dependence to which they are reduced;
the example of the modern Greeks being proof how
far servitude may degrade the human species. But the
Indians in the millions of the Jesuits, and the savages
who Ptill enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited in
their faculties, not to fay as ttupid as the other, one
cannot observe, without humiliation, that man, when
abandoned to simple nature, and deprived of the ad-
vantages resulting from education and society, differs
but little from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv.
de Amaz. 52, 53. M. de Chanvalon, an intelligent
and philosophical observer, who visited Martinico in
1751, and resided there fix years, gives the following
defcrip:ion of the Caraibs. " It is not the red colour
of their complexion, it is not the singularity of their
features, which conflitutes the chief difference between
them and us. It is their excessive simplicity; it is the

I i 3 limited

limited degree of their faculties. Their reason is not
more enlightened or more provident than the inftint
of brutes. The reason of the most grots peasants, that
of the negroes brought up in the parts of Africa most
remote from intercourse with Europeans, is such that
we discover appearances of intelligence, which, though
imperfrit, is capable of increase. But of this the un-
derftanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly susceptible.
If found philosophy and religion did not afford us
their light, if we were to decide according to the first
impression which the view of that people makes upon
the mind, we should be disposed to believe that they
do not belong to the fame species with us. Their
stupid eyes are the true mirrour of their fouls; it ap-
pears to be without functions. Their indolence is
ex:reme; they have never the least solicitude about the
morr.ent which is to succeed that which is present."
Voyage a a Martinique, p. 44, 45. 51. M. de ]a
B.:de, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm this defcrip-
tion. " The characleriflics of the Callfornians," fays
P. Vene"a;, " as well as of all other Indians, are
fl u-idity and infenlfibility; want of knowledge and re-
f.'lion; inconflancy, impetuosity, and blindness of
a.peti:e; an excessive flrth, and abhorrence of all la-
bour and ta!i ue; an exccffive love of pleasure and
amusement of e.try kind, however trifling or brutal;
Fui'in~.mity; aad, in .:;e, a molf wretched want of
every trhin vhirh coni:i:u;ts the real man, and ren-
c'-s hi.- ra:!onal, inv.- .tiie, tratable, and useful to
.:,':iF and focitty. It is not cafy fur Europeans,
u ho nev- r were o.:t (-r :eir own country, to conceive
an a-equate id a cf t:!' peopie: for, even in the

least

least frequented corners of the globe, there is not a na-
tion so stupid, of such contracted ideas, and so weak
both in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians.
Their understanding comprehends little more than
what they fee; abftrat ideas, and much less a chain
of reasoning, being far beyond their power; so that
they scarce ever improve their firfl ideas, and these are
in general false, or at leaf inadequate. It is in vain
to represent to them any future advantages which will
result to them from doing or abstaining from this or
that particular immediately present; the relation of
means and ends being beyond the Itretch of their fa-
culties. Nor have they the least notion of pursuing
such intentions as will procure themselves some future
good, or guard them against future evils. Their will
is proportional to their faculties, and all their paflions
move in a very narrow sphere. Ambition they have
none, and are more desirous of being accounted flrong
than valiant. The objects of ambition with us, ho-
nour, fame, reputation, titles, potls, and diftincions
of superiority, are unknown among them ; so that this
powerful spring of action, the cause of so much seem-
ing good and real evil in the world, has no power here.
This disposition of mind, as it gives them up to an
amazing languor and lassitude, their lives fleeting away
in a perpetual ina&ivity and detestation of labour, so
it likewise induces them to be attrated by the first ob-
je& which their own fancy, or the persuasion of ano-
ther, place before them; and at the fame time renders
them as prone to alter their resolutions with the fame
facility. They look with indifference upon any kind-
ness done them ; nor is even the bare remembrance of

i 4 it

it to be expeced from them. In a word, the unhappy
mortals may be compared to children, in whom the
developement of reason is not completed. They may
indeed be called a nation who never arrive at man-
hood." Hit. of Californ. Engl. Tranl. i. 64. 67. Mr.
Ellis gives a similar account of the want of foresight
and inconsiderate disposition of the people adjacent to
Huifoii's Bay. Voyage, p. I94, 195.

TiE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa
arc oblerved to be more capable of improving by in-
firuscion. They acquire the knowledge. of several
particulars which the Americans cannot comprehend.
Hence the negroes, though slaves, value themfelvesas
a superior order of beings, and look down upon the
Americans with contempt, as void of capacity and of
rational discernment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 32,,323.

NOTE XXV. p. 107.
I UAVEobferved, p. 72,73, that, forthe fame rearona

they never attempt to rear children who are feeble,

d lorted, or defetive in their make. So deeply were
both those ideas imprinted in the minds of the Ameri-
cans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when
compared with the barbarous tribes whose manners .1
am describing, retained them; and even their inter-
course with the Spaniards has not been able to root
them out. When twins are born in any family, it is
still confidered as an ominous event, and the parents
haerecoutr: to rigorous ass of mortification, in order

to

to avert the calamities with which they arethreatened.
When a child is born with any deformiity,- they will
not, if they canpoffibly avoid it, bring it to be bap-
tized, and it is with difficulty they can be brought to
rear it. Arriaga Extirpac.. de la Idolat. del Peru,
P' 32, 33.

NOT E XXVI. p. 113.
T HE number of the fiih in the rivers of South

America is so extraordinary, as to merit parti-

cular notice. " In the Maragnon (fays P. Acugna)
fih are so plentiful, that, without any art, they
may take them with the hands." p. 138. " In the
Orinoco (fays P. Gumilla), besides an infinite variety
of other fish, tortoises or turtle abound in such num-
bers, that I cannot find words to express it. I doubt
not but that such as read my account will accuse me
of exaggeration: but I can affirm, that it is as dif-
ficult to count them, as to count the sands on the
banks of that river. One may judge of their number
by the amazing consumption of them; for all the
nations contiguous to the river, and even many who
are at a diftarice, flock thither at the season of breed-
ing, and not only find fuitenance during that time,
but carry off vass quantities both of the turtles and of
their eggs, &c." Hill. de l'Orenoque, ii. c. 22. p.
59. M. de la Condamine confirms their accounts, p.
159.

NOTE

NOTE XXVII. p. 113.
p S 0 describes two of there plants, the Cururuape,

and the Guajana-7Tmbs. It is remarkable, that

though they have this fatal effe& upon fifihes, they
are*fo far from being noxious to the human species,
that they are used in medicine with success. Pifo,
lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft mentions another, the Hi-
m-re, a fmnall quantity of which is sufficient to ine-
briate all the fish to a considerable difiance, so that in
a few minutes they float motionless on the surface of
the water, and are taken with ease. Nat. Hist. of
Guiana, p. o16.

NOTE XXVIII. p. t17.
R EMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities

which rude nations susser by famine. Alvar

NTugnez Cabeca de Vaca, one of the most gallant
and virtuous of the Spanish adventurers, resided almost
nine years among the savages of Florida. They were
unacquain:ed with every species of agriculture. Their
fubfisnr.ce was poor and precarious. " They live
chiefly (fays he) upon roots of diffcrent plants, which
the) procure w:th great d:tncultv, wandering from
p!ace to place in search of them. Sometimes they
kiii gare, fornetirnes they catch siss, but in such
Irma'; qJzntit:es, that their hunger is so extreme as
cornm-e th;m to eat fpide:s, the ecgs of ants, worms,
].zar3s, fcrp;?:s, a ki:nd of unctuous e:r:h, and I am
per:'ui.dJ. tihat :f in this cou;s;ri- thcre w.ere any
itones, th.v wo;oid . la;ui:. tl:c. They prefcrve the

bones

bones of fishes and serpents, which they grind intq
powder, and eat. The only season when they do not
susser much from famine, is when a certain fruits
which he calls Tunas, is ripe. This is the fame with
the Opuntia, or prickly pear, of a reddish and yellow
colour, with a sweet insipid tafle. They are some-
times obliged to travel far from their usual place of
residence, in order to find them." Naufragias, c. xviii.
p. 20, 21, 22. In another place, he observes that
they are frequently reduced to pals two or three days
without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE XXIX. p. .19.

SER MIN has given an accurate description of the
two species of manioc, with ah account of its

culture, to which he has added sone experiments, in
order to ascertain the poisonous qualities of the juice
extractd from that species which he calls the bitter
caflava. Among the Spaniards it is known by the
name of Yuca brava. Defer. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXX. p. 1i9.
T H E plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well

as in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not

an indigenous plant of the New World, but was in-
troduced into the island of Hispaniola, in the year
1516, by father Thomas de Berlanga, and that he
tranfpianted it from the Canary Islands, whither the
oril;inal flips had been brought from the East Indies.
Ovicdo, lib. viii. c. i. But the opinion of Acofta
and o:hcr naturaliits, who reckon it an American

plant,

plant, seems to be better founded. Acofta Hist. Nat.
lib. iv. 2r. It was cultivae'd by rude tribes in Ame-
rica, who had little intercourse with the Spaniards,
and who were destitute of that ingenuity which dif-
poses men to borrow what is useful from foreign na-
tions. Gumil. iii. 186. Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE XXXI. p. 121.
I T is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the most ac.

curate and beft-informed writers concerning the

Weft Indies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated
in the continent, was not known in the islands, the
inhabitants of which had none but caffada bread.
Hist. Nat. lib. iv. c. I6. But P. Martyr, in the fire
book of his firfl Decad, which was written in the
year 1493, upon the return of Columbus from his
first voyage, expressly mentions maize as a plant which
the islanders cultivated, and of which they made
bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise asserts, that they were
acquainted with the culture of maize. Hiftor. Gener.
cap. 28. Oviedo describes maize without any inti-
mation of its being a plant that was not natural to
Hifpniola. Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE XXXII. p. I30.
N EW HOLLAND, a country which formerly

was only known, has lately been visited by in-

telligent observers. It lies in a region of the globe
where it must enjoy a very favourable climate, as it
firetches from the Ic:h to the 38:h degree of northern
la:i:ude. It is of great -xtent, and from its square

form

form must be much more than equal to all Europea,
The people who inhabit the various parts of it aiper
to be of one race. They are evidently ruder than
most of the Americans, and have made till less pro-
grefs in improvement and the arts,:of life. There is
not the least appearance of cultivation in any part of
this vast region. The inhabitants are extremely few,
so that the country appears almoR desolate. Their
tribes are still more inconsiderable than those of Ame-
rica. They depend for subsistence, almot entirely,
on sithing. They do not fettle in one place, but
roam about in quest of food. Both sexes go stark-
naked. Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more
simple and rude than those of the Americans. Voy-
ages, by Hawkefworth, iii. 622, &c. This, per-
haps, is the country where man has been discovered'
in the earliest tage of his progress, and it exhibits a
miserable specimen of his condition and powers in
that uncultivated itate. If this country shall be more
fully explored by future navigators, the comparison
of the manners of its inhabitants with those of the
Americans will prove an initruAive article in the his.
tory of the human species.

NOTE XXXIII. p. r30.
S) GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his ita-

* tion among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus.

describes the face of the country: "c We have marched
twelve days without meeting a tingle human creature.
Sometimes we found ourselves in vail meadows, of.
which we could not fee the boundaries, through.which
there flowed many brooks and rivers, but without any

path

path to conduc us. Sometimes we were obliged to
open a passage across thick forefis, through bushes,
and underwood filled with briars and thorns. Some-
times we had to pass through deep marshes, in which
we funk up to the middle. After being fatigued through
the day, we had the earth for our bed, or a few leaves,
exposed to the wind, the rain, and all the injuries
of theair. Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 360. Dr. Brickell,
in an excursion from North Carolina towards the
mountains, A. D. 1730, travelled fifteen days with-
out meeting with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of
North Carolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempt-
ing to make a Settlement in South America, A. D.
1532, marched fifty days through a country without
one inhabitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. ii.

N O T E XXXIV. p. I3i.
I STRONGLY furpea that a community of goods,

and an undivided flore, are known only among the

rudeff tribes of hunters ; and that as soon as any species
of agriculture or regular industry is known, the idea
of an exclusive right of property to the fruits of them
is introduced. I am confirmed in this opinion by ac-
counts which I have received concerning the slate of
property among the Indians in very different regions
of America. " The idea of the natives of Brasil con-
cerning property is, that if any person cultivate a
field, he alone ought to enjoy the produce of it, and
no other has a title to pretend to it. If an individual
or family go a hunting or fishing, what is caught
belongs to the individual or to the family, and they
communicate no part of it to any but to their cazique,

or

or to such of their. kindred as happen to be indisposed
If any person in the village come to their hut, he
may fit down freely, and eat without aiking liberty.
But this is the consequence of their general principle
of hospitality; for I never observed any partition of
the increase of their fields, or the produce of the
chace, which I could confider as the result of any
idea concerning a community of goods. On the con-
trary, they are so much attached to what they deem
to be their property, that it would be extremely dan-
gerous to encroach upon it. As far as I have seen,
or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians in South
America, among whom that community of goods
which has been so highly extolled is known. The
circumstance in the government of the Jesuits, most
irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the commu-
nity of goads which those fathers introduced. This
was repugnant to the original ideas of the Indians.
They were acquainted with the rights of private
exclusive property, and they submitted with impa-
tience to regulations which destroyed them." M. le
Cheval. de Pinto, MS. penes me. " Ascual posses-
sion (fays a miflionary who resided several years
among the Indians of the Five Nations) gives a right
to the foil, but whenever a possessor fees fit to quit it,
another has as good right to take it as he who left it.
This law, or custom, refpe&s not only the particular
spot on which he ere&s his house, but also his plant-
ing-ground. If a man has prepared a particular spot
of ground, on which he designs in future to build or
plant, no man has a right to incommode him, much
less to the fruit of his labours, until it appears that

he

he voluntarily gives up his views. But I neyf le
of any formal conveyance from one.,Indianto aeothet
in their natural fate. The limits of every.cantpn,.s
circumscribed; that is, they are:allowedto .unt a,'far
as such a river on this hand, and such a mountai .on
the other. This area is occupied and, improved:by,
individuals and their families. Individuals, not the.
community, have the use and profit of their own la-
bours, or success in hunting." MS. of Mr..Gideon
Hawley, penes me.

NOTE XXXV. p. i33.
T HIS difference of temper between the Americaifs

and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a prover-

bial faying in the French islands, " Regarder un fau-
vage de travers, c'efl le battre; le battre, c'eft re
tuer; battre un negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre, if.
490.

NO T.E XXXVI. p. r34.
T HE description of the political state of the people

of Cinaloa perfectly resembles that of the inha-

bitants of North America. " They have neither laws
nor kings (fays a missionary who resided long among
them) to punish any crime. Nor is there amn6ng
them -any species of authority, or political governi-
ment, to restrain them in any part of their condut.
It is true, that they acknowledge certain Caziques,
who are heads of their families or villages, but their
authority appears chiefly in war, and the expeditions
against their enemies. This authority the Caziques

obtain

obtain not by hereditary right, but by their valour in
war, or by the power and number of their families
and relations. Sometimes they owe their pre-eminence
to their eloquence in'difplaying their own exploits."
Ribas Hiflor. de las Triumph. &c. p. IT. The
slate of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly the'
fame. " They have no regular form of government,
or civil life, but in matters of public concern they
liftcn to the advice of their old men, and usually
follow it. The dignity of Cazique is not hereditary,
but conferred according to merit, as the reward of
valour in war. The union among them is imperfect.
Their society referibles a republic without any head,
in which every man is malfer of himself, an3,' bpon
the least disgust, separates from those with whom he
seemed to be cononeed." Relacion Historical de las
Mifliones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernan-
dez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under very different climates,
when nations are in a similar slate of society, their
inflitutions and civil government assume the fame
form.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 152.

HAVE known the Indians (fays a person well ac.
quainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand

r.iles for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods,
over hills and mountains, through huge cane swamps,
exposed to the extremities of heat and cold, the vicif^r
fitide of feafnns, to hunger and thirst. Such is their
over-boiling revengeful temper, that they utterly con-
temn all those things as imaginary trifles, if they are
so happy as to get the scalp of the murderer, or enemy,

VOL. II. K k to

to satisfy the craving ghosts of their deceased rela-
tions." Adair's Hit. of Amer. Indians, p. i50.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 152.

N the account of the great war between the Algon-
quins and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pilkaret,

a famous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly
by himself alone, or with one or two companions,
make a capital figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c.
Colden's Hil. of Five Nations, 125, &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. i55.
T HE life of an unfortunate leader is often in

danger, and he is always degraded from the rank

which he had acquired by his former exploits. Adair,
p. 388.

NOTE XL. p. i55.
AS the ideas of the North Americans with refpecr

to the mode of carrying on war, are generally

known; I have founded my observations chiefly upon
the teflimony of the authors who describe them. But
the fame maxims took place among other nations in
the New World. A judicious missionary has given a
view of the military operations of the people in Gran
Chaco, in South America, perfectly similar to those
of the Iroquois. " They are much addicted to war
(fays he), which they carry on frequently among them-
selves, but perpetually against the Spaniards. But they
may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they
never make head against the Spaniards, uilefs when
they can affauk them by fealth, or have guarded againit

anv

any mifchaice by fplies, who may be called indefati-
gable; thiy Will watch th'e fettleents of the Spaniards
for one, two, or three years, obfervingby night every
thing that pasTees with the'u'moft solicitude, whether
they may expet rutfitance or not, and until they are
perfefly secure of the event they will not venture
upon an attack ; so that when they do give the assault,
they are certain of success, and free from all danger.
These spies, in order that they may not be observed,
will creep on all-four like cats in the night; but if
they are discovered, make their escape with much dex-
terity. But, although they never chufe to face the
Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any place, whence
they cannot escape, they will fight with desperate
valour, and fell their lives very dear." Lozano
Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLI. p. 157.
L ERY, who was an eye-witness of the proceed-

ings of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a

war against a powerful nation of their enemies, de-
scribes their courage and ferocity in very itriking terms.
Ego cum Gallo altero, paulo curiofius, magno nofiro
periculo (si enim ab hoftibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus,
devorationi fuiffemus devoti), barbaros noftros in mili-
tiam euntes comitari volui. Hi, numero 4000 ca-
pita, cum hoftibus ad littus decertarunt, tanta feroci-
tate, ut vel rabidos & furiosos quofque fuperarent.
Cum primum 'hostes confpexere, in magnos atque
editos ululatus perruperunt. Hac gens adeo sera eft
& truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum
reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant.

K k 2 Qlod

Quod a natura illis inditum effe reor. T4.r ,iterFea
me,. qui non femel, tum.peditum turn equitum copias
ingentes, in aciem initruaas hic confpexi, tanta nun-
quam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis ful-
gentibus, quanta turn pugnantibus iftis percuffum
suisse. Lery His. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iii.
207, 208, 209.

NOTE XLII. p. 159.
TRHE Americans, like other fierce nations, origi-

nally cut off the heads of the enemies whom they

flew in war, and carried them away as trophies. But,
as they found these cumbersome in their retreat,whlich
they always make very rapidly, and often through a
vast extent of country, they became satisfied with tear-
ing off their scalps. This custom, though mositpre-
valent in North America, was not unknown among
the southern tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLIII. p. 165.
T HE terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by

the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war

to revenge the death of my brothers; 1 fall kill; I
shall exterminate; I shall burn my enemies; I shall
bring away flares; I hfall devour their heart, dry their
P.efh, drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps,
and make cups of their sculls." Boffu's Travels
rrh.oizh Louifi:na, vol. i. p. 102. I am informed,
by persons on whose teltimony I can rely, that as the
number of people in the Indian tribes has decreased so
much, almost none of their prisoners are now put.to
&e.;:h. It is ccfi:.rcd as better policy to spare and

to

to adopt them. Thbfde'drea'd'ful fTehes which I have
described' occur how ifb'arely;' that 'niiidfinaries and'
traders who have:irfided longatiriorig the Indians, never
were witnesses to them.;

NOTE XLIV. p. x65.

LL the travellers who have visited the most un-
civilized of the American tribes, agree in this.

It is confirmed by two remarkable circumflances,
which occurred in the conquest of different provinces.
In the expedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year
1528, the Spaniards were reduced to such extreme
distress by famine, that, in order to preserve their own
lives, they eat such of their companions as happened
to die. This appeared so ihocking to the natives,
who were accuflomed to devour none but prisoners,
that it filled them with horror and indignation against
the Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584.
Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv.
p. 15. During the siege of Mexico, though the
Mexicans devoured with greediness the Spaniards and
Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners, the utmoff
rigour of the famine which they suffered could not in-
duce them to touch the dead bodies of their own
countrymen. Bern. Diaz. del Caflillo Conquift. de
la N. Efpagna, p. I56.

NOTE XLV. p. 167.
M ANY singular circumstances concerning the

treatment of prisoners among the people of

Brasil, arc contained in the narrative of Stadius, a
German officer in the service of the Portuguese,

K k 3 publilhed

N 0 1 t AL. p. 155.
As the ideas of the North Americans with respect

to the mode of carrying on war, are generally

known; I have founded my observations chiefly upon
the testimony of the authors who describe them. But
the fame maxims took place among other nations in
the New World. A judicious missionary has given a
view of the military operations of the people in Gran
Chaco, in South America, perfectly similar to those
of the Iroquois. " They are much addicted to war
(fays he), which they carry on frequently among them-
selves, but perpetually against the Spaniards. But they
may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they
never make head agalnft the Spaniards, unless when
they can aTfault them by ftialth, or have guarded against

Zlan

I:'.f:;ip. dt:l G'ran Ccaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLI. p. 157.
tERY, who was an eye-witness of the proceed-

ings of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a

war against a powerful nation of their enemies, de-
scribes their courage and ferocity in very triking terms.
Ego cum Gallo altero, paulo curiofius, magno noftro
periculo (li enim ab hoftibus capti aut lefi fuiflTmus,
devorationi fuilfemus devoti), barbaros noftros in mili-
tiam euntes comitari volui. Hi, numero 4000 ca-
pita, curn hofibus ad littus decertarunt, tanta feroci-
tate, ut vel rabidos & furiosos quofque fuperarent.
Cum prirnum hoftcs confpexere, in magnos atque
editos ululatus pcrruperunt. Hac gens adeo sera eft
& truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum
reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamquenunquam capeffant.

K k 2 Qlod

Quod a natura illis inditum effe reor. Teltor .iiterea
me, qui non femel, turn peditum turn equitum copias
ingentes, in aciem inftrutas hic confpexi, tanta nun-
quam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis ful-
gentibus, quanta urn pugnantibus iftis percuffum
suisse. Lery Hist. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iii.
207, 208, 209.

NOTE XLII. p. 159.
T HE Americans, like other fierce nations, origi-

nally cut off the heads of the enemies whom they

flew in war, and carried them away as trophies. But,
as they found these cumbersome in their retreat,, which
they always make very rapidly, and often through a
vast extent of country, they became satisfied with tear-
ing off their scalps. This custom, though mot pre-
valent in North America, was not unknown among
the souther tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLIII. p. i65.
T HE terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by

the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war

to revenge the death of my brothers; 1 shall kill; I
shall exterminate; I shall burn my enemies; I shall
bring away slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their
P.eh, drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps,
and make cups of their skulls." Boffu's Travels
trrcui.h Louifil:na, vol. i. p. 102. I am informed,
by persons on whose testimony I can rely, that as the
number of people in the Indian tribes has decreased so
much, alrr.at none of their prisoners are now put to
&.'h. It is cc,,.idered as better policy to spare and

to

to adopt them. Those dreadful f'cees which I have
described' occir now 'so rarely, that mifilonaries and
traders who haverefided longnamong the Indians, never
were witnesses to them.

NOTE XLIV. p. 165.
ALL the travellers who have visited the mos un-

civilized of the American tribes, agree in this.

It is confirmed by two remarkable circumstances,
which occurred in the conquest of different provinces.
In the expedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year
1528, the Spaniards were reduced to such extreme
distress by famine, that, in order to preserve their own
lives, they eat such of their companions as happened
to die. This appeared so {hocking to the natives,
who were accustomed to devour none but prisoners,
that it filled them with horror and indignation against
the Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584.
Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv.
p. 15. During the siege of Mexico, though the
Mexicans devoured with greediness the Spaniards and
Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners, the utmost
rigour of the famine which they suffered could not in-
duce them to touch the dead bodies of their own
countrymen. Bern. Diaz. del Caflillo Conquifi. de
la N. Elpagna, p. 156.

NOTE XLV. p. 167.

A NYANY singular circumstances concerning the
treatment of prisoners among the people of

Brasil, are contained in the narrative of Stadius, a
German officer in the service of the Portuguese,

K k 3 published

publiihed in the year 1556. He was taken prisoner
by the Toupinambis, and remained in captivity nine
years. He was often present at those horrid festivals
which he describes, and was destined himself to the
fzr.e cruel fate with other priioners. But he saved
his life by extraordinary efforts of courage and address.
De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De Lery, who accom-
pa.ied M. De VJilegagnon in his expedition t. Brasil,
in the year 1556, and who resided some time in that
country, agrees with Stadius in every circumiftanc ui
importance. He was frequently an eye-witness of the
manner in which the Brafilians treated their prisoners.
De Bry, iii. 210. Several striking particulars omitted
by them, are mentioned by a P..;tugufe author.
Putch. Pi!:r. iv. 1294, &c.

NOTE XLVI. p. 17i.

HOU GH I have followed that opinion concern-
i.g :he :pathy of the Americans, which appeared

to me mcft rational, and supported by the authority
of the molt refpeclable authors, other theories have
been formed with regard to it, by writers of great
eminence. D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends,
that the texture of the skin and bodii. habit of the
Americars is f..ch, that they are less fenlible of pain
than the reft of rmankind. He produces several proofs
of this, f:om the manner in which they endure the
roft cruel chirurgical operations, S&c. Noticias
Americ-.i.s, p. 313, 314. The fame observation
has been made by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian,
they fay, never complains under pain, and will bear

the

the amputation of a leg or arm without uttering a
single groan. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVII. p. 74.

HI S is an idea natural to all rude nations.
Among the Romans, in the early periods of

their commonwealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner,
" turn decefflife videtur cum captus eft." Digeot.
lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. 18. and afterwards when the pro-
grcfs of refinement rendered them more indulgent
with rcfpec to this article, they were obliged to em-
ploy two ficions of law to secure the property, and
permit the return of a captive, the one by the Lex
Cornelia, and the other by the Jus Poftliminii Heinec.
Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294. Among
the negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom was
ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon as one is taken
in war, he is reputed to be dead; and he is so in effe&
to his country and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des
Marchais, i. p. 369.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 175.

H
I E people of Chili, the most gallant and high-
spirited of all the Americans, are the only ex-

ception to this observation. They attack their enemies
in the open field; their troops are ranged in regular
order; their battalions advance to the charge not only
with courage, but with discipline. The North Ame-
ricans, though many of them have substituted the Eu-
ropean fire-arms in place of their own bows and ar-
rows, still adhere to their ancient maxims of war,

Kk 4 and

and carry it on according to their own peculiar fyftern.
But the Chilefe nearly resemble the warlike nations of
Europe and Asia in their military operations. Ovalle's
Relation of Chili. Church's Coll. iii. p. 71.
Lozano's Hist. Parag. i. 1,4, 145.

NOTE XLIX. p. 179.

ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this.
In Yucatan, the men are To solicitous about their

dress, that they carry about with them mirrors, pro-
bably made of stone, like those of the Mexicans,
Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. in which they delight to view
themfeives; but the women never use there. Dec. iv.
lib. x. c. 3. He takes notice, that among the fierce
tribe of the Panches, in the new kingdom of Granada,
none butdiitineu!lhed warriors were permitted either to
pierce their lip3, and to wear green Itones in them, or
to adorn their h:ads .vi:h p!umes of feathers. Dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. A. In tome provinces of Peru, though that
er,.pire had made considerable progress in civilization,
the ft-te of wonen was little in:proved. All the toil
of cultivation anJ domeflic work was devolved upon
them, and they were no: per.itted to wear bracelets
or other ornmr.ents, with which the men were fond
of decking thei,^:' , s. Za.ate Hist. de Peru, i.
p. 15, 16.

NOTE L. p. 179.
I HAVE ventured to cal: this mode of anointing and

painting their bodies, the drs'q of the Americans.
Fbis is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never

fir

flir abroad if they are not completely anointed ; they
excuse themselves when in this situation, by faying,
that they cannot appear because they are naked.
Gumilla Hilt. de l'Orenoque, i. 19r.

NOTE LI. p. i8r.

O MIE tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the
gulf of California, seem to be among the rudest

people of America united in the social fiate. They
neither cultivate nor sow; they have no houses in
which they reside. Those in the inland country sub-
fitl by hunting; those on the sea-coast chiefly by fish-
ing. Both depend upon the spontaneous productions
of the earth, fruits, plants, and roots of various
kinds. In the rainy season, as they have no habita-
tions to afford them ihelter, they gather bundles of
reeds, or firong grass, and binding them together at
one end, they open them at the other, and fitting
them to their heads, they are covered as with a large
cap, which like a pent-house throws off the rain, and
will keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a shed with the branches of
trees, which protects them from the sultry rays of the
fun. When exposed to cold they make large fires,
round which they sleep in the open air. Hiftoria de
los Triumfos de nueltra Santa Fe entre Gentes las mas
barbaras, &c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE

NOTE LII .

p. 182.

HE S E houses resemble barns. " We have
measured fore which were a hundred and fifty

paces long, and twenty paces broad. Above a hundred
persons refits in Tome of them." Wilson's Account
of Gu2an2. Purch. Pilgr. vol. iy. p. 1263. Ibid.
1291. " The Indian houses," fays MI. Barrere,

have a moit wretched appearance, and are a firiking

imaze of the rudeness of early times. Their huts are
commonly built on some rising ground, or on the
banks of a river, huddled sometimes together, some.
times ftraegling, and always without any order.
Their afpzEt is melancholy and disagreeable. One
fees no:hing but what is hideous and savage. The
uncultivated firlds have no gaiety. Thefilence which
reigns there, unless when interrupted by the disagree-
able no:es of bi:ds, or cries of wild beasts, is ex-
tremely dirfmll." Relat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIII. p. 185.

O M E tribes in South America can fend their ar-
rows to a great diflance, and with considerable

force, withaut the aid of the bow. They make use
of a hollow reed, about nine feet long, and an inch
thick, which is called a Sarbaeane. In it they lodge
a frnai arrow, with lome unfpun cotton wound about
its great end; th:s confines the air, so that they can
blow it with ailonifhing rapidity, and a sure aim, to
the dditance of above a hundred paces. These small

3 arrows

arrows are always poisoned. Fermin. Defcr. de
Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hist. of Guiana, p. 281,
&c. The Sarbacane is much used by the East Indians.

NOTE LIV. p. 185.

MIGHT produce many instances of this, but ihall
satisfy myself with one, taken from the Efkimaux.
Their greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is shewn

in the ftru&ure of their bows, made commonly of
three pieces of wood, each making part of the fame
arch, very nicely and exacly joined together. They
are commonly of fir or larch; and as this wants
firength and elasticity, they supply both by bracing
the back of the bow, with a kind of thread, or line,
made of the sinews of their deer, and the bow-firing
of the fame materials. To make them draw more
tfiffly, they dip them into water, which causes both
the back of the bow and the firing to contract, and
consequently gives it the greater force; and as they
praacife from their youth, they ihoot with very great
dexteritv"' Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. 13S.

NOTE LV. p. 186.
N ECES S ITY is the great prompter and guide

of mankind in their inventions. There is,

however, such inequality in some parts of their pro-
grefs, and some nations get so far the start of others in
circumstances nearly similar, that we mult ascribe
this to some events in their story, or to some pecu-
liarity in their situation with which we are unac-
quainted. The people in the island of Otaheite,

lately

lately discovered in the South Sea, far excet most ,of
the Americans in the knowledge and praaice'of the arts
of ingenuity, and yet they had not invented any me-
thod of boiling water; and having no vessel that
would bear the fire, they had no more idea that water
could be made hot, than that it could be made solid.
Voyages by Hawkefworth, i, 466. 484.

NOTE LVI. p. 186.
oNE of these boats, which could carry nine men,

weighed only sixty pounds. Gofnol Relat. des

Voy. a la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au Nord. tom. v,
p. 403.

NOTE LVII. p. i89.
A REM.ARKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa.

In weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other

coarse cloths, which they are accustomed to manu-
fa&ure, their industry has discovered no more expedi-
tious method, than to take up thread after thread,
and after counting and forting them each time, to pass
the woof between them, so that in finishing a small
piece of there tluffs, they frequently spend more than
two years. Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame
description of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. Ac-
cording to Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch of the
North American Indians are not greater, p. 422.
From one of the engravings of the .Mexican paintings
in Purchas, vol. iii. p. I c6. I think it probable that
tfe people of Mexico were unacquainted with any
better or more expeditious mode of weaving. A loom

was

was an invention beyond the ingenuity of the most
improved Americans.,. In all their works they advance
so slowly, that one of their artists is two months at a
tobacco-pipe with his knife, before he finiihes it.
Adair, p. 423.

NOTE LVIII. p. 192.
THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeurs

des Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in
quarto.

NOTE LIX. P. 14.

H A V E referred the reader to several of the
authors who describe the most uncivilized na-

tions in America. Their testimony is uniform.
That of P. Ribas concerning the people of Cina-
loa, coincides with the reft. " I was extremely
attentive (rays he), during the years I resided among
them, to ascertain whether they were to be confidered
as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the most per-
seA exatnefs, that though among some of them there
may be traces of idolatry, yet others have not the
least knowledge of God, or even of any faife deity,
nor pay any formal adoration to the Supreme Being,
who exercises dominion over the world; nor have they
any conception of the providence of a creator or go-
vernor, from whom they expec in the next life the
reward of their good, or the punishment of their evil
deeds. Neither do they publicly join in any aa of
divine worship." Ribas Triumphos, &c. p. 16.

NOTE

sNOTE LX. p. 196.
r HE people of Brasil were so much affrighted

', thunder, which is frequent and dreadful in

their country, as well as in other parts of the torrid
zone, that it was not orly- the obje't of religiocs reve-
rence; bu: the ooft exprefive name in their language
for the Dcity, was Tcupan, the fame by which they
diingiruilhed thunder. Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8.
Nieuhoff. Church. Coll. ii. p. 132.

NOTE LXI. p. 205.

Y the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness,
gives of the funeral of the great chief of the

Natchez, it appears, that the feelings of the persons
who suffered on that occasion were very different.
Some solicited the honour with eagerness; others
laboured to avoid their doom, and several saved their
lives by fving to the woods. As the Indian Bramins
give an int:xicating draught to the women, who are
to be burnt together with the bodies of their husbands,
which renders them infcr.fible of their approaching
fate, the Natchez obliged their vicims to swallow
several laroe pi!!s of tobacco, which produce a similar
effect. Mlem. de Louis. i. 227.

NOTE LXII. p. 214.
O N some occasions, particularly in dances instituted

for tl;e recovery of persons who are indifpoted,
they are extremely licentious and indecent. De la

Potherie

Potherie Hilt. &c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. Fr. iii;
p. 319. But the nature of their dances is commonly
such as I have described.

NOTtE LXIII. p. 216.

H E Othomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of
the Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a com-

position, which they call Yupa. It is formed of the
feeds of an unknown plant, reduced to powder, and
certain shells burnt and pulverized. The effets of this
when drawn up into the nostrils are Co violent, that they
resemble madness rather than intoxication. Gumilla,
i. 286.

NO T E LXIV. p. 220.
r HOUGH this observation holds true among the

greater part of the southern tribes, there are forhe

in which the intemperance of the women is as exceflive
as that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Guiana,
p. 275.

NOTE LXV. p.226.

V EN in the most intelligent writers concerning
the manners of the Americans, one meets with

inconliftent and inexplicable circumstances. P. Char-
lcvoix, who, in consequence of the controversy be-
tween his order and that of the Franciscans, with re-
fpecl to the talents and abilities of the North Ameri-
cans, is disposed to represent both their intellectual
and moral qualities in the most favourable light,
ahl rts, that they are engaged in continual negociations

with

with their neighbours, andconduc these with the mnot
refined addrefis At the fame time,.he.adds, ' thia
it becomes their envoys.or plenipotehtiaries ta.exert
their abilities and eloquence, for if the terms which
they offer are not accepted .of, they had need to (tand
on their guard. It frequently happens, that a blow
with a hatchet is the only return given to their propo-
fitions. He is not out of danger even if he is so for-
tunate as to avoid the stroke, he may expeflto be pur-
sued, and if taken, to be burnt."' Hist. N. Fr. iii.
251. What occurs 'ol. ii. p. 29.' concerning the
rr.-nner in which the Tlafcalans treated' the ambafla-
dcrs from Zempoalla, corresponds with the faR re-
lated by Charlevoix. Men capable of such acts of
violence, seemed to be unacquainted with the firll
principles upon which the intercourse between nations
is founded; and instead of the perpetual negociations
which Charlevoix mentions, it seems almost impoflible
that there should be any correspondence whatever
among them.

NOTE LXVI. p. 228.
IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,

" Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nee

acceptis obiigantur." C. 21. An author who had a
good opportunity of observing the principle which
leads savages neither to express gratitude for favours
which they had received, nor to expect any return for
such as they bestowed, thus explains their ideas:

If, fay they, you give me this, it is because you
have no need of it yourself and as for me, I never

part

part with that:which- ithink neceffair.tobmeJeii Me.
moir fur le Galibis;s'.ifHitdesr Pantes'4iH.la Guiane
Francoise par M.,Alblet, ton;...i.p; roj ,-:......

IN OT-E LXVI L-pi 245.;- .', '<',.
AN D. BESXIA'LiES, the~'eiC6temport" and 'frieiid

of Colurnbus', ath'Wpreferved 'sTome cfiljf m^rie

concerning the braverybf'the Caribbees,iwhich ^ae it
mentioned 'byDon Ferdinand Columbus, or the ot.
historians of that period, whose works have been piub-
lilhed. A Caribbean canoe with' four ' en, two
women, and a boy, fell in unexpectedly with the fleet
of Columbus in his fecbnd voyage, as it was'fteeriing
through tlihir islands. At first, they were ftruck-alT
most flupid with astonishment at such a stran'ge spe'c-
tacle, and hardly' oved from the spot for above'an
hour. A Spaniflrbark, with twenty-five men,'ad-
vanced towards them, and the fleet gradually'fiur-
rounded them, so as to cut off their' communication
with the shore. " When they saw that it was ihipof-
fible to escape (fays the historian), they seized their
arms with undaunted resolution, and began the attack.
I use the expression, with undaunted reflution, for they
were few, and beheld a vast riunmbr ready to aflault
them. They wounded several of the Spanialds, al-
though they had targets, as well as other defensive ar-
mour; and even after their canoe was overset, it wais
with no little difficulty and danger, that part of the'ri
were taken, as they continued to defend themselves,
and to use their bows'with great dexterity wh'ile'fwimi
ming in the Tea."" · Hist. de'D. Fern. y Yfab. MSS:
c, 119. . . . .

VOL. II. LI NOTE

NOTE LXVITI. p.245.
APROBABLE conjeturt may be formed with refpea

to the cause of the diftintion in chara6er between

the Caribbees and the irihabitants ds 'the -larger islands.
The former appear manifefiRy to be a separate race.
Their language is totally different from that of their
neighbours in the large islands. They themselves
have a tradition, that their ancestors came originally
from rome part of the continent, and having conquered
and exterminated the ancient inhabitants, took posses-
sion of their lands, and of their women. Rochefort,
384. Tertre, 360. Hence they call themselves Ba-
7aree, which signifies a man come from beyond sea.
Labat. vi. 131. Accordingly, the Caribbees still use
two diftint languages, one peculiar to the men, andjthe
other to the women. Tertre, 361. The language of
the men has nothing common with that spoken in the
large islands. The dialec of the women considerably
resembles it. Labat. 129. This strongly confirms
the tradition which I have mentioned. The Carib-
bees themselves imagine, that they were a colony from
the Galii:s, a powerful nation of Guiana, in South
America. Tertre, 361. Rochefort, 348. But as their
fierce manners approach nearer to those of the people
in the northern continent, than to those of the natives
of South America; and as their language has likewise
some affinity to that spoken in Florida, their origin
fould be deduced rather from the former than from
the latter. Labat. 12S, k&c. Herrera, Dec. i. lib. ix.
c. 4. In their wars, they lill observe their ancient
pracice of deflroying all the rma!es, and preserving the
women either for servitude or for brecding.

NOTE

N O it E LXIX. p. 247.
O U R knowledge of the events which happened in

the conquest of New Spaii, is detived from

sources of information more original and authentic than
that of any tranfacion in the history of America. The
letters of Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the
most valuable of these; and the firfi in order of time.
As Cortes early afflumed a command independent of
Velasquez, it became necessary to convey such an ac-
count of his operations to Madrid, as miight procure
him the approbation of his sovereign.

THE firfi of his dispatches has never been made

public. It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July i6th)
i519. As I imagined that it might not reach the
Emperor, until he arrived in Gerinany, for vIhich he
set out early in the year 1520, in order to receive thd
Imperial crown; I made diligent search for a copy of
this dispatch, both ih Spain and in Germany, but
without success. This, howeverj is of less confe-
quence, as it could not contain any thing very mate-
rial, being written so soon after Cortes arrived in New
Spain. But, in searching for the letter from Cortes,
a copy of one from the colony of Vera-Cruz to the
Emperor has been discovered in the Imperial library
at Vienna. Of this I have Subjoined some account at
the close of the Notes to the third volume. The second
dispatch, dated Oftober 3oth, 1520, was published at
Seville, A D. 1522, and the third and fourth soon
after they were received. A Latin translation of them

L 1 2 appeared

appeared in Germany, A. D. 1532. Ramufio soon
after made them more generally known, by inserting
them in his valuable colleAion. They contain a re-
gular and minute history of the expedition, with many
curious particulars concerning the policy and manners
of the Mexicans. The work does honour to Cortes;
the style is Gmple and perspicuous; but as it was ma-
nifeffly his interest to represent his own actions in the
fairest light, his victories are probably exaggerated, his
lofics diminished, and his aas of rigour and violence
fome-hat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva

Efpazna, by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, published
A. D. 554.. Gomara's historical merit is considerable.
His mode of narration is clear, flowing, always agree-
able, and Sometimes elegant. But he is frequently in-
accurate and credulous; and as he was the domestic
ch-elain of Cortes after his return from New Spain,
::.z probably composed his work at his desire, it is
r-.nz.ft that he -abours to magnify the merit of his
i.::j, and t., c.,nc.-l or extenuate such tranfacions as
were unsavourab!e to his cz.-rac-cr. Of this Herrera
a:cJi: him in one instance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and
i: :- ),,t once only that this is conspicuous. He writes,

:'..-_'ve-, with fu u.':ch freedom concerning several
i-. :;.res of t:.e Spa;.ifh court, that the copies both of
I: Hfitor a de as Indias, and of his Chronica, were

c'!d in by a decree of the council of the Indies, and
they v.-e e long confidered as prohibited books in Spain,
though of late licence to print them has been granted.
Pinelo Biblio:h. 589.

THE

THE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del

Castillo to compofehis Hifloria Verdadera de la Con-
quifta de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an adven-
turer in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and
was the companion of Cortes in all his battles and
perils. When he found that neither he himself, nor
many of his fellow-foldiers were once mentioned by
Gomara, but that the fame of all their exploits was
ascribed to Cortes; the gallant veteran laid hold of his
pen with indignation, and composed his true history.
It contains a prolix, minute, confused narrative of all
Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar style as
might be expected from an illiterate soldier. But as
he relates tranfacions of which he was witness, and in
which he performed a considerable part, his account
bears all the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied
with such a pleasant naiveti, with such interesting de-
tails, with such amusing vanity, and yet so pardonable
in an old soldier who had been (as he boasts) in a hun-
dred and nineteen battles, as renders his book one of
the molt Singular that is to be found in any language.

PET. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatise de Infulis

nuper inventis, added to his Decades de Rebus Oceani-
cis & Novo Orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expe-
dition. But he proceeds no farther than to relate
what happened after his first landing. This work,
which is brief and flight, seems to contain the inform-
ation transmitted by Cortes in his first dispatches, em-
bellifhed with several particulars communicated to the
author by the officers who brought the letters from
Cortes.

L 3 BUT

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern

historians have had recourse for information concerning
the conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la Conquifta
de Mexico, por I). Antonio de Solis, first published
A. D. 1684. I know no author in any language
whole literary fame has risen so far beyond his real
merit. De Solis is reckoned by his countrymen one
of the purest writers in the Castilian tongue; and if a
foreigner may venture to give his opinion concerning
a matter of which Spaniards alone are qualified to
judge, he is intitled to that praise. But, though his
language be correa, his taste in composition is far from
being just. His periods are so much laboured as to be
often siss, and sometimes tumid; the figures which be
employs by way of ornament, are trite or improper,
and his observations superficial. These blemishes,
however, might easily be overlooked, if he were not
defecive with refpecl to all the great qualities of an
historian. Destitute of that patient indufiry in re-
search, which conduts to the knowledge of truth 1
a stranger to that impartiality which weighs evidence
with cool attention; and ever eager to eflablish his fa-
vourite sysTem of exaltirig the charater of Cortes into
that of a perfect hero, exempt from error, and adorned
with every virtue; he is less solicitous to discover what
was true, than to relate what might appear splendid.
VWhen he attempts any critical diicuflicn, his reason-
ings are fallacious, and founded upon an imperfect
view of facts. Though he sometimes quotes the dif-
t!.'.ie of Cortes, he seems not to have consulted them;
and though he lets out with some censure on Gomara,

he

he frequently prefers his authority, the moft,dqubtuful
of any, to that of the other contemporary historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes

the fullest and most accurate information concerning
the conquest of Mexico, as well as every other tranf-
a&ion of America. The induPrry and attention with
which he consulted not only the books, but the origi-
nal papers and public records, which tended to throw
any light upon the fubie&6 of his enquiries, were so
great, and he usually judges of the evidence before him
with so much impartiality and candour, that his de-
cads may be ranked among the most judicious and
useful historical collecions. If, by attempting to re-
late the various occurrences in the New World in a
firiE chronological order, the arrangement of events
in his work had not been rendered so perplexed, dif-
conneted, and obscure, that it is an unpleasant talk
to collec from different parts of his book, and piece
together the detached shreds of a story, he might justly
have been ranked among the most eminent historians of
his country. He gives an account of the materials
from which he composed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii.
c. 19.

NOTE LXX. p. 250.
CORTES purposed to have gone in the train of

Ovando when he set out for his government in the

year 1502, but was detained by an accident. As he
was attempting in a dark night to scramble up to the
window of a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he car-
ried on an intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which

L1 4 he

he had mounted, gave way, and he was so much bruised
by the fall as to -be-unfit for the voyage. Gomara,
Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, cap, i.

NOTE LXXI. p. 53.
C O RT ES had two thousand pesos in the hands of

Andrew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand.

These fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred
pounds lterling; but as the price of every thing was
extremely high in America, they made but a scanty
ilock when applied towards the equipment of a mili-
tary expedition. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B.
Diaz. c. 20.

NOTE LXXII. p. 259.
'THE names of those gallant officers which will

often occur in the subsequent story, were Juan

Velasquez de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero,
Francisco de Montejo, Chriftoval de Olid, Juan de
Ffcalante, Francisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado,
Francico de Salceda, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de
Nortes. Cortes himself commanded the Capitana, or
Admiral. Francisco de Orozco, an officer formed in
the wars of Italy, had the command of the artillery.
The experienced Alaminos aced as chief pilot.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 261.
IN those different conflicts, the Spaniards loft only

two men, but had a considerable number wounded.

Though there be no occasion for recourse to any fu-
pernatural cause to account either for the greatness of

their

tH ei r vi ofYies, 'o''the 'fm'innefy'obf theirr£s; sthtiSpa-
nifh hiffriaris'fail:rn'it td'c''fgl'bBthrtb the'pa'trsonagi
of St. Jago, the tutelar Sairit oF'their c6untriy whob-as
they relate, fought at the head of their countrymen,
and by his prowess gave'a 'turh 'to the fate of the
battle. Gomara is the first who mentions this appari-
tion of St. James. It is amusing to observe the embark
raffment of B. Diaz de Castillo, occasioned by the
struggle between his superstition and his veracity. The
former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter
restrained him from attesting it. " I acknowledge,
fays he, that all our exploits and vicories are owing
to our Lord Jesus Chriss, and that in this battle there
was such a number of Indians to every one of us, that
if each had thrown a handful of earth they might have
buried us, if by the great mercy of God we had not
been proteRied. It may be that the person whom Go-
mara mentions as having appeared ori a mottled grey
horse, was the glorious apofile Signor Sari Jago or
Signor San Pedro; and that I, as being afinner, was
not worthy to fee him. This I know, that I saw
Francisco de Morla on such a horse, but as an unwor-
thy transgressor, did not deserve to fee any of the holy
apostles. It may have been the will of God, that it
was so as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chro-
nicle I never heard among any of the conquerors that
such a thing had happened." Cap. 34.

N 0 T E LXXIV. p. 269.
SEVERAL Spanish historians relate this occurrence

in such terms, as if they wished it should be be-
lieved, that the Indians loaded with the presents, had

3 carried

carried ther from the eapital in the fame flort space
of time that the couriers performed that journey.
This is incredible, and Gomara mentions a circum.
fiance which shews, that nothing extraordinary hap-
pened on this occasion. This rich present had been
prepared for Grijalva, when he touched at the fame
place fomne months before, and was now ready to be
delivered, as soon as AMontezuma sent orders for
that purpose. Gomara Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of

the silver plate representing the moon, was alone
above twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand
pounds Sterling.

NO TE LXXV. p. 276.
T H I S private traffic was direcly contrary to the

inftrudions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that

whatever was acquired by trade should be thrown into
the common flock. But it appears, that the soldiers
had each a private assortment of toys, and other goods
proper for the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their
favour by encouraging this under-hand barter. B.
D.az, c. 4r.

N O T E LXXVI. p. 292.
G OM IARA has published a catalogue of the vari-

ous articles of which this present confiffed. Cron.

c. 49. P. Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after
they were brought to Spain, and who seems to have
examined them with great attention, gives a defcrip-

tion

tion of each, which is. curious,, as...it,.conveys some
idea of the progreyf which the Mexicans had made- i4
several arts of elegance. De Infulis puper iavertid
Liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 300.
THERE is no circumstance in thehiftory of the

conquest of America, which is more questionable

than the account of the numerous armies brought into
the field againlt the Spaniards. As the war with the
TlaCcalans, though of short duration, was one of the
most considerable which they waged in America, the
account given of their forces merits some attention.
The only authentic information concerning this is de-
rived from three authors. Cortes, in his second dif-
patch to the emperor, dated at Segura de la Frontera,
October 30, 1520, thus estimates the number of their
troops in the first battle 6000; in the second battle
oo0,coo; in the third battle 50,000o. Relat. ap.
Ramus. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del Cafiillo, who was
an eye-witness, and engaged in all the aAions of this
war, thus reckons their numbers; in the first battle
3000, p. 43; in the second battle 6000, ibid. in
the third battle 50,000, p. 45. Gomara, who was
Cortes's chaplain after his return to Spain, and pub-
lifhed his Gronica in 1552, follows the computation
of Cortes, except in the second battle, where he
reckons the Tlafcalans at 80,ooo, p. 49. It was
manifestly the interest of Cortes to magnify his own
dangers and exploits. For it was only by the merit
of extraordinary services, that he could hope to atone
for his irregular condu&, in assuming an inde-

6 pendent

pendent comrifand. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly
disposed to place his own prowess, .and that of his
felow-ronquerors, in the most advantageous point of
light, had not the fame temptation to exaggerate.
and, it is probable, that his account of the numbers
approaches nearer to the truth. The assembling of
an army of 50o,0oo men requires many previous, ar-
rangements, and such provision for their subsistence
as seems to be beyond the foresight of Americans.
The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala does not seem
to have been so great, as to have furnished such a
vaif army with provisions. Though this province
was so much better cultivated than other regions bs
New Spain, that it was called the cuntry of bread;
yet the Spaniards in their march suffered such want,
that they were obliged to fubfifl upon Tunas, a fpe-
cies of fruit which grows wild in the fields. Herrera,
Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. 5. p. i82.

NOTE LXXVIIL p. 306.
T HE SE unhappy viAims are said to be persons

of diffinAion. It seems improbable that so great

a number as fifty should be employed as spies. So
many prisoners had been taken and dismissed, and the
Tlafcalans had sent so many messages to the Spanish
quarters, that there appears to be no reason for ha-
zarding the lives of so many considerable people, in
order to procure information about the position and
state of their camp. The barbarous manner in which
Cortes treated a people unacquainted with the laws of
war established among polithed nations, appears so
thocking to the later Spanish writers, that they diminish

the

the number of"thofe 'whom he puniflied so cruelly.
Herrera fays, thatfhe'cutf bss the hand's of fevern, an'
thumbs of some more.' Dec.' i;. Lil. 'ii c. 8: 'De
Solis relates, tha' the hands of fourteen 'dr fifteen were
cut off, and'the thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c; 2o.
But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b.' and after him
Gomara, c. 48,' affirm, that the hands of all the fifty
were cut off.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 309.
THE horses were objecs of the greatest astonish-

ment to all the people of New Spain. At fifst

they imagined the horse and his rider, like the Ced-
taurs of the ancients, to be some monstrous animal;6s
a terrible form; and supposing, that their food wasithe
fame as that of men, brought flesh and bread to nourifl
them. Even after they discovered their mistake, they
believed the horses devoured men in battle, and when
they neighed, thought that they were demanding their
prey. It was not the interest of the Spaniards to un-
deceive them. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. ii.

NOTE LXXX. p. 315.
ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no

reason for this masSacre, and it was an at of wan-

ton cruelty, perpetrated merely to itrike terror into the
people of New Spain. Relac. de la Deftruyc. p.'"j,
&c. But the zeal of Las Casas often leads hiiif'tb
exaggerate. In opposition to him Bern. Diaz, c. 83,
aflerts, that the firit missionaries sent into New Spain
by the emperor, made a judicial inquiry into this tranf-

acion;

action i and having examined the priests and elders of
Cbolala, found that there was a real conspiracy to cut
off the Spaniards, and that the account given by Cot-
tes-was exasly true. As it was the objea of Cortes
at that time, and manifestly his interest, to gain the
good-will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that he
would 'have taken a ftep which tended so vifiby to alie-
nate him from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it
to be necessary for his own preservation. At the fame
time, the Spaniards who served in America had such
contempt for the natives, and thought them so little
entitled to the common rights of men, that Cortes
right hold the Cholulans as guilty upon flight and
imperfect evidence. The severity of the puniflment
was certainly excessive and atrocious.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 317.
PHIS description is taken almost literally from

Bernal Diaz del Cafrilloj who was so unacquaint-

ed with the art of composition, as to be incapable of
embellihfing his narrative. He relates in a simple and
rude fPyle what passed in his own mind, and that of his
fellow-foldiers, on that occ2fion ; " And let it not be
thought strange, fays he, that I fiould write in this
manner of what then happened, for it ought to be con-
fidered, that it is one thing to relate, another to have
beheld things that were never before seen, or heard, or
spoken of among men." Cap. 86. p. 64, b.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXII. p.'333.
B. Diaz del CafRiljo gives us some idea of the fatigu

and hardlhips they underwent in performing this~

and other parts of duty. During the nine months that
they remained in Mexico, every man, without any dif-
tinRion between officers and soldiers, slept on his
arms, in his quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on
mats, or straw spread on the floor, and each was ob-
ligdc to hold himself as alert as if he had been on
guard. " This, adds he, became so habitual to me,
that even now in my advanced age, I always sleep in
my cloaths, and never in any bed. When I vift nty
Enccmnienda, I reckon it suitable to my rank, to have a
bed carried along with my other baggage, but I never
go into it; but, according to cuffom, I lie in my
cloaths, and walk frequently during the night into the
open air, to view the flars as I was wont when in ser-
vice." Cap. Io8.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 336.

ORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the
emperor, does not explain the motives which in-

duced him either to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames,
or to put Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B.
Diaz is silent with refpec to his reasons for the former;
and the only cause he assigns for the latter was, that
he might meet with no interruption in executing the
sentence pronounced against Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p.
75. But as Montezuma was his prisoner, and abfo-
lutely in'his power, he had no reason to dread him, and

the

the insult offered to that monarch could have no effec
but to irritate him unnecelarily,- Gomara supposes,
that Cortes had no other objet than to occupy Mon-
tezuma with his own distress and fufrings, that he
might give less attention to what besel Qualpopoca.
Cron. c. 89. Herrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec.
ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd expedient, in
order to make a person bear one injury, to load him
with another that is greater. De Solis imagines, that
Cortes had nothing else in view than to intimidate Mon-
tezuma, so that he might make no attempt to rescue the
vicims from their fate; but the spirit of that monarch
was so fubmiffise, and he had so tamely given up the
prisoners to the difpofl of Cortes, that he had no
cause to apprehend any opposition from him. If
the explanation which I have attempted to give.of
Cortes's proceedings on this occasion be not ad-
mitted, it appears to me, that they muff be reckoned
among the wanton and barbarous acts of oppression
which occur too often in the history of the conquest of
America.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 34r.
DE Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of

doing homage to the King of Spain, came from

Mlontezuma himself, and was made in order to induce
the Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He de-
scribes his conduct on this occasion, as if it had been
founded upon a scheme of profound policy, and exe-
cuted with such refined address, as to deceive Cortes
himself. But there is no hint or circumstance in the

con-

contemporary hifiorians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to
justify this theory. Montezuma, on other occasions,
difcovcred no such extent of art and abilities. The
anguiflh whidh he felt in performing this hiumBling
ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to have been in-
voluntary. But, according to the theory of De Solis,
it would have been prcpofterous and inconfiftcnt with
his own design of deceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 345.

N several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all

their induitry and influence, could colled no gold.

In others, they procured only a few trinkets of small
value. Montezuma assured Cortes, that the present
which he offered to the King of Castile, after doing
homage, consisted of all the treasure amassed by his
father; and told him, that he had already distributed
the reft of his gold and jewels among the Spaniards.
B. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara relates, that all thc silver
cullefcd amounted to 50o merks. Cron. c. 93. Tnis
aerces with the account given by Cortcs, that the
roval fifth of silver was roo marks. Rclat. 239, B. So
that the fum total of filvcr was only 4000 ounces, at
the rate of eight ounces a mark, which denmnftrates
the proportion of silver to gold to have been exceed-
ingly small.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 346.
DE Solis, lib. iv. c. I. calls in question the truth

of this tranfation, from no better reason than
that it was inconsistent with that prudence which dif-

VOL. II, Mm tinguifhes

tinguifhes the character of Cortes. But he ought to
have recollected the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala,
which was no less imprudent. He asserts, that the
evidence for it refts upon the teltimony of B. Diaz del
Castillo, of Gomara, and of Herrera. They all con-
cur indeed, in mentioning this inconsiderate ftep which
Cortes tooki; and they had good reason to do so, for
Cortes himself relates this exp!oit in his second dispatch
to the Emperor, and seems to glory in it. Cort. Relat.
Ramus. iii. 14o, D. This is one inifance, among
many, of De Solis's having consulted with little at-
tention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which
the most au:hentic information with refpec to his
operations mutl be derived.

NOTE LXXXVII. p. 35r.
HERERRA and De Solis suppose, thatVelafquez

was encouraged to equip this armament against

Cortes, by the accounts which he received from Spain
concerning the rccep:ion of the agents sent by the co-
Iony of Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Son-
feca bishop of Burgos had espoused his interefR, and
condemned the proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii.
i:. ix. c. 18. De So!;s, lib. iv. c. 5. But the chro-
nological orJer o, events refutes this supposition. Por-
tocarrero an' Mlon:ejo filed from Vera Cruz, July
26, I So. H:rer3, dec. i. b. v. c. 4. They landed
,: S:. Luc-a in Ocober, according to Herrera, ibid.
BJt P5. .irr, r.v

: au;:-n-ied :he court at that time,

and commun'cated e. -rv occurrence of moment to his
crrefporJe-.n: d, by day, mentions the arrival of
these agen:-, for the i.ri, time, in December, and speaks

of

it as a recent event. Epif. 650. All the historians
agree, that the agents of Cortes had their first audi-
cnc' ,f the Emperor at Tordelillas, when he went to
that town to visit his mother in his way to St. Jago de
CoJmofRellal. -Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De So-
lis, II. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set out from Valla-
doiid for Tordefillas, on the i Ith of March 1520; and
P. Miirtyr mentions his having seen at that time the
prefcnts made to Charles, Epift. 1665. The arma-
ment under Narvaez failed from Cuba in April 1520.
It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not receive
any account of what passed in this interview at Torde-
fillas, previous to his hostile preparations against
Cortcs. His real motives seem to be those which I
have mentioned. The patent appointing him Adelan-
tado of New Spain, with such extensive powers, bears
date November I3, I519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii.
c. ii. He might receive it about the beginning of
January. Gomara takes notice, that as soon as this
patent was delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet
and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 354.
D3E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no inter-

preters, he could hold no intercourse with the

people of the provinces, nor converse with them in
any way but by signs, and that it was equally impof-
fible for him to carry on any communication with
Montczuma. Lib. iv. c. 7. But it is upon the au-
thority of Cortes himself that I relate all the particu-
lars of Narvaez's correspondence, both with Montezu-
ma and with his subje&s in the maritime provinces.

M m 2 Relat.

Relat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes affirms, thaf
there was a mode of intercourse between Narvaez and
the Mexicans, but does not explain how it was carried
on. Bernal Diaz funplies this defec, and informs us, that
the three deserters who joined Narvaez acted as inter-
preters, having acquired a competent knowledge of the
lan2uage, c. lie. With his usual minuteness, he
mentions their names and characters, and relates, in
chapter 122, how they were punished for their perfidy.
The S:aniards had now resided above a )ear among
the Mexicans; and it is not surprising, that several
among them should have made some proficiency in
speaking their language. This seems to have been the
cafe. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. I. Both B. Diaz, who
was present, and Herrera, the most accurate and best
informed of all the Spanish writers, agree with Cortes
in his account of the secret correspondence carried on
with Montezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18, 19. De
Solis seems to confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his
hero, that hMontezuma should have been ready to
engage in a correspondence with Narvaez. He sup-
poses that monarch to have contracted such a wonder-
ful afe-etion for the Spaniards, that he was not fo!icit-
ous to be delivered from them. After the indignity
with which he had been treated, such an affecAion is
incredible; and even De Solis is obliged to acknow-
ledge, that it mut be looked upon as one of the
miracles which God had wrought to facilitate the
conquetl, l;b. iv.. c. 7 The truth is, Montezuma,
however much overawed by his dread of the Spaniards,
was extremely impatient to recover his liberty.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 374.
T IIESE words I have borrowed from the anony-

mous Account of the European Settlements in

America, published by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo.
a work of so much merit, that I flould think there
is hardly any writer in the age who ought to be
alhamed of acknowledging himself to be the author
of it.

NOTE XC. p. 382.
T HE contemporary historians differ considerably

with refpec to the lobs of the Spaniards on this

occasion. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the em-
peror, makes the number only 150. Relat. ap.
Ramus. iii. p. 249, A. But it was manifeffly his in-
tercft, at that junture, to conceal from the court of
Spain the full extent of the loss which he had fuflained.
De Solis, always fludious to diminish every misfor-
tune that besel his countrymen, rates their loTs at
about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19. B. Diaz
affirms, that they loft 870 men, and that only 440
escaped from Mexico, c. 128. p. IoS, b. Palafox,
biflop of Los Angeles, who seems to have inquired
into the eaily tranfatlions of his countrymen in New
Spain, with great attention, confirms the account of
B. DIaz with refped to the extent of their loss.
Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Gomara states their loss
at 450 men. Cron. c. 109. Some months after-
wards, when Cortes had received several reinforce-
imen), he mustered his troops, and found them to be

M m 3 only

orly 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 255, E. Now,
2s Narvaez brought 880 men into New Spain, and
about 4:0 of Cortes's soldiers were then alive, it is
evident, that his loss in the retreat from Mexico must
have been much more considerable than what he
mentions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify the dangers
and sufferings to which he and his fellow-conquerors
were exposed, may have exaggerated their loss ; but,
in my opinion, it cannot weli be estimated at less than
6' rmen.

NOTE XCI. p. 4c8.
S M E remains of this great work are still visible,

and the stot where the brigantincs were built and

iaunched, is still pointed out to firangers. Torque-
ma2a viewed them. Mionarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOT E XCII. p. 418.
T HE flation cf Alvarado on the causeway of Ta-

cuba was t.e neareit to the city. Cortes ob-

fervcs, that tere they could distinctly observe what
paiTcd when their cou:rs men were sacrificed. Relar.
2?. Ramui'. iii. p. 273, E. B. Diaz, who belonged
to A.larado's dlvificn, relates what he beheld with his
own e-es. C. 152. p. 148, b. 149, a. Like a man
whoce ccurage was so clear as to be above suspicion,
he describes with his u;ual fi.plici:. the imprefion
which this fpedacic made upon him. " Before, fays
he, I saw the breatls of my companions opened, their
hearts yet flutterinz, offered tz an accursed idol, and
their fle& devoured by their exulting enemies; I was

accuflomed

accuflomed to enter a battle not only without fear, but
with high spirit. But from that time I never ad-
vanced to fight the Mexicans without a secret horror
and anxiety, my heart trembled at the thoughts of the
death which I had seen them fufier." He takes care
to add, that as soon as the combat began, his terror
went off; and, indeed, his adventurous bravery on
every occasion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz,
c. 156. p. 157, a.

NOTE XCIII. p. 425.

N E circumfincc in this siege merits particular
notice. The account which the Spanish writers

give of the numerous armies employed in the attack
or defence of Mexico, seems to be incredible. Ac-
cording to Cortes himself, he had at one time 15o,oo0
auxil;.ry Indians in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii.
272, E. Gomara asserts, that they were above
200,000. Cron. c. 136. Herrera, an author of higher
authority, fays, they were about 2o0,000. Dec. iii.
lib. i. c. 19. None of the contemporary writers
ascertain explicitly the number of persons in Mexico
during the siege. But Cortes on several occasions
mentions the number of Mexicans who were slain, or
who perished for want of food; and, if we may rely
on thole circumfiances, it is probable, that above two
hundred thousand muff have been lhut up in the town.
But the quantity of provifiors necetfary for the sub-
fiftcncc of such vast multitudes assembled in one place
during three months is tb great, and it requires so
much foresight and arrangement to collea there, and
lay them up in magazines, so as to be certain of a

regular
5

re'u'ar supply, that one can hardly believe that this
cc'.d be accomplified in a country where agriculture
was so imperfecd as in the Mexican empire, where
there were no tame animals, and by a people naturally
so improvident, and so incapable of executing a com-
plicated plan as the most improved Americans. The
Spaniards, with all their care and attention, fared very
poorly, and were often reduced to extreme distress
from want of provisions. B. Diaz, p. 1.2. Cortes
Rclat. 27i, D. Cortes on one occasion mentions
flizht'v the fu.'fiflence cf his army; and after ac-
know!edjing, tha: the) were often in great want,
adds, that they rc:iteJ supplies from the people of
the country, of £fb, and cf some fruir, which he calls
the cherries cf 'he country. Ibid. B. Diaz fays, that
they had cak:s of ma!ze, and cerafas de latierra; and
when the season of th:re was over, another fruit,
which he calls 7-i.eas; but thei; most comfortable
subsistence was a root which the Indians use as food,
to which he gave the name of Quiites, p. 142. The
Indian auxiliaries had one means of subsistence more
than the Spaniards. They fed upon the bodies of the
Mexicans whom they killed in battle. Cort. Relat.
176, C. B. Diaz confirms his rela:ion, and adds,
that when the Indians returned from Mexico to their
o-.n country, they carried with them large quantities
of the fi:sh of the Mexicans fated or dried, as a most
acce)table prefert to their friends, that they might
ha.ae tP plea.'re of feeding upon the bodies cf their
enL:i.;s in th.;:r .ai':'s. P. 157. D: So'is, who
l f'n- :0 ConIltri it 2a an imputatlic; of C ilredit to his
c3u:;ryrnen, that thzy should aet in concert with

auxiliaries
7

auxiliaries who fed upon human flef, is solicitous to
prove, that the Spaniards endeavoured to prevent their
aflbciates from eating the bodies of the Mexicans,
lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this from
the original historians. Neither Cdrtes himself, nor
B3. Diaz, seem to have had any such scruple; and, on
many occasions, mention the Indian repasts, which
were become familiar to them, without any mark of
abhorrence. Even with this additional stock of food
for the Indians, it was hardly poflible to procure sub-
filtence for armies amounting to such numbers as we
find in the Spanish writers. Perhaps the best solution
of the difficulty is, to adopt the opinion of B. Diaz
de! Castillo, the most altlcfs of all the Hfjioriadores
prinitiuis. " When Gomara, fays he, on some oc-
cafions relates, that there were so many thousand
Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that there wero
so many thousand houses in this or that town, no re-
gard is to be paid to his enumeration, as he has no
authority for it, the numbers not being in reality the
fifth of what he relates. If we add together the dif-
ferent numbers which he mentions, that country
would contain more millions than there are in Castile."
C. 129. But though some considerable deduction
flould certainly be made from the Spanifli accounts of
the Mexican forces ; they must have been very nume-
rous, for nothing but an immense superiority in
number, could have enabled them to withstand a body
of line hundred Spaniards, conducted by a leader of
such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE

NO T E XCIV. p. 445.

N relating the opprefrive and cruel proceedings of
the conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed

B. de lIs Caf-i as mv cuide. His account of them,
Relat. de la Destruvc. p. 18, &c. is manifeltly exag-
gerated. It is from the teltimony of Cortes himself
and of Gomara, who wroct under his e!e, that I have
ta-ken my account of the punishment of the Panucans,
and they relate it without anv dilapprohation. B.
Diaz, contrary to his u;-ual custom, mentions it only
in general terms, c. 162. Herrera, solicitous to ex-
tenuate this barbarous action of his countrymen,
though he m-ntions 6o caziques, and 400 men of note,
as being condemn'u to the fiame-, aflerts, that thirty
only were burnt, and t'-e reft pardoned. Dec. iii.
lib. v. c. 7. But this is contra! t the teltimony of
the original hiftori-n, partic'ilar' of Gomara, whom
it appears he had confu'!ed, as hz adopts fe:cral of
his exoref,3ns in this pass-7e. The punifirnent of
Gua:i-ncz:n'is rc.ltedJ y the moRs a:thrr:ic of the
Spanish wr:ters. Tcrquemac.a !-s cx:racdcd from a
hisorv c; T:-e'cc, con p-.:J in the Mexican tongue,
an acc^'r. of '-,i trr. .c, . re f.ivourable to
Gua:iTnoziil ::-ar. ti': c- the S;:nfh authcrs. Aon.
In;':.a, i. , '. Acc:-,';i.n. to the Mexican account,
Cortes had l':.-;r.; a

:' . .vw of C:!i.c-.' to justify

(u'r -. .wan:c:: ..ct no c-ueltv. B. D'az .itirmT, that
Guar:l'noz:." -..: . h!; I:s :'-oW-lf:-ers 'Tertcd thr.ir in-
i-oc:r.cc r-.:- ..!r i' breath, and that r..a-v of the
Sparn'h ii :' C

. -,c-r:;;d' th.s acdaon of Corcs as
cou»;i,. un!;c'-t:i" r.nd unj:'", p. 2oo, b. 2-I, a.

NOTE

NOTE XCV. p.448.
T HE motive for undertaking this expedition

was, to punish Chriftoval de Olid, one of his

officers, who had revolted against him, and aimed at
establishing an independent jurisdiction. Cortes
regarded this infurre&ion as of such dangerous
example, and dreaded so much the abilities and popu-
larity of its author, that in person he led the body of
troops deffined to suppress it. He marched, according
to Gomara, three thousand miles, through a country
abounding with thick forefis, rugged mountains, deep
rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated only in a few
places. What he suffered from famine, from the
hostility of the natives, from the climate, and from
hardflips of every species, has nothing in history pa-
rallel to it, but what occurs in the adventures of the
other discoverers and conquerors of the New World.
Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above
two years, and though it was not distinguished by any
splendid event, he exhibited, during the course
of it, greater personal courage, more fortitude of
mind, more perseverance and patience, than in any
other period or scene in his life. Herrera, dec. iii.
lib. vi. vii. viii. ix. Gomara Cron. c. 163-177.
B. Diaz, 174-190. Cortes, MS. penesme. Were
one to write a life of Cortes, the account of this ex-
pedition should occupy a splendid place in it. In a
general hitfory of America, as the expedition was
productive of no great event, the mention of it is
sufficient,

/ NOTE

NOTE XCVI. p.45o.
ACCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which

Cortes brought with him, consisted of fifteen

hundred marks of wrought plate, two hundred thou-
sand pesos of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior
flandard, many rich jewels, one in particular worth
forty thousand pesos, and several trinkets and orna-
ments of value. Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. r.
He afterwards engaged to give a portion with his
daughter of a hundred thousand pesos. Gomara
Cron. c. 237. The fortune which he left his sonS
was very considerable. But as we have before related,
the fum divided among the conquerors on the first re-
duuion of Mex'co w2s very small. There appears
then to be some reason for fufpeaing that the accufa-
tions of Cortes's enemies were not altogether destitute
of foundation. They charged him with having un-
jufly applied to his own use a disproportionate share of
the Mexican spoils; with having concealed the royal
treasures of Montezuma and Guatimozin, with de-
frauding the king of his fifth, and robbing his fol-
lowers of what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii.
lib. viii. c. 15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the
conquerors themselves entertained suspicions of the
fame kind. B. Diaz, c. 157.

]ND OF THE SECOND VOLUMEc

'N.t
