THE

HISTORY
SC OTLAND

DURING THE REItGNS OF

QUEEN MARY

AND OF
KING JAMES VI.

TILL
HIS ACCESSION

TO THE

CRPOWVN OF ENGLAND.
WITH A REVIEW OP THE SCOTTISH HISTORY

PREVIOUS TO THAT PERIOD;

And
AN APPENDIX CONTAINING ORIGINAL PAPERS.,

IN TWO VOLUMES.

BY WILLIAM ROBEPTSON,
D. D. Minister of Lady Yester's , Edinburgh,

VOLUME II.
A NEW E D I T O N.

VIENNA,
V I E W N A ,
Printed for F, A. SCHRAERABL,corner in the Karnthner.

Street. Nro. o153.

E 7 8 8.

# BOOK VI.

# Disorders occasioned by the Regent's death.

TH E
HISTORY

OF
S C OTLAND.

BOOK VI.

Difrder ,cclairlned Iby tihe Rc3eu'.s .e.tlk.

-ji-l; unexpesed blow, by which the Regent
was cut off, struck. the King's party with the
utmoio consternation. Elizabeth bewailed his
death as the molf fatal dilafter which could have
befallen her kingdom ; and was inconfulable to
a degree that little suited iier dignity. Mary's
adherents exulted, as if. now, her refloration.
were not oniy certain . but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime natuirally fell on those,
xwho exprefted such indecent joy at the com-
miflion of it. And as the afiilin made his es-
cape on a horse, which belongedto LordClaud
Hamilton, and Fled direcly to Hamilton, where
he was received in triumph, it was concluded
that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the
resentment of the (Queen's party, rather than
to the revenge of a private man. On the day
after the murder, Scott of BLccleugh, and Ke'

A 2

# Steps taken towards electing another Regent.

of Ferniherft, both zealous abettors of the
Queen's cause, entered England in an holcile
manner, and plundered and burnt the country,
the inhabitants of which expe&ed no such out-
rage. If the Regent had been alive, they
would fcarcehave ventured on such an irregular
incursion, nor could it well have happened so
loon after his death, unless they had been privy
to the crime.

Steps taken towards eiefling llmtller Regent,

This vas not the onlv irregularity, to,

which the anarchy that followed the Regent's
death gave occasion. During such generalcon-
fusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and
broke out into excefles of every kind. As it
was impoflible to restrain there, without a
fettled form of government, a Convention of
the nobles was held, (Febr. 12. x570. inor-
der to deliberate concerning the ele&ion of a
Regent. The Queen's adherents refuted to be
present at the meeting, and protefled againfl:
its proceedings. The King's own party was
irresolute, and divided in opinion. Maitland,
whom Kirkaldy had set at liberty, and who
obtained from the nobles then assembled a de-
claration acquitting him of the crime which
had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by
proposing to admit the Queen to the joint ad-
ministration of government with her son. Eli.

* '.. i Pt',? '...t;,\i;
,;[u'(: .

# A coalition of parties attempted in vain.

xsabeth adhering to her ancient fyfetn with re-
gard to Scotti'h afihirs, laboured, notwith-
flandiug the solicitations of l'lary's friends, '")
to multiply, and to perpetuate the factions,
-which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph,
whom flhe difpatclied into Scotland on the firlt
news of the Regent's death, and who was her
usual agent for such services, found all parties
so exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full
of irreconcilable rancour, that it colt him little
trouble to inflame their animosity. The Con-
vention broke up without coming to any agree-
ment; and a new meeting, to which the nobles
of all parties were invited, was appointed on
tile sirs of May. ':)

A coalition of parties attempted ill aill.

Meantime, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who

still continued to acknowiedge the King's au-
thority, were at the utmost pains to rclilore
some degree of harmony among their country-
men. They procured for this purpose, an
amicable conference among the leaders of the
two faEtions. Butwhile the one demanded the
restoration of the Queen, as the only thing
which could reestablish the publick tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the King's authority
to be so sacred, that it was, on no account, to

:') See Append. No. 1,
") CroV'x, `Mein. s3t. Calderw, ii, IS7.

# The Queen's party in possession of Edinburgh.

be called in question or impaired; and neither
of them would recede in tle learf point from
their opinions, they separated without any pro-
fpe& of concord. Both were rendered more
averse from reconcilement, by the hope of for-
eign aid. An envoy arrived from France with
promises of powerful succour to the Queen's
adherents; and as the civil wars in that king-
dom seemed to be on the point of ternminating
in peace, it was expected that Charles would
soon be at liberty to fulfil what- he promnifed.
On the other hand, the Earl of Sull'ex was al'-
fembling a powerful army on the borlers , and
its operations could not fail of a sdinlg fi;ritand
frrength'to the King's party. *)

The Queen's party in poefflion of Edinburgh.

Though the attempt towards a coalition of

the faCtiots proved inefi'ecual, it contributed
somewhat to moderate, or fuapend their rage;
but they soon began to a&c with their usual vio-
lence. Morton, the most vigilant and able leader
on the King's fide, solicited Elizabeth to inter-
pose, without delay, for the safety of a party,
so devoted to her interest, and which itood
so much in need of her assistance. The Chiefs
of the Queen's faction, assembling at Linlith-
gow, marched thence ( April ro. ) to E]din-
burgh; and Kirkaldy, who was both Governor

*) Crawf. Menw. 134.

# Endeavour to involve the nation in a war with England.

of the Castle, and Provost of the town, pre-
vailed on the citizens, though with omre diffi-
culty, to admit themn within the gates. Together
with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and iMait-
land, acceded almof: openly to their party; and
the Duke and Lord Herries, having recovered
their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour, resumed the
places which they had formerly held in their
councils. Encouraged by the acquisition of
persons, so illuifrious by their birth, or so
eminent for their abilities, they published a
proclamation, declaring their intention to sup-
port the Queen's authority, andfeemedrefolved
not to leave the city before the meeting of the
approaching Convention, in which, by their
numbers and influence, they did not doubt of
securing a majority of voices on their fide. *)

Endliavoulr to iuvolve tie .nati(,l il a iwar with El-glnnd.

At the fame time, they had formed a design

of kindling war between the two kingdoms.
And if they could engage them in hostilities,
and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy,
they hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy
of great advantage to the King's cause, but to
reconcile their countrymen to the Queen, Eli-
zabetll's natural and most dangerous rival. With
this view, they had, immediately after the
murder of the Regent, prompted Scott andKet

') Crawf. MCem. 137, Calilerw. ii.17?1

to commence hoflilities, and had since inftigat-
ed them to continue and extend their depre-
dations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one hand,
the dangerous consequences of rendering this a
national quarrel; and resolved, on the ouher,
not to susser such an insult on her government
to pass with impunity; Ihe issued a proclama-
tion, declaring that she imputed the outrages
which had been comrnitted, not to the Scotrifh
nation, but to a few desperate and ill-defigning
persons; that, with the former, she was re-
solved to maintain an inviolable friendfhirp,
whereas the duty, which she owed to herown
subje&s, obliged her to chaffife the licentious-
ness of the latter. *) Suffex and Scroop, ac-
cordingly, entered Scotland, the one on the
east, the other on the weft borders, and laid
waste the adjacent countries with fire and
sword. "'*) Fame magnified the number and
progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents,
not thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the
inhabitants whereof were ill afi'e(ted to their
cause, retired to Linlithgow. Thereby a publick
proclamation they asserted ( April 28. ) the
Queen's authority, and sorbad giving obedience
to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll
and Huntly, whom she had constituted her
Lieutenants in the kingdom,

*) Cald. ii. 181.
*-<:r) Catltsll. , T74,.

# The King's party enter Edinburgh.

# Motives of Elizabeth's conduct with regard to them.

The King's party enter Edinburgh.

The nobles who continued faithful to the

King, though considerably weakened by the
defection of so many of their friends, afl'embled
at Edinburgh on the day appointed. (May i. )
They iflued a counter-proclamation, declaring
those who appeared for the Queen, enemies of
their country; and charging them with the
murder both of the late King, and of the Re-
gent. They could not, however , presume so
much on their own firength as to venture either
to ele& a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the allifIance, which
they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to
do both. By her order, Sir William Drury
marched into Scotland, with a thousand foot,
and three hundred horse; the King's adherents
joined him with a considerable body of troops,
and advancing towards Glasgow, where the
adverse party had already begun hostilities by
attacking the castle, they forced them to re-
tire , plundered the neighbouring country,
which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after
seizing some of their caitles , and rating others,
returned to Edinburgh.

Mlotives of Elizabeth's conduft with regard to them.

Under Drury's proteEtion, the Earl of Len-

nox returned into Scotland. It was natural to
commit the government of the kingdom to himn

during the minority of his grandson. His illus-
trious birth, and alliance with the royal family
of England, asvwell as of Scotland, rendered
him worthy of that honour; and his refntentet
againfr Mlary being implacable, and his estate
lying in England, and his family residing there,
E'lizabeth confidered him as a man, who, both
from inclination and from interest, would at
in concert with her, and ardently wished that
he might ruceeed Murray in the office of Regent.
Bitt, on many accounts, she did not think it
prudent to discover her own sentiments, or to
favour his pretensions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had been excited by a
pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with
a fierceness that did it real dishonour, appeared
a;ow to be on the point of coming to an issue;
and after shedding the belt blood, and wafting
the richest provinces in the kingdom, both
parties desired peace with an ardour that facili-
tated the negotiations which were carrying on
for that purpose. Charles IX. was known to
be a passionate admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor
could he, in honour, fuafer a Queen of France,
and the most ancient ally of his crown, to
languish in her present cruel situation, without
attempting to procure her relief. He had, hi-
therto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monflrating, by his ambafladors, against the in-
dignity with which she had been treated. But
if he were once at full liberty to pursue his in-

clinations, Elizabeth would have every thing
to dread from the impetuosity of his temper,
and the power of his arms. It therefore be-
came necefiary for her to at with some reserve,
and not to appear, avowedly, to countenance
the choice of a Regent, in contempt of Mary's
authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the
Scts required no less management. Had she
openly supported Lennox's claim; had she re-
commended him to the Convention, as the can-
didate whom fie approved; this nmight have
roused the independent spirit of the nobles, and
by too plain a dilcovery of her intention , ihe
tnight have defeated its success. For these
reasons, she hesitated long, and returned am-
biguous answers to all the mefLages, which she
received from the King's party. A more explicit
declaration of her sentiments was at laift obtain-
ed, and an event of an extraordinary nature
seems to have been the occaflon of it. Pope
Pius V. having itllued a bull, whereby he ex-
communicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her
kingdom, and absolved her fubjeas from their
oath of allegiance, Felton, an Engliflhman, had
the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bishop
of London's palace. In former ages; a Pope,
moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bi-
gotry, denounced this fatal sentence againit the
moil powerful monarchs; but as the authority
of the court of Rome was now lels regarded,
its proceedings were more cautious; and it was

# Le nx elected Regent.

only when they were roured by some powerful
Prince, that the thunders of the church were
ever heard. Elizabeth , therefore, imputed
this flep, which the Pope had taken, to a corn
bination of the Roman Catholick Princes against
ler, and lttfpeRced that some plot was on foot
in favour of the Scottish Queen. In that event,
file knew that the safety of her own kingdom
depended on preserving her influence in Scot-
land; and in order to strengthen this, she re-
ne\wed her promises of proteEting the King's
adherents, encouraged them to proceed to the
ele&ion of a Regent , and even ventured to
point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person
who had the best title. That honour was ac-
cordingly conferred upon him, in a Convention
of the whole party, held on the izth of July. *)

Le n .x elefed Regent.

The Regent's first care was to prevent the

meeting of the Parliament, which the Queen's
party had summoned to convene at Linlithgow.
Having el'e&ted that, he marched against the
Earl of Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North,
and forced the garrison , which he had placed
in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after, he made himself master of some other
castles. Emboldened by this successful begin-
ning of his administration, as well as by the

*) Spotfw, 240, Cald, ii. IS. See Append, N;, 1t.

# Mary's adherents negotiate with Spain.

# Elizabeth proposes a treaty of accommodation between Mary and her subjects.

appearance of a considerable army, with xbi:,Ili
the Earl of Suelex hovered on the borders. le
deprived Maitland of his office of Secretary, and
proclaimed him, the Duke, Hunrly, and utiier
leaders of tie Queen's party, traitors and ene-
mies of their country. I')

lMlry's alllherents negotiate with Spain.

In this desperate situation of their aTlirs,

the Queen's adherents had recourse to the Ki:.
ss Spain, ') with whom Mary had held a clo'e
correspondence ever since her confinement in
England. They prevailed on the Duke of Alva,
to fend two of his officers to take a view of
the country; and to examine its coalss and har-
bours; and obtained from him a frnall fapply of
money and arms, which were sent to the farl
of i:untly. *'': ) But this aid, so difproportio-
nate to their exigencies, would have availedk
them little.

Elizabeth propose- a treaty of accomlnodation hetweae.

Mlary and her frbjeas.

They were indebted for their safety to a

treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on, un-
der colour of restoring the captive Queen to her
''throne. The first steps in this negotiation had1

°) Crawf. Metn. I59. Cald. ii. I95.

) Sec Append. No. III.
':) Anderr. iii. 12. Craxf, MVem. I53.

been taken in the month of May; but hitherto
little progress was made in it. The peace con-
cluded between the Roman Catholicks and Hu-
gonots in France, and her- apprehensions that
Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf
of his fifler-in-law, quickened Elizabeth's mo-
tions. She afieted to treat her prisoner with
mure indulgence, she listened more graciously
to the solicitations of foreign ambassadors in her
favour, and seemed fully determined to replace
her on the throne of her ancestors. As a proof
of her sincerity, she laboured to procure a cef-
fation of arms between the two contending sac-
tions in Scotland. Lennox, elated with the
good fortune which had hitherto attended his
adminifiration, and flattering himself with an
easy triumph over enemies whose estates were
watled, and their forces dispirited, refused, for
'ome time, to come into this measure. It was
not safe for him, however, to dispute the will
of his proteEtrefs. A cessation of hostilities dur-
ing two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renew-
ed from time to time, it continued till the
first of April next year. '")

Soon after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and

Sir Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots.
The dignity of these ambassadors, the former
her prime Minister, the latter Chancellor of the

') Sporfw, 243.

Exchequer, and one of her ablest counsellors,
convinced all parties that the negotiaridn wag
serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty
was now approaching. The propositions, which
they made to her, were advantageous to E!i-
zabeth, but fach as a Prince, in nlary's ii-
tuation, had realon to expeet. 'The ratification
of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing any
pretenflons to the English Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the
adhering to the alliance between the two king-
doims; the pardoning her fubjeas , who had
taken arms against her; and her promising to
hold no correspondence, and to counten.nce no
enterprise, that might disturb Elizabeth's go-
vernment; were among the chief articles. By
way of security for the accomplifhmentofthefe,
they demanded that some persons of rank should
be given as hostages, that the Pritce her son
should reside in England, and that a few castles
on the border should be put into Elizabeth's
hands. To some of these propolitions Mary
consented; some she endeavoured to mitigate
and others she attempted to evade. In the
mean time, she transmitted copies of them to
the Pope, to the King's of France and Spain,
and to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that
-without some timely and vigorous interposition
in her behalf, she would be obliged to accept
of these hard conditions , and to purchase li-
berty at any price. But the Pope wvas a diflant

# Elizabeth's artifices in the conduct of it.

and feeble ally, and by his efforts against the
Turks , his treasury was entirely exhausted.
Charles had already begun to meditate that con-
fpiracy againit the Hugonots, which marks his
reign with such infamy; and it required much
leilure, and perfeat tranquillity, to bring that
execrable plan to maturity. Philip was em-
ployed in fitting out that fleet , which acquired
so great renown to the Christian arms, by the
vi&ory over the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors
in Spain threatened an infurre&ion ; and his
fubjeóts in the Netherlands, provoked by much
oppression, and many indignities, were breaking
out into open rebellion. All of themn for
there diflerent reasons, advised Mary A without
depending on their aid, to conclude the treaty
on the bes terms she could procure. *)

Elizabeth's artifices in the condu& of it.

Mary, accordingly, consented to many of

Elizabeth's demands, and discovered a facility
of disposition , which prornifed still further con-
ceilions. But no concession she could have
made, would have satisfied Elizabeth, who,
in spite of her repeated professions of sincerity
to foreign ambassadors, and notwithtlanding the
solemnity with which she carried on the treaty,
had no other objea in it, than to ainufe Mary's

allies,
*) Ainderf, vol. iii. izo . xSO-

allies, and to gain time. *) After having so
long treated a Queen, who fled to her for re-
fuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could
not now dimifs her with safety. Under all the
disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary
had found means to excite commotions in Eng-
land, which were extremely formidable. What
desperate elreits of her julf resentment might
be expeaed, if she were set at liberty , and
recovered her former power ? What engage-
ments could bind her , not to revenge the
wrongs she had fltYered, nor to take advantage
of the f:voura-,le conjilntmtu re that might pre-
sent themselves? Wvas ir pol'lble for her to give
such fecuritv for her behaviour, in tines to
cone, as night remove all suspicions and fears?
And t-.ts thlere not good caiue to conclude,
that n,( future beneiits cculd ever obliterate the
memory of p:tf i ij;ries? It was thus Elizabeth
reasoned; thonltli fhc continued to aft as if her
views had been entirely difTerent. She appoint-
ed seven of her privy counsellors to be commis-
fioners for fettling the articles of the treaty;
and as Mary had already named the Bishops of
Rois, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for
her ambassadors , she required the Regent to
impower proper persons to appear in behalf of
the King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn, abbot

*) Diggeg , Conpl. Ainb. ?8,
HM11. Of ScotI. Vol. I. 'M

of Dunfermling, and Sir. James Macgill were
the persons chosen by the Regent. They pre-
pared for their journey, as slowly as Elizabeth
herself could have wished. At length they ar.
rived at London , and met (Frb. 9. 1.57. )
the commissioners of the two Queens. lMary's
atnbal'adors discovered the strongest inclination
to comply with every thing that vwould remove
the obfIacles which flood in the way of their
miffrefs's liberty. But -when lnlort;ln and his
afTociates were called upon to vindicate their
conduct, and to explain the sentiments of their
party, they began, in justification of their
treatment of the Queen, to advance such ma-
xims concerning the limited powers of Princes,
and the natural right of fuLbjets to rcfift and to
controul them, as were extremely flocking to
Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative
were very exalted. \tith regard to the autho-
rity which the King now poflefied, they de-
clared that they neither had, nor could poliibly
receive inftroutions, to consent to any treaty,
that tended to itlbvcrt, or even to impair it in
the least degree. ') Nothing could be more
trilling and iidiculous , than such a reply fiom
the connmiffioners of the King of Scots to the
Queen of England. His party depended abfolu-
tely on her protection, her hand had feated him
on the throne, and to ler power he owed the

:''*) Cnld. ii. 2.-;.. l)isses, il Haynes, 523,5 3-1>

# It proves fruitless.

# Dunbarton castle surprised by the Regent.

continuance of his reign. Vyith the utmofr ease,
fne c:,)old hiave brought thleni to tallk iu a very
di i'cI;t tci manner; and wihatever conditions lhe
mi :Lc h:ave tholuglht lit to p)relcribe, they wvould
have i::td no other choice but to rubinic.

it iroves fruitless.

'This decclaration, however, fhie asseted to

o-uim der as an ini'unrable dificulty. And find-
iui, ti.at there was no reason to dread any dan-
ger from tie l'rench King, xwho had not dif-
covered that engerncfs in support of Mary,
wvilieh wvas expetecd; the reply made by Mlr-
ton furnifiled her with a pretence for putting a,
fop to the negotiation, ( ?.rch. 24. ) till the
,egent fhlould iend amtbatfi'dors with more
ample powers. Thus, after being arnufed for
ten months with the hopes of liberty , the un-
Ihappy Queen of Scots remained under flrifter
cufi(ody than ever, and without any prol'pet
,of eicaping from it; 'hlile those l'ubje'is , wiho
till adh!iered to her, were exupoled, wxithout
ally or prot(l tor, to the rage of enemies, whonm
their fi'ccel's iti this negotiation rendered ltil.
ilnore iniolent. ':)

DlI:)bartll catlle f'urpirc.d by the Regent.

On the day after the expiration of the
truce , which had been oblerved with little

B1
') An'!erf. iii. :, &,.

exnatnefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of
Jordan-hill , a galant and enterprising ojsicer,
performed a service of great importance to the
Regent, by surprising the castle of Dunbarton.
This was the only fortified place in the king-
dom, of which the Queen had kept polit'iion,
ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Its situation on the top of an high and almofi in-
accessible rock , which rifes in the middle of a
plain, rendered it extremely flrong, and in the
opinion of that age impregnable; as it com-
manded the river Clyde, it was of great con-
sequence, and esteemed the most proper place
in the kingdom for laading any foreign troops
that might come to MIary's aid. The firength
of the place retidered Lord Fleming, the go-
vernor, more secure thani he ought to have
been, confidering its importance. A soldier,
who had served in the garrison, and had been
disgusted by some ill usage, proposed the scheme
to the Regent, endeavoured to demonslrate that
it was pralicable, and offered hinfelf to go
the foreinoft man on the enterprise. It was
thought prudent to risk any danger for so great
a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else
was neceflary, were prepared with the utmost
secrecy and dispatch. All the avenues to the
calile were seized, that no intelligence of the
deflgn might reach the governor. Towards
evening, Crawford marched from Glasgow with
a finall but determined band. By midnight,

tliey arrived at the bottom of the rock. The
moon was set. and the fRy, which hitherto
had been extremely clear, was covered with a
thick fog. It was where the rock was highest,
that the afll'ilalts made their attempt, because
in that place there were few ccntinels, andt
they hoped to find them leafc alert. Tile first
ladder was scarce fixed, when the weight and
eagerness of those who mounted, brought it to
the ground. None of the afiailants were hurt
by the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed at
the noise. Their guide and Crawford scrambled
up the rock, and fattened the ladder to the
roots of a tree, which grew in a cleft. This
place they all reached with the utmost diffi-
culty, but were flill at a great diflance from
the foot of the wall. Their ladder was made
fast a second time; but in the middle of the
ascent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty.
One of their companions was seized with ofme
sudden fit, and clung, seemingly without life,
to the ladder. All were at a stand. It was
impossible to pass him. To tumble him head-
long was cruel; and might occasion a discovery.
But Crawford's presence of mind did not forfako
him. He ordered the soldier to be bound salE
to the ladder, that he might not fall when the
fit was over: And turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his
belly. Day now began to break, and there
ifill remained a high wall to fcalei but after

# Archbishop of St. Andrew's put to death by him.

surmounting so many great difficulties, this was
soon accomplifhied. A sentry observed the first
nan , who appeared on the parapet, and had
just time to give the alarm , before lie was
lknocked on the head. The officers and soldiers
of the gari-ifon ran out nacked, unarmed, and
more oblicirous about their own safety, than
capable of maling refll-ance. The afiailnnts
rufir'd forwards, swith repeated shouts , and
with the utmost flury ; took poffellion of the
magazine; seized the cannon; and turned them
againit their enemies. Lord Fleming got into
a firall boat, and fled all alone into Argylefhire.
Crawfo;-d, in reward of his valour and good
conduct, remained master of the caltle; and as
he did not lutfe a single man in the enterprise,
lhe enjoyed his fiiccel's with unmixed pleafire.
Lady Flemrng , \Verac the rrench E]iioy, and
Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrew's, were
the prifoncrs of greatest distinction. ::)

Arcil: ifi ol, or Sr..\lldi.-ew's put to death by hinl,

Verncs character protected itn fromn the

usage, which he merited by his activity in stir-
ring up enemies againif the King. The Regent
treated the lady with great politeness and hu-
-nianity. But a very different fate awaited the
Arci'bifhop ; lhe was carried under a itrong
guard to Stirling; and as lie had formerly beeri

1*") Biih. 394.

# Kirkaldy defends the castle of Edinburgh in the Queen's name.

,ttainted by az of Parliament, he was, without
any formal trial , condenlned to be hanged;
and on the foutrlt day after lhe was taken, the
sentence . was executed. An attempt was
niade to convit hiin of being accefnary to the
murder both of the King and Regent, but there
accul'tions iwere ftpported by no proof. Our
hiflurians observe, that he aos the first Bishop
in Scotland who died by the hands of the exe-
cutioner. The hih offices he bad enjoyed,
both in church and frate, ought to have exempt-
ed him f-roi a puniifhmient inilieted only on the
]owvef crimin nls. But his zeal for the Queen,
his abilities, and his profefion , rendered him
odious and formidable to the King's adherents.
i.enni:ix hated him as the pcrlon, by whose
counsels the reputation and power of thle louse
of Hamilton vere supported. And party rage.
and personal enmity, di:tited that indecent
sentence, for \vhichl some colour was fought, by
imputing to him such odious crimes. *)

Killkaldy d(efends the cnalle ns Edillibulgil in the

Queen's name.

The loss of Dunbarton , and the severe

treatment of the Archbishop, perplexed and
enraged the Queen's party; and hostilities were
renewed with all the fierceness which difap-
pointment and indignation can inspire. Kir-

') Spo~Tst-, 333,

# Both parties hold parliaments.

kaldy, who, during the truce, had taken care
to increase the number of his garrison, and to
provide every thing necefiary for his defence,
issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's autho-
xity to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded
all who favoured his cause to leave the town
within fix hours; seized the arms, belonging
to the citizens; planted a battery on the steeple
of St. Gi!es, repaired the walls, and fortified
the gate of the city; and, though the affe&ions
of the inhabitants leaned a different way, held out
the metropolis against the Regent. The Duke
Hunrly, Home, Herries, and other chiefs of
that faction, repaired to Edinburgh with their
followers; and having received a small fum of
money, and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls.
On the other fide, Morton seized Leith, and
fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a
considerable botiy of men. While the armies
lay so near each other, daily skirmishes hap-
pened , and Xwith various success. The Queen's
party was not strong enough to take the field
against the Regent, nor was his superiority so
great as to undertake the siege of the caffle, or
of the town. *)

Both parties hold parliaments.

Some time before Edinburgh fell into the
hands of his enemies, the Regent hadfummoned

); CalJ. iit Z33, &c.

a parliament to meet (Ilay Y4.) in that place.
In order to prevent any objedion against the
lawfulness of the meeting, the members obeyed
the proclamation as exactly as possible; and ac-
fembled in a house at the head of the Canon-
gate, which, though without the walls, lies
within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy exert-
ed himself to the utmost to interrupt their
meeting; but they were so firongly guarded,
that all efforts were vain. They passed an act
attainting Maitland and a few others, and then
adjourned to the 28th of Augufi. *)

The other party, in order that their pro-

ceedings might be countenanced by the fame
shew of legal authority, held a meeting of par-
liament soon after. There was produced in
this assembly, a declaration by the Queen, of
the invalidity of that deed, whereby she had
religned the Crown, and contented to the co-
ronation of her fi;n. Conformable to this de-
claration, an ait was pafled, pronouncing the
resignation to have been extorted by fear; to
be null in itself, and in all its consequences;
and enjoining all good fubjests to acknowledge
the Queen alone to be their lawful Sovereign,
and to support those who ated in her name.
The present establishment of the protestant re-
ligion was confirmed by another flatute; and,

') Crabwf. Mem, 17.

# Miserable condition of the kingdom.

# State of factions.

in iinitation of the adverse party, a new meeting
w-as appointed on the 26th of Anguft. ':)

Aliferalhc coi:lition of the kilgdom.

Meanwhile, all the mniferics of civil war

desolated the kingdom. Fellow-citizen s, friends,
brothers, took different fides, and ranged them-
selves under the standards of the contending
faations. In every county, and almoflin every
town and village, King's-men and Qiieen's-men
were names of diflinfrion. Political hatred dif-
solved all natural ties, and extinguiflied the rc-
ciprocal good-will and confidence wli:ich hold
mnankilnd together in society. IRcligious zc:l
mingled itself with tlere civil dirfiincions , and
contributed not a little to heighten, and to in-
flanme thlem.

State of I'n.i ols.

The factions which divided the lingdnom

'were, in appearance, only two. [-ut in both
these, there were persons, with views and prin-
ciples, so different from each other, that they
ought to be distinguished. W.Tith some, confi-
derations of religion were predominant, and
they either adhered to the Queen, because they
[hoped, by her means, to reefiablifh Popery, or
they defended the King's authority, as the best
support of the Protestant faith. Among these

Crawf. Mem. 17-.

the oppofltion was violent and irreconcilable.
Others verc inlluenced by political motiveson-
ly, or allured by views of interef; theRegent
aimed at uniting these, and did not d(clpair of
gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mtlary's adhe-
rents to acknowledge the King's authority.
Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame
design of a coalition, but on such terms, that
the Queen might be restored to foime share in
the government, and the kingdom shake olT its
dependence on England. Mlorton, the ablc'r,
the most ambitious, and the n-ior. powerfulmanl
of the King's party, held a particular course;
and moving only as lie was prompted by the
conrt of England, thwarted every measure that
tended towards a reconcilement ofthe faftions;
and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity,
lie derived both power and credit from her
avowed protec.ion.

ctie time appointed by both parties for the

n:eeting of their parliaments now approached.
Onlyithree peers and two bishops appeared in
that which was held in the Queen's name at
Edinburgh. But, contemptible as their num-
bers were, they pasTed an aft for attainting up-
wvards of 2oo of the adverse faction. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid.
The Regent had prevailed on the Earls of Ar-
gyll, !Eglinton, Caflils, and Lord Boyd, to ac-
lnuowledge the King's authority. The three
E;.rls were among the noft powerful noblemen

# The King's party surprised in Stirling.

in the kingdom, and had hitherto been zealous
in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been
ene of Mary's commissioners at York and Weft-
mninfter, and, since that time, had been ad-
mitted into all her moit secret councils. But,
during that turbulent period, the conduct of in-
·dividuals, as well as the principles of fadions,
varied so often, that the sense of honour, the
chief preservative of confitence in characer,
wvas entirely loft; and, without any regard to
decorum, men suddenly abandoned one party,
and adopted all the violent paflions of the other.
The defeetion, however, of so many persons
of diftinf:ion, not only weakened the Queen's
jparty, but added reputation to her adversaries.

The King's party farprifed in Stirling.

After the example of the parliament at

Edinburgh, that at Stirling began with framing
nas against the opposite faction. But in the
snidft of all the security, which confidence in
their own numbers; or distance from danger
could inspire, they were awakened, early one
morning, (Sept. 3.) by the shouts of the ene-
ny in the heart of the town. In a moment
the houses of every person of diftintion were
surrounded, and before they knew what to
think of so strange an event, the- Regent, the
Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caflls, Eg-
linton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil,
Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and

mounted behind troopers, who -vere ready to
carry thetn to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprise; and ifhe had
not been induced by the ill-timed folicitute of
his friends about his safety, not to hazard his
own person in conducing it, that day might
have terminated the contest between the two
factions, and have reflored peace to his country.
By his diretion, four hundred men, underthe
command of Huntley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and
Scott of Buccleugh, let out from Edinburgh,
and, the better to conceal their design, march-
ed towards the fo.ith. But they soon wheeled
to the right, and horres having been provided
for the infantry, rode fIraight to Stirling. By
four in the morning, they arrived there; not
one sentry was polled on the walls, not a
single man was awake about the place. They
met with no refinance from any person they
had seized, except Morton. He defending his
house with obstinate valour, they were obliged
to set it on fire, and he did not surrender till
forced -oit of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was consumed; and the pri-
vate men, unaccustomed to regular discipline,
left their colours, and began to riflethehoufes
and shops of the citizens. The noifeanduproar
of the town reached the caflle. The Earl of
Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers; fired briskly
upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the
officers kept together in a body. The towns-

# The Regent killed.

# Mar chosen Regent.

men took arms to aflift their governor; afudden
panick ftrucl the afiailants; iome fled, some
surrendered thernfelves to their own pritfolers;
and had not the borderers, who followed Scott,
prevented a pursuit, by carrying olT all tile
horses within the place, not a man would have
elcaped.

The Regent killd.

If the Regent had not unfortunately been

killed, the lots on the King's iide would have
been as inconliderable, as the alarm was great.
,,Think on the Archbishop ofSt. Andrew's," was
the word among the Queen's soldiers; and
Lennox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The of-
sicer, to whom he surrendered, endeavouring'
to protef him, loft his own life in his defence.
He was slain, according to the general opinion,
by command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kir-
kaldy had the glory of concerting this plan with
great secrecy and prudence; but Morton's for-
tunate obitinacy, and the want of di'cipline
among his own troops, deprived him offuccefs,
the only thing wanting to render this equal to
the most applauded military enterprises of the
kind. ')

1Mar chosen Regent.

As so many of the nobles were assembled,
they proceeded, without delay, to theeledion

) Melv, 634. Cra^wf. Me'e. 20o.

# Proceedings in England against Mary.

of a Pegent. Argyll, Mlorton, and Mar, erre
candidates for the oiiice. Mar was chiolfe
( Sept. 6.) by a majority of voices. Anmidlf all
the fierce difi'enfions which had prevailed so
long in Scotland, he had difiinguiflled hinfeli
by his moderation, his humanity, and.his dit-
interefrednefs. And as his power was far in-
ferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less
formidable to the other nobles. lis merit, too,
in having so lately rescued the leaders of the
party from imminent deftrudion, contributed.
not a little to his preferment.

I'roceedings in Englaill amailln Mary.

While these things were carrying on in.

Scotland, the tranfa&tions in England were no
less interesting to MAary, and Hill more fatal to
her cause. The parliament of that kingdom,
which met in April, passed an aft, by which
it was declared to be high treason to claim any
right to the Crown during tlie life ofthe Queen i
to affirm that the title of any other person was
better than hers, or to maintain that the par-
liament had not power to fettle and to limit
the order of faccellion. This remarkable flatute
was intended not only for the security of their
own Sovereign, bat to curb the restless andin-
trinuig spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her
adherents. :)

') Caild, 43(6,

# Marriage negotiated between Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou.

Marriage negotiated between Elizabeth and tho

Duke of .Anjou.

At this time, a treaty of marriage between

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the French
King's brother, was well advanced. Both courts
seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave
out, with the uttmof confidence, that it could
not fail of taking place. Neither of them, hov-
ever, wished it success; and they encouraged
it for no other end, but because it served to
cover or to promote their particular designs.
The whole policy of Catherine of Medicis was
bent towards the accomplishment of -her de-
tellable projec for the deftrulEion of the Hu-
gonot chiefs; and by carrying on a negotiation
for the marriage of her son with a Princefswho
was justly esteemed theprotcdrefs ofthatparcy,
by yielding fore things in point of religion,
and by discovering an indifference with regard
to others, she hoped to amuse all the Protelt-
ants in Europe, and to lull aileep the jeaioufy
even of the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth
flattered herself with reaping advantages of
another kind. During the dependence of the
negotiation, the French could not with decency
give any open assistance to the Scottish Queen;
if they conceived any hopes of success in the
treaty of marriage, they would, of course, in-
terest theinfelves but coldly in her concerns;
Mary herself must be dejeEted at losing an ally,
whom she had hitherto reckoned her most pow-

erful

# Norfolk's conspiracy in favour of Mary.

erful protector; and by interrupting her cor-
refpondence with France, one source, at leaftr
of the cabals and intrigues which disturbed the
kingdom, would be ftopt. Both Queens fuc-
ceeded in their schemes. Catherine's artifices
imposed on Llizabeth, and blinded the Hugo-
nots. The French discovered the ut;ofi indif-
ference about the interest of the Scottish Queen;
and Mary, confidering that court as already
united with her rival, turned herself, for pro-
teetion, towards the King of Spain. *) Phi-
lip, whose dark and thoughtful mind delighted
in the mystery of intrigue, had held a secret
correspondence with Mary, for some time, by
means of the Bishop of Ross, and had supplied
both herself and. her adherents in Scotland with
small furns of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the
character of a banker, and who ated privately
as an agent for the Pope, was the perfonvwhom
the Biflhop intruiled with this negotiation.

Norfolk's conifliracy in favour of Mary.

Mary thought it neceflary, likewise, to

communicate the secret to the Duke of Norfolk,
whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty,
upon his folemnn promise to have no further in-
tercourfe with the Queen of Scots; which,

') Digges, 144. 148. Camdl. 434.
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. II. C

however, he regarded so little, that she took
no ftep in any matter of moment, without his
advice. She complained in a long letter, which
she wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness
with which the French court had abandoned
her interest; she declared her intention of im-
ploring the assistance of the Spanish Monarch,
which was now her only resource; and recom-
mended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a person
capable both of explaining and advancing the
scheme. The Duke commanded Hickford, his
Secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this
letter; but whether hehad been already gained
by the court, or resolved at that time to betray
his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the
order, and hid the letter, together with other
treasonable papers, under the Duke's own bed.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk,

omitted none of those arguments, and spared
none of those promises, which are the usual in-
centives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him,
had a great fum in readiness to bestow in so
good a cause. The Duke of Alva had under-
taken to land ten thousand men not far from
London. The Catholicks to a man would rife
in arms. Many of the nobles were ripe for a
revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the
nation had turned their eyes towards him, and
called on him to revenge the unmeritedinjuries
which he himself had suffered; and to rescue
an unfortunate Queen, who offered him her

# Discovered by Elizabeth.

person, and her crown, as the reward of his
success. Norfolk approved of the design, and.
though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter
of credit, allowed him to use his name in ne-
gotiating with the Pope and Alva. :) The
Bishop of Ross, who, from the violence of his
temper, and impatience to procure relief for his
miRfrefs, was apt to run into rash and desperate
designs, advised the Duke to assemble secretly
a few of his followers, and at once to seize
Elizabeth's person. But this the Duke.rejeat-
ed as a scheme equally wild and hazardous.

Dircovered by Elizabeth,

MVeanwhile, the English court had received

some imperfect information of the plot, by in-
tercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; (August)
and an accident happened, which brought to
light all the circumstances of it. The Duke
had employed H-ickford to transmit to Lord
Berries, some money, which was to be dif-
tributed among IMary's friends in Scotland. A
person not in the secret was intrufed with con-
veying it to the borders, and he, fufpeting it
from the weight to'be gold, whereas he had
been told that is was silver, carried it direftly
to the Privy Council. The Duke, his domes-
ticks, and all who were privy, or could be

C a
'h) Anders. iil. 161.

fufpeted of being privy to the design, were
taken (Sept. 7.) into custody. Never did the
accomplices in a conspiracy discover less firm-
ness, or servants betray an indulgent mater
with greater baseness. Every one confessed the
whole of what he knew. Hickford gave di-
rections how to find the papers which he had
hidden. The Duke himself, relying at lirft on
the fidelity of his associates, and believing all
dangerous papers to have been defiroyed, con-
fidently asserted his own innocence; but when
their depositions and the papers themselves
were produced, aflonifhed at their treachery,
he acknowledged his guilt, and implored the
Queen's mercy. His offence was too heinous,
and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;and
Elizabeth thought it neceflary to deter her sub-
jeEts, by his punishment, from holding corre-
fpondence with the Queen of Scots, or her
emissaries. Being tried by his Peers, he was
found guilty of high treason, and, after several
delays, suffered death for the crime. :')

The discovery of this conspiracy produced

many effets, extremely detrimental to Mary's
interest. The BifhopofRofs, who appeared by
the confession of all concerned, to be the prime
mover in every cabal against Elizabeth, was
taken into cnflody, his papers searched, him-
self committed to the Tower, treated with the

4) Anderr, iii. 149, State Trials, IS.

# Elizabeth declares openly against the Queen's party.

utmost rigour, threatened with capital pu-
nifhment, and, after a long confinement, set
at liberty, on condition that he should leave
the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived
of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal and
his abilities, but was denied from that time the
privilege of having an ambassador at the Eng-
lifh court. The Spanish ambafiador, whom
the power and dignity of the prince he repre-
sented exempted from such insults as Ross had
suffered, was commanded to leave England. ;)
Mary herself was kept under a firiter guard than
formerly, the number of her domeitiks abridged,
and no person permitted to fee her, but in
presence of her keepers. *).

Elizabeth declares openly againil the Queel's party.

At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing

the storm which was gathering on the continent
against her kingdom, began to with that tran-
quillity were reisored in Scotland; and irritat-
ed by Mary's late attempt againit her govern-
ment, she determined to at, without disguise
or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party.
This resolution she intimated (OEt. a3.) to
the leaders of both'factions. Mary, she told
them, had held such a criminal correspondence
with her avowed enemies s and had excited

) Digges, 163.
'*) Stryp"e, Aun. ii. 5S.,,

# Hostilities carried on between them.

such dangerous conspiracies both agalnft her
crown and her life, that she would henceforth
confider her as unworthy of protecion, and
would never consent to restore her to liberty,
far less to replace her on herthrone. She exhort-
ed them, therefore, to unite in acknowledging
the King's authority. She promised to procure
by her mediation equitable terms for those who
had hitherto opposed it. But if they still con-
tinued refractory, she threatened to employ
her utmost power to compel them to submit. ;')
Though this declaration did not produce an
immediate effet; though hostilities continued
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh; though
Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his
bravery and good condu&, had routed the
King's adherents in the North in many en-
counters; yet such an explicit discovery of
Elizabeth's sentiments contributed not a little
to animate one party, and to depress the spirit
and hopes of the other. **)

Hotilities carried on between them.

As Morton, who commanded the Regent's

forces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy still held
out the town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce
a day passed without a skirmish. And while
both avoided any deciiive aftion, they harassed

I) See Append. No. IV.
*) Cald. ii> 389, z94. Stiype, ii. 7<.

each other by attacking fnall parties, beating
up quarters , and intercepting convoys. These
operations, though little memorable in them-
selves, kept the passions of both fations in
perpetuel exercise and agitation, and wrought
themn up, at last, to a degree of fury, which
rendered them regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity.
Nor was it in the field alone, and during the
heat of combat, that this implacable rage ap-
peared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without
mercy , and without trial. Great numbers
suffered in this Chocking manner; the unhappy
.viftims were led, by fifties at a time, to exe-
cution ; and it was not till both fides had
smarted severely, that they discontinued this
barbarous practice, reproachful to the charaEter
of the nation. *) Meai -while, those in the
town and castle, though they had received a
supply of money from the Duke of Alva, **)
began to susser for want of provisions. As
Norton had destroyed all the mills in the
neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
iinall garrisons in all the houses of strength
around it, scarcity daily increased. At last
all the iniferies of famine were felt, and they
must have been soon reduced to fich extre-

") Caldi, ii I
345 .

# League between England and France. (April 11. 1572.)

inities, as would have forced them to capitulate,
if the English and French ambassadors had not
procured a suspension of hostilities between the
two parties. *)

League between England and France. (April ii. 1572.)

Though the negotiation for a marriage be-

tween Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had
been fruitless, both Charles and she were defir-
cus of concluding a defensive alliance between
the two Crowns. He confidered such a treaty,
not only as the best device for blinding the
Protestants, against whom the conspiracy was
now almost ripe for execution; but as a good
precaution, likewise, againif the dangerous
consequences to which that atrocious measure
might expose him. Elizabeth , who had hi-
therto reigned without a single ally, now saw
her kingdom so threatened with intestine com-
motions, or exposed to invasions from abroad,
that she was extremely solicitous to secure the
affiflance of so powerful a neighbour. The
difficulties arising from the situation of the
Scottish Queen, were the chief occasions of
any delay. Charles demanded some terms of
advantage for Mary, and her party. Elizabeth
refused to liften to any proposition of that
kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint efforts
of the French Monarch. IMary's name was not

v Cald, ii, 346k,

so much as mentioned in the treaty; and -with
regard to Scottish affairs, a short article was
inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to
this purpose, " That the parties contracing
shall make no innovations in Scotland; nor
fufler any stranger to enter, and to foment the
fadtions there; but it shall be lawful for the
Queen of England to chastise, by force of
arms, those Scots who shall continue to har-
bour the English rebels now in Scotland. " ;:)
In consequence of this treaty, France and
England affeEted to aft in concert with regard
to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William
Drury, appeared there, in name of their
refpe&ive Sovereigns. By their mediation, a
truce for two months was agreed upon, and
during that time conferences were to be held
between the leaders of the opposite facions,
in order to accommodate their differences, and
restore peace to the kingdom. This truce
afforded a seasonable interval of tranquillity to
the Queen's adherents in the South; but in
the North it proved fatal to her interest. Sir
Adam Gordon had fill maintained his reputa-
tion and superiority there. Several parties,
under different officers, were sent against him.
Some of them he attacked in the field; against
others he employed firatagem; and as his cou-
rage and condu& were equal, none of his

') Digges, 170. Ir9. Camd. 444..

# Proceedings in England against Mary.

enterprises failed of success. He made war,
too , with the humanity which became so gal-
lant a man, and gained ground by that, no
less than by the terror of his arms. If he had
not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations, he would, in all probability,
have brought that part of the kingdom to sub-
mit entirely to the Queen's authority. *)

Proceedings in England againdl Mary.

Notwithstanding Gordon's bravery and fuc-

cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not
only in her own kingdom , but among the
English. Nothing could be more offensive to
that nation, jealous of foreigners, and terrified
at the profpef of the Spanish yoke , than her
rnegotiations with the Duke of Alva. The
parliament, which met in May, proceeded
againit her as the most dangerous enemy of
the kingdom; and after a foletmn conference
between the Lords and Commons, both houses
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guil-
ty of high treason, and to deprive her of all
right of succession to the Crown. This great
cause, as it was then called, occupied them
during the whole session, and was carried on
with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though she
applauded their zeal, and approved greatly of
the course they were taking , was satisfied

k) Cawr. AMemn.

# The French neglect her interest.

# The massacre of Paris.

with shewing Mary what she might expect
from the resentment of the nation; but as The
dit not yet think it tine to proceed to the most
violent extremity against her, fle prorogued
the parliament. ;)

The French negleEl her interet.

These severe proceedings of the English par-

liament were not more mortifying to Mary, than
the coldness and neglea of her allies the French.
TheDuke of Montmorency, indeed,who came ovcr
to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew
of interesting himself in favour of the Scottish
Queen; but, instead offolicitingforher liberty, or
her restoration to her throne, all that he de-
manded was a flight mitigation of the rigour
of her imprisonment. And even this fmrall
request , he urged with so little warmth or
importunity, that no regard was paid to it. *)

The nialfacre of Paris.

The alliance with France afforded Elizabeth

much fatisfaEtion, and she expeted from it a
great increase of security. She now turned
her whole attention towards Scotland , where
the animofities of the two faCtions were frill
so high, and so many interfering interests to
be adjusted, that a general pacification seemed.

') D'Ewes Journ. "o6, &ic,

l) Jebb, ii. 513.

to be at a great diltance. But while she la.
boured to bring them to ofme agreement, an event
happened which filled a great part of Europe
with astonishment, and with horror. This
was the massacre of Paris; an attempt, to
which there is no parallel in the history of
mankind, either for the difimulation which
led to it, or for the cruelty and barbarity with
which it was put in execution. By the molt
solemn promises of safety and of favour, the
leaders of the Protestants were drawn to court;
and though doomed to deftruEtion, they were
received with caresses, loaded with honours,
and treated , for seven months, with every
possible mark of familiarity, and of confidence.
In the midst of their security, the warrant for
their deftrustion was issued (August 24.) by
their Sovereign, on whose word they had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their country-
rmen, their fellow-citizens, and companions,
imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thou-
sand Protestants, without diftinEtion of age,
or sex, or condition, were murdered in Paris
alone. The fame barbarous orders were sent
to other parts of the kingdom, and a like car-
nage ensued. This deed, which no Popish
writer, in the present age, mentions without
detestation, was, at that time, applauded in
Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings
were offered to God for its fccefs. But
among the Protestants, it excited incredible

# Detrimental to Mary's interest.

horror; a striking picure of which is drawn
by the French Ambaflidor at the court of
England, in his account of his firit audience
after the maflfacre. ,, A gloomy sorrow, fays
he, fat on every face; silence , as in the dead
of night, reigned through all the chambers of
the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep
mourning, and as I pafled through them, not
one bellowed on me a civil look, or made the
least return to my salutes." ')

Detrimental to Mary's interest.

But horror was not the only pafiion, with

which this event inspired the Protestants ; it
filled them with fear. They confidered it as
the prelude to some greater blow, and believed,
not without much probability, that all the Po-
pish Princes had conspired the deftrution of
their feet. This opinion did no small disservice
to Mary's affairs in Scotland. Many of her
adherents were Protestants; and, though they
wished her restoration, were not willing, on
that account, to sacrifice the faith which they
professed. They dreaded her attachment to a
religion, which allowed its votaries to violate
the most solemn engagements , and prompted
them to perpetrate the most barbarous crimes.
A general confederacy of theProteftants seemed

' Carte, iii. g,2 .

# The Regent endeavours to unite both parties.

to them the only thing that could uphold the
Reformation against the league which was form-
ed to overturn it. Nor could the present
eftabliflment of religion be long maintained in
Britain, but by a itri& union with Elizabeth,
and by the concurrence of both nations, in
espousing the defence of it, as a common
cause. *)

The Regent endeavours to unire both parties.

The Regent took hold of this favourable

conjuncture for negotiating a general peace.
And as he laboured for this purpose with the
utmoift zeal, and the adverse faction placed
entire confidence in his integrity, his endeavours
could scarce have failed of being successful.
laitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an
agreement with him, that scarce any thing
remained, except the formality of signing the
treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the
disappointment he met with in his pretentions
to the Regency; his abilities, his wealth, and
the patronage of the court of England, gave
him greater sway with the party, than even
the Regent himself; and he took pleasure in
thwarting every measure pursued by him. He
was afraid that, if Maitland and his aflbciates
recovered any share in the administration, his
own influence would be considerably diminished ;
') Dieges, S44, 967.

# His death.

and the Regent, by their means, would regain
that ascendant, which belonged to his station.
With him, concurred all those, who were in
possession of the lands, which belonged to any
of the Queen's party. And his ambition, and
their avarice, frustrated the Regent's. pious in-
tentions, and retarded a blessing so necessary
to the kingdom , as the eltablifhment of
peace. :')

His death.

Such a discovery of the felfiChnefs and am-

bition which reigned among his party, made
a deep imprefifon on the Regent, who loved
his country, and wished for peace with much
ardour. This inward grief broke his spirit,
and by degrees brought on a fettled melancholy,
that ended in a distemper, of which he died
on the 29th of OEtober. He was, perhaps,
the only person in the kingdom, who could have
enjoyed the oiffce of Regent, without envy,
and have left it, without loss of reputation.
Notwithilanding the mutual animofities, both
fations acknowledged his views to be honour-
able, and his integrity to be uncorrupted. **)

*) Mely. 233, Crawf. Mem. 337,
*') Id. =41.

# Morton chosen Regent.

Morton cho Cen Regent.

No competitor now appeared against Mor-

ton. The Queen of England powerfully sup-
*ported his claim, and notwithlfanding the fears
of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles,
he was eleted (Novemb.) Regent; the fourth,
vwho, in the space of five years, had held that
dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the

fjrft ofJanuary I573,this gave him an opportunity
of continuing the negotiations with the opposite
party, which had been set on foot by, his pre-
deceflor. They produced no effefts, however,
till the beginning of the next year.

Before we proceed to these, some events,
hitherto untouched, deserve our notice.

The Earl of Northumberland, who had

been kept prisoner in Lochlevin, ever since his
flight into Scotland in the year 1569, was
given up to Lord Hunfdon governor of Berwik;
and .being carried to York, suffered there the
punishment of his rebellion. The King's party
were so sensible of their dependence on Eli-
zabeth's prote&tion, that it was scarce possible
for them to refuse putting into her hands a
person who had taken up arms against her.
But as a fumr of money was paid, on that ac-
count; and shared between Morton andDouglas
of Lochlevin, the former of whom, during
his exile in England, had been much indebted

to

# Affairs of the church.

to Northumberland's friendship, the abandoning
this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to
certain deftrufion, was deemed an ungrateful
and mercenary aEtion. *)

Affairs of the church.

This year was remarkable for a confider-

able innovation in the government of the
Church. Soon after the Reformation, the Po-
pish bishops had been confirmed by law in pof-
session of part of their benefices; but the fpi-
ritual jurisdiction , which belonged to their
order, was excrciied by fuperintendants, though
with more moderate authority. On the death
-of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Morton ob-
tained from the Crown a grant of the tempo-
ralities of that fee. But as it was thought
indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to
which the care of fouls was annexed, he pro-
cured Douglas, retor of the University of St.
Andrews, to be chosen Archbishop; and allotting
him a finall pension out of the revenues of
the fee, retained the remainder in his own
hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages
they might reap from such a practice, support-
ed him in the execution of his plan. It gave
great offence, however, to the Clergy, who,
instead of perpetuating an order, whose name

:;) Crawf. Men. 55. 22. Camd. 445.
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. II. D

and power was odious to them, wished that
the revenues which had belonged to it, might
be employed in supplying such parishes as were
still unprovided with fettled pallors. But on
the one hand, it would have been rash in the
Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen,
on whom the very existence of the Protestant
Church in Scotland depended; and Morton, on
the other, conduCed his scheme with such
dexterity, and managed them with so much
art, that it was, at last, agreed, in a con-
vention composed of the leading men among
the Clergy, together with a committee of privy
council, " that the name and office of Arch-
bishop, and Bishop, should be continued dur-
ing the King's minority, and these dignities
be conferred upon the best qualified among the
Proteflant Ministers ; but that, with regard to
their spiritual jurifdiEtions , they fliould be
1ubjeEt to the general aflembly of the Church."
The rules to be observed in their eletion; and
the persons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the
Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were
likewise particularly specified. *) And the
whole being laid before the General Aflembly,
after some exceptions to the name of Archbishop,
Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protestation that ii:
should be confidered only as a temporary con-

*) Cald. ii. 30;-.

ftitution, till one more perfet could be intro-
duced, it obtained the approba:ion of that
court. ::) Even Knox, who was prevented
from attending the Afiembly by the ill state of
his health, though he declaimed loudly againit
the Simoniacal pa&tion, to which Douglas owed
his preferment, and blamed the nomination of
a person, worn out with age and infirmities,
to an office, which required unimpaired vigour
both of body and mind, seems not to have
condemned the proceedings of the Convention;
and in a letter to the Assembly, approved of
some of their regulations with refpe& to the
Eledion of Bifshops, as worthy of being carefully
observed. **) In consequence of the Allembly's
consent to the plan agreed upon in the Con-
vention, Douglas was installed in his office,
and at the fame time, an Archbishop of Glasgow,
and a 3ifliop of Dunkeld, were chosen from
among the Protcftant Clergy. They were all
admitted to the place in Parliament, which
belonged to the ecclesiastical order. But, in
imitation of the example set by Morton, such
bargains were made with them by different
noblemen, as gave them poflelion only of a
very frnall part of the revenues, belonging to
their fees. ***)

:7 Caol. si 354,

'") See Append. No. V.
'") SpotfW. 361.

D .

# Death and character of Knox.

Death and charaaer of Knox.

Soon after the dissolution of this assembly,

Knox, the prime inftlrument of spreading and
establishing the Reformed religion in Scotland,
ended hislife, (Nov. 27.I572.) in the 67th year
of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, disinterestedness,
were virtues which he polTeffed, in an eminent
degree. He was acquainted, too, with the
learning cultivated in that age; and excelled
in that species of eloquence, which is calculat.
ed to rouse, and to inflame. His maxims,how-
ever, were often too severe, and the impetuo-
fity of his temper excessive. Rigid and un-
complying himself, he shewed no indulgence to
the infirmities of others. Regardless of the di-
ftintions of rank andchara&er, he uttered his
admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence,
more apt to irritate, than to reclaim. This
often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expressions, with refpet to the Queen's person
and conduct. Those very qualities, however,
which now render his character less amiable,
fitted him to be the instrument of Providence
for advancing the Reformation among a fierce
people, and enabled him to face dangers, and
to surmount opposition, from which a person
of a more gentle spirit would have been apt to
shrink back. By an unwearied application to
study and to business, as well as by the fre-
quency and fervour of his publick discourses,

# The Regent treats with the Queen's party.

he had worn out a constitution, naturallyftrong.
During a lingering illness, he discovered the ut-
mofi fortitude; and met the approaches of death,
with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha-
rafter. He was conflantly employed in aats of
devotion, and comforted himself with those
profpets of immortality, which not only pre-
serve good men from desponding, but fill them
with exultation in their last moments. The
Earl of Morton, who was present athis funeral,
pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the
more honourable for Knox, as they came from
one whom he had often censured with peculiar
severity: ,, There lies He, who never feared
the face of man. " ;')

The Regent treats with the Queen's party.

Though Morton did not desire peace from

such generous motives as the former Regent,
he laboured, however, in good earnest to
establish it. The publick confafions and cala-
mities, to which he owed his power and im-
portance when he was only the second person
in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that he was raised to be the firfl.
While so many of his nobles continued in arms
against him, his authority, as Regent, was
partial, feeble, and precarious. Elizabeth was
no less desirous ofextinguiflling the flame, which

) Spots. 266. Cald. ii. 273.

# His overtures rejected by Maitland and Kirkaldy.

she had kindled and kept so long alive in Scot.
land. -) She had discovered the alliance with
France, from which she had expe&ed such ad.
vantages, to be no foundation of security. And
though appearances of friendship still subsisted
between her and that court, and Charles daily
renewedhis protestations ofinviolable adherence
to the treaty, she was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little she ought to rely on the
promises or oaths of that perfidious Monarch.
Her ambassador warned her that the French held
secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in
Scotland, and encouraged them in their obfli-
nacy. **) The Duke of Alva carried on his in-
trigues in that kingdom, with less disguise. She
was persuaded that they would embrace thefirfi
serene interval, which the commotions in
France and in the Netherlands would allow them,
and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She
resolved, therefore, to prevent their getting
any footing in the island, and to cut off all their
hopes of finding any assistance there, byuniting
the two parties.

His overtures rejeaed by Maitland and Rirkaldy.

The situation of Mary's adherents enabled

the Regent to carry on his negotiations with
them to great advantage. They were now di-

*') Ibid. S96. 313.

vided into two fations. At the head of the
one, were Chatelherault and Hantly. Mlait-
land and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the
other. Their high rank, their extensive pro-
perty, and the numbers of their followers, ren-
dered the former considerable. The latter were
indebted for their importance, to their personal
abilities, and to the strength of the castle of
Edinburgh, which was in their possession. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the
Queen's party, if it remained entire, would be
able to thwart and embarrass his administration,
he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a fe-
parate negotiation. He made the first overture
to Kirkaldy, and his aflociatcs, and endeavour-
ed to renew the negotiation with them, which,
during the life of his predecessor, had been
broken off by his own artifices. But Kirkaldy
knew Morton's views, and Ifyfrem of govern-
ment, to be very different from those of the
former Regent. Maitland confidered him as a
personal and implacable enemy. They received
repeated assurances of protection from France.
And though the siege of Rochelle employed the
French arms at that time, the fame hopes,
which had so often deceived the party, ffill
amused them, and they expe&ed that the ob-
ftinacy of the Hugonots would soon be subdued,
and that Charles would then be at liberty to aft
with vigour in Scotland. Meanwhile, a supply

of money was sent, and if the castle could be
held out till Whitfunday, effectual aid was pro-
mired. ') Maitland's genius delighted in
forming schemes that were dangerous; and
Kirkaldy pofleffed the intrepidity necessary for
putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated that it might defy all the
Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would
not violate the treaty with France, by fending
forces to his assistance; and if the French should
be able to land any considerable body of men,
it might be pollible to deliver the Queen from
captivity, or at least to balance the influence
of France and England in such a manner, as to
rescue Scotland from the dishonourable depend-
ance on the latter, under which it had fallen.
This splendid, but chimerical projet, they pre-
ferred to the friendship of Morton. They en-
couraged the negotiation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the
fame purpose, that the whole of the Queen's
party should be comprehended in it, and that
Kirkaldy should retain the command of the
cafile fix months after the treaty was signed.
His interest prompted the Regent to rejea the
former; his penetration discovered the danger
of complying with the latter; and all hopes of
accommodation vanished. ;;:)

*) Digges, 314.
*') Melv. 235, &c.

# Accepted by Chatelherault and Huntly.

# Articles of the treaty.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy

began to fire on the city of Edinburgh, which,
by the return of the inhabitants whom he had
expelled, was devoted as zealously as ever to
the King's cause. But as the Regent had now
set on foot a treaty with Chatelherault. and
Hlntly, the cefiation of arms frill continued
with them.

Accepted by Chatelllerault and Huntly.

They were lets scrupulous than the other

party, and listened eagerly to his overtures.
The Duke was naturally unsteady, and the ap-
proach of old age increased his irresolution, and
aversion to afion. The miseries of civil discord
had afflited Scotland almost five years, alength
of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing service, had
been detrimental to the Queen; and more ruin-
ous than any foreign invasion to the kingdom.
In profecutingit, neither party had gained much
honour; both had suffered great lofles; and had
exhausted their own estates, in wafting those
of their adversaries. The commons were in
the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a
peace, which might terminate this fruitless but
deftruftive quarrel.

Articles of the treaty.

A great ftep was taken towards this deflr-
able event, by the treaty concluded at Perth,

# Siege of the castle of Edinburgh.

(Febr. 33. I573.) between the Regent on or,
hand, and Chatelherault and Huntly on th
other, under the mediation of Killegrew, Eli.
zabeth's Ambassador. ') The chief articles ir
it were there; that all the parties comprehended
in the treaty should declare their approbation o!
the Reformed religion, now eftablifhled in the
kingdom; that they should submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as
Regent; that they should acknowledge every
thing done in opposition to the King, since his
coronation, to be illegal; that on bothfidesthe
prisoners who had been taken flould be set at
liberty, and the lands restored to their proper
owners; that the aft of attainder passed against
the Queen's adherents should be repealed, and
indemnity granted for all the crimes of which
they had been guilty since the i5th of June
1567; and that the treaty fbould beratifiedby
the common conrent of both parties in par-
liament. i;;*)

Siege of the castle of Edinburgh.

Kirkaldy, though abandoned by his affo-

ciates, who neither discovered solicitude nor
made provision for his safety, did not lore cou-
rage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommo-

:) See Append. No. VI.
*) Crawf. Blein. 351.

dation. *) And tlhough all Scotland ilad now
submitted to the King, he still resolved to de-
fe'nd the caitle in the Queen's name; and to
wait the arrival of the prom:fed succours: The
Regent was in want of every thing necefTary
for carrying on a ilege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the dilTen-
sions in Scotland to a period,beforetheFrench
could find leisure to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him fafficient supplies. Sir Wil-
liam Drury marched into Scotland with 5i;oo
foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The
Regent joined him (April 25.) with all his
forces; and trenches were opened and ap-
proaches regularly carried on against the caitle.
Kirkaldy, though difeouraged by the loss of a
great fum of money, remitted to him from France,
and which fell into the Re1gent's hands throl!gh
the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the mofl

) Melvil, whose brother, Sir Rolhrt, was one of tliht who

joIined wxith Kianllly ill the defence or the cnal, ann
Who was himrlelf lrongly attached to their party, uni'ert,
that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reafoiable tcr::i
of conpofition, buit that all his offers were rt jeftcti lby
the Regent, Melv. 24o. But as Elizabeth was, as til.:
time, extremely defirols of reiloring peace ill Scntlaild,
and her Aimhasiador Killegres., as well as the Earl of
Rothes, tied their uttnoft endeavours to periliade Kirk-
aldy to accede to the treaty of 'erth, it leeils more cre-
dible to impute the continuance of hollilities to Kirkalt
dy's obrrilnacy, his di(trift of Mortol, or ht.s hope of for-
eign aid, than to ally other catl'e.

That this was really the cafe, 's evident from the po-

litive tefimolnoy of Spotfw. 269, 270. Caind. 44S. Jolift.
!-lit-. 3, 4. I)igges, 33., Crawford's accol:t aeues, ia
the mainl, with theirs. Mlemi. 36-.

corrupt man of that age, defended himnfelfwvit"'
bravery, augmented by despair. Three and
thirty days he resifted all the efforts of the
Scotch and English, who pufled on their at.
tacks with courage, and with emulation. Nor
did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
wrere battered down, and one of the wells in
the castle dried up, and the other choaked with
rubbish. Even then, his spirit was unfubdued,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously be.
hind the lait intrenchment, than to yield to his
inveterate enemies. But his garrison was not
animated with the fame heroick or desperate
resolution, and riling in a mutiny, forced him
to capitulate. He surrendered himfelf(May 9.)
to Drury, who promised, in the name of his
mistress, that he should be favourably treated.
Together with him, James Kirlaldy his brother,
Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few
citizens of Edinburgh, and about I6o soldiers,
were made prisoners. *)

Several of the officers, who had been kept

in pay during the war, prevailed on their men
to accompany them into the Low-countries, and
entering into the service of the States, added,
by their gallant behaviour, to the reputation
for military virtue, which has always been the
charafteriftick of the Scottish nation.

') Cald. ii. 40S. Melv. 24o. Crawf. Mem. 265.

# Review of the character of both parties.

Review of the charafter of both parties.

Thus by the treaty with Chatelherault and

Huntly, and the surrender of the cattle, the
civil wars in Scotland were brought to a period.
When we review the Pcate of the nation, and
compare the strength of the two factions,
Mary's partisans among the nobles appear, ma-
nifetlly, to have been superior both in numbers
and in power. But these advantages were more
than counterbalanced by others, which their
antagonists enjoyed. Political abilities, miili-
tary fiill, and all the talents which times of
a&tion form, or call forth, appeared chiefly on
the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boals
of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of
Murray, tempered with wifidorn; the profund
sagacity of Morton; the subtle genius, and in-
finuating address, of Mailland ; or the fuccefsfal
valour of Kirkaldy ; all which were, at first,
employed in laying the foundations of the
King's authority. On the one fide, measures
were concerted with prudence, and executed
with vigour ; on the other, their resolutions
were rash , and their conduit feeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and
prompted by indignation against the Queen,
warmly supported the King's cause. The Clergy
threw the whole weight of their popularity
into the fame scale. By means of there, as
well as by the powerful interposition of Eng-
land, the King's government was finally elta-

# Kirkaldy put to death.

blifhed. Mary loft even that shadow of fove.
reignity, which, amidfc all her sufferings, she
iad hitherto retained among part of her own
fubjedts. And as she was no longer permitted
to have an Ambassador at the court of England,
the only mark of dignity which flhe had , for
foniie time, enjoyed there, she mul: henceforth
be confidered as an exile stripped of all the
ensiGns of royalty ; guarded with anxiety in the
one kin.gdom, and totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

Kirkaldy put to deati.

Kirkaldy and his associates remained ini

Drury's cnftody, and were treated by him with
great humanity, till the Queen of England,
whole prisoners they were, should determine
their fate. iMorton inlifted that they should
fuller the punishment due to their rebellion and
obfiinacy; and declared that, so long as they
were allowed to live, he did not reckon his
own per:on or authority secure; and Elizabeth,
without regarding Drury's honour, or his pro-
mises in her name, gave them up to the Re-
gent's disposal. He first confined them to fepa-
rate prisons; and, soon after, with Elizabeth's
con ent, condemned (August 3. ) Kirkaldy, and
his brother , to be hanged at the cross of Edin-
burgh. Maitland, who did not expee& to be
treated more favourably, prevented the igno-
miny of a publick execution, by a voluntary

death, and ,ended his days, fays Melvil, after
the old Roman fashion. ') "

While the Regent was wreaking his ven-

geance on the remains of her party in Scotland,
Mary, incapable of aflording them any relief'
bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of
her prison. At the fame time, her health began
to be much impaired by confinement, and
want of exerci'e. At the entreaty of the French
Ambaflador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was
permitted to carry her to Buxton-wells, not far
from Tuthbury, the place of her imprisonment.
Cecil, wiho lately had been created Baron of
Burleigh, and Lord High Treasurer of England,
happened to be there at the fame time. And
though no mrinitrer ever entered more warmly
into the views of a Sovereign, or gave stronger
proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than this
great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust of
every person who approached the Queen of
Scots , that her suspicions extended even to
him; and, while Mary jufily reckoned him her
most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty
in persuading his own miifrefs that he was not
partial to that unhappy Queen. 4*)

The Duke of Alva was this year recalled

from the government of the Netherlands, where
his haughty and oppreffrve adminittration roused

:') Melv. 243,
'":') Strype, ii. 2 2S. gs, .

# The Regent's administration becomes odious. (1574.)

a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spai:
exhausted its treasures, ruined its armies, an:
loft its glory. Requefens, who succeeded hin
was of a milder temper, and of a less enter
prifing genius. This event delivered Elizabeti
from the perpetual disquietude, occasioned b\
Alva's negotiations with the Scottish Queen
and his zeal for her interest.

Tie Regent's adminiflration becomes odious, ( J574.)

Though the kingdom was now fettled it

profound peace, many of the evils which ac
company civil war were fill felt. The restraint
of law, which, in times of publick confusion
are little regarded even by civilized nationsr
wvere totally despised by a fierce people, unac.
cuilomed to the regular administration ofjuftice
The disorders in every corner of the kingdoir
were become intolerable; and, under the pro.
tetion of the one or the other faftion, crimes
.of every kind were committed with impunity
The Regent set himself to redress these, and,
by his industry and vigour, order and fecuritr
were re-established in the kingdom. But hi
loit the reputation due to this important service
by the avarice, which he difeovered, in per
forming it; and his own exaftions became mon
pernicious to the nation than all the irregula
rities which he restrained. *1) Spies and in

fornlcr
*) See Append, 'No, VII

formers were every where employed; the re-
membrance of old ofrences was revived; imagi-
nary crimes were invented; petty trespasses
were aggravated; and delinquents were forced
to compound for their lives, by the payment
of exorbitant fines. At the fame time , .the
current coin was debased; ;) licences were fold
for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce,
unusual taxes were imposed on commodities;
and all the refinements in oppression, from
xwhich nations so imperfectly polished as the
Scots are usually exempted, were put in prac-
tice. None of there were complained of more
loudly, or with greater reason , than his in-
justice towards the Church. The thirds of be-
nefices, out of which the Clergy received their
subsistence, had always been slowly and irre-
gularly paid to colle&ors, appointed by the
General Aflembly; and, during the civil wars,
no payment could be obtained in several parts
of the kingdom. Under colour of redressing.
*) The corruption of the coin, during Moiton's adminiltration,

was very great. Although the quantity of current imonte-
coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gradually increaicit
by former prilces; the flandard or fiueneefs fulered little
alteration , and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame
vith what is now Lufed. But Morton mixed a fourth pait
of alloy with every pound of silver, and funk , by confe-
quence, the value of coi n n proportion. In the year 1r5S
all the money coined by himn was called il, and alppoinitcd
to be recoiied. The Rfandard as restored to the fame
purity as formerly. Ruddim. Praef. to Anders, Dipiro'.,
1.' 74.
Hilt. of Scotl. Vnol. I, E

this grievance, and upon a promise of aligning
every Minister a stipend within his own parish,
the Regent extorted from the Church the thirds
to which they had right by law. luttheClergy,
instead of reaping any advantage from this alte-
ration, found that payments became more irre-
gular and dilatory than ever. One Minister was
commonly burdened with the care of four or
five parishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and
the Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft
of the fund. *)

The death of Charles IX. which happened

this year, was a new misfortune to the Scottifi
Queen. Henry 111. who succeeded him, had
not the fame attachment to her person; and his
jealousy of the house of Guise, and obsequious-
ness to the Queen Mother, greatly alienated
him from her interest.

The death of the Duke of Chatelherault

(Jan. 22. I575.) rnuft likewise be confidered
as some loss to Mary. As the Parliament had
frequently declared him next heir to the Crown,
this entitled him to great refpeEt among his
countrymen, and enabled him, more than any
other person in the kingdom, to counterbalance
the Regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the usual interviews

between the wardens of the Scottish and Eng-
lifh marches, a scuffle happened, in which the

'l Crawf. Mem, 272. Spotr, 373. CRld. ii. 42». 427.

# Attempts of the Clergy against the Episcopal order.

English were worsted; a few killed on the spot;
and Sir James Forrester, the warden, with fe-
veral gentlemen who attended him, taken pri-
foners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent
were too sensible of the advantage which re-
fulted from the good understanding that sub-
sifted between the two kingdoms, to allow this
flight accident to interrupt it.

Attemnpts of the Clergy agaiift the Episcopal order.

The domeftick tranquillity of the kingdom.

was in some danger of being disturbed by another
cause. Though the persons, raised to the dig-
nity of Bishops, poffefled very small revenues,
and a very moderate degree of power, the
Clergy, to whom the Regent and all his mea-
fares were become extremely odious, began to
be jealous of that order. Knowing that cor-
ruptions steal into the Church gradually, under
honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such fnall begin-
nings, the hierarchy might grow in time, to
be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of there suspicions was Mr. Andrew
Melvil, a man, distinguished by his uncommon
erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in
the retirement of an academy, he was unac-
quainted with the arts of life; and being more
attentive to the ends which he purCued, tlhan

E z

# He irritates some of the nobles. (1576.)

to the means which he employed for promoting
them, he often defeated laudable designs by
the impetuosity and imprudence with which he
carried them on. A question was moved by
him in the aflembly, ,, whether the office of
Bishop, as now excrcifed in the kingdom, were
agreeable to the word of God? "' In the eccle-
fiaftical judicatories, continual complaints were
made of the Bishops for neglec& of duty, many
of which their known remifl'efs too well julti-
sied. The Bishop of Dunkeld , being accused
of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty
by the aflembly. And the Regent, instead of
checking, connived at these disputes about ec-
clefiaflical government, as they diverted the zeal
of the Clergy from attending to his daily encroach-
ments on the patrimony of the Church. *)

He itritttes Come of the nobles. (I576.)

The weight of the Regent's oppressive ad-

minii'tration had, hitherto , fallen chiefly on
those in the lower and middle rank; but lie
began now to take such steps, as convinced the
nobles, that their dignity would not long
exempt them from feeling the effects of his
power. An accident, which was a frequent
canfe of dissension among the Scottish nobles.
occasioned a difference between the Earls of
Argyll and Athol. A vafnal of the former had

") Cald. Afremblies, 1374, &c, Jcllt. Hist. I.

rmade rome depredations on the lands of the
latter. Achol took arms to punish the offender;
.Argyll, to protect hlim; and this ignoble quar-
rel they were ready to decide in thefield, when
the Regent, by interposing his authority, ob-
liged them to disband their forces. Both of
them had been guilty of irregularities, which,
though common, were contrary to the letter of
the law. Of these the Regent took advantage,
and resolved to found on them a charge of
treason. This delign was revealed to the two
Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The com-
mon danger, to which they were exposed,
compelled them to forget old quarrels, and to
unite in a close confederacy , for their mutual
defence. Their junition rendered them for-
midable; they despised the furnions which the
Regent gave themi to appear before a court of
justice; and he was obliged to defit from any
further prosecution. But the injury he intend-
ed made a deep impression on their minds, and
drew on him revere vengeance. *)

Nor was he more successful in an attempt,

which he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton
with the guilt of having formed a conspiracy
against his life. Though those, who were sup-
posed to be his accomplices, were seized , and
tortured, no evidence of any thing criminal ap-
peared; but, on the contrary, many circam-

;') Cravmr, Mem. 285.

# They turn their eyes towards the King.

# James's education and disposition.

fances discovered his innocence, as well as the
Regent's secret views, in imputing to him such
an odious design. *)

They turn their eyes towards the King.

The Scottish Nobles, who were almost

equal to their Monarchs in power, and treated
by themrn with much diftintion, obrerved these
arbitrary proceedings of a Regent with the
utmost indignation. The people, who, under
a form of government extremely simple, had
been little accustomed to the burden of taxes,
complained loudly of the Regent's rapacity.
And all began to turn their eyes towards the
young King, from whom they expected the
redress of all their grievances, and the return
of a more gentle and more equal adminiltration.

James's education and difpasition.

James was now in the twelfth year of his

age. The Queen, soon after his birth, had
committed him to the care of the Earl of Mar,
and during the civil wars he had resided fecu-
rely in the castle of Stirling. Alexander Erskine,
that nobleman's brother, had the chief dlre&tion
of his education. Under him the famous Bucha-
nan afted as preceptor, together with three
other masters, the most eminent the nation as-
forded for skill in those sciences which were

*) Crawf. Mem. 387.

# He is suspicious of the Regent's power.

deemed necefiary for a prince. The young King
shewed an uncommon pallion for learning, and
made great progress in it. And the Scots fan-
cied that they already discovered in him, all
there virtues which the fondness or credulity
of fubjets usually ascribe to princes during their
minority. But as James was still far from that
age at which the law permitted him to assume
the reins of government, the Regent did not
sufficiently attend to the sentiments of the
people, nor relie&, how naturally these preju-
dices in his favour might encourage the King
to anticipate that period. He not only negleEted
to secure the friendship of those who were about
the King's person, and who polfeffed his ear,
but had even exasperated some of them by per-
fonal injuries.

He is fiCfpiiolis of the Re sent's powers

Their resentment concurred vith the am-

bition of others, in infusing into the King early
suspicions of Morton's power and designs. A
King, they told him, had often reason to fear,
feldorm to love, a Regent. Prompted by am-
bition, and by interest, he would endeavour to
keep the Prince in perpetual infancy, at a di-
fiance from his fubjets, and unacquainted with
business. A small degree of vigour, however,
was sufficient to break the yoke. SubjeEts na-
turally reverence their Sovereign, and become
impatient of the temporary and delegated ju.rif-

# At plot formed against the Regent.

diaion of a Regent. Morton had governed with
rigour, unknown to the ancient Monarchs of
Scotland. The nation groaned under his op-
pressions; and would welcome the first profpeEt
of a milderadminiftration. At present theKing's
name was scarce mentioned in Scotland, his
friends were without influence, and his favouri-
tes without honour. But one effort would
discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it
was arbitrary. The fame attempt would put
himself in possession of his just authority, and
rescue the nation from intolerable tyranny. If
he did not regard his own rights as a King, let
him liftep, at least, to the cries of his people. ')

At plot formed ngainlll the Regent,

These fuggeflions made a deep impression

on the young King, who was trained up in an
opinion that he was born to command. His
approbation of the design, however, was of
small consequence, without the concurrence of
the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and Athol,
two of the most powerful of that body, were
animated with implacable resentment against the
Regent. To them the Cabal in Stirling-caftle
communicated the plot which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander
Erskine, who, since the death of his brother,
and during the minority of his nephew, had

Y'Melv. £49*

the command of that fort, and the custody of
the King's person, admitted them secretly into
the King's presence. They gave him the fame
account of the misery of his fubjeas, underthe
Regent's arbitrary administration; they com-
plained loudly of the injustice with which them-
selves had been treated, and besought the King,
as the only means for redressing the grievances
of the nation, to call a council of all the nobles.
James consented, and letters were issued, in
his name , for that purpose ; but the two Earls
took care that they should be sent only to
such as were known to bear no good will to
Morton. *)

The number of there was, however, so

inconsiderable , that , on the day appointed,
(March.4. 1 78.) far the greater part of the nobles
afiembled at Stirling; and so highly were they
incensed against Morton , that although , on
receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athol's
interview with the King, he had made a feint
as if he would resign the Regency, they ad-
vised the King, without regarding this offer,
to deprive him of his office, and to take the
administration of government into his own hands.
Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and Herries, were
appointed to signify this resolution to Morton,
who was , at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual
place of residence.

') Spotfw, 378.

# He resigns his office, and retires.

He resigns his office, and retires.

Nothing could equal the joy with whicli

this unexpeted resolution filled the nation, but
the surprise occasioned by the seeming alacrity
with which the Regent descended from so high
a Itation. He neither wanted sagacity to fore.
fee the danger of resigning, nor inclination to
keep poffeifion of an office , for the expiration
of which the law had fixed so distant a term.
But all the sources, whence the faction of
which he was head, derived their fIrength, had
either failed, or now supplied his adversarics
with the means of humbling him. The Commons,
the city of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were all
totally alienated from him , by his multiplied
opprellions. Elizabeth, having lately bound
herself by treaty, to fend a considerable body
of troops to the assistance of the inhabitants of
the Netherlands, who were struggling for li-
berty, had little leisure to attend to the affairs
of Scotland; and as she had nothing to dread
from France, in whose councils the Princes of
Lorrain had not, at that time, much influence,
she was not displeased, perhaps, at the birth
of new fa&ions in the kingdom. Even those
nobles, who had long been joined with Morton
in faction, or whom he had attached to his
person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven,
Pitcairn the secretary, Murray of Tillibardin
Comptroller, all deserted his falling fortunes,

# Continues to watch the motions of the adverse party.

and appeared in the council at Stirling. So
many concurring circumstances convinced Mor-
ton of his own weakness, and determined him
to give way to a torrent, which was too im-
petuous to be refitted. He attended the Chan-
cellor and Herries to Edinburgh ; was present
,when the King's acceptance of the government
was proclaimed, and, in the presence of the
people , surrendered (March I2.) to the King
all the authority to which he had any claim in
virtue of his office. This ceremony was ac-
companied with such excessive joy and accla-
mnations of the multitude, as added, no doubt,
to the anguish which an ambitious spirit muff
feel when compelled to renounce supreme
power; and convinced Morton how entirely he
had loft the affections of his countrymen. He
obtained, however, from the King , an aft,
containing the approbation of every thing done
by him in the exercise of his office, and a par-
don, in the most ample form that his fear or
caution could devise, of all past offences, cri-
mes, and treasons. The nobles , who adher-
ed to the King, bound themselves, under great
penalty, to procure the ratification of this aft,
in the firlt parliament. *)

Continues to watch the motions of tile adverse party.

A council of twelve Peers was appointed to
assist the King in the adtniniftration of affairs.

'*) Spotr. S7S. Crawf. Mem. 2lS9. Cild. ii, 523.

And Morton, deserted by his own party, and
unable to struggle with the fa&cion, which go.
verned abfolurely at court, retired to one of his
feats, and feetned to enjoy the tranquillity, and
to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply
dilquieted with all the uneasy refleAions which
accompany disappointed ambition, and intent
on fchetnes for recovering his former grandeur.
Even in this retreat, which the people called
the Lion's-den , his wealth and abilities render-
ed him formidable. And the new Counsellors
were so imprudent as to rouse him, by the
precipitancy with which they hastened to strip
him of all the remains of power. They requir-
ed him to surrender the cattle of Edinburgh,
which was flill in his poffet!lon. HI-e refused at
firit to do so, and began to prepare for its de-
fence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having
taken arms, and repulsed part of the garrison,
.which was sent out to guard a convoy of pru-
visions, he was obliged to give up the im-
portant fortrefs,without refinfance. This encou-
raged his adversaries to call a parliament to
meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply their de-
mands upon him, in such a manner, as con-
vinced him that nothing less than his utter ruin
would satisfy their inveterate hatred.

Their power and popularity, however,

began already to decline. The Chancellor, the
ablest and most moderate man in the party,

# Resumes his former authority.

hav;ng been killed at Stirling, in an accidental
rencontre betw-een his followers and those of
the Earl of Crawford; Athol, who was appoint.
ed his successor in that high office, the Earls of
Englinton, Cathnefs , and Lord Ogilvie, all
the prime favourites at court, were either
avowed Papills, or fufpeEted of leaning to the
opinions of that fest. In an age, when tha
return of popery was so much and fJ julily
dreaded , this gave universal alarnr. And as
Mlorton had always treated the Papifls with
rigour, this nnfe.aConable indulgence made all
zealous Protestants remember that circumntance
in his adtminiftration with great praise. :')

Pxefillles his former authority.

Mortnio. to whom none of these particulars

were unknown, thought this the proper junittre
for setting to -work the inftrumcnts which lie
had been preparing. Having gained the confi-
dence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess
his mother, he insinuated to them that Alexan-
ider Erskine had formed a plot to deprive his
nephew of the government of Stirling-caftle.
and the custody of the King's person ; and
easily induced an ambitious woman , and a
youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent
this supposed injury. The Earl repairing fud-
denly to Stirling, and being admitted, as ufuaai:
"* S'potfw. 283.

into the caffle with his attendants, seized t!h
gates early in the morning, (April 26.) an:
turned out his Uncle, who dreaded no dange
from his hands. The soldiers of the garrilc;
fabmitted to him as their governor, and, wit:
little danger and no effusion of blood, he be.
came master both of the King's person, and o
the fortre s. *)

An event so unexpected occasioned gre,

consternation. And though Morton's hand di;
not appear in the execution, he was universally
believed to be the author of the attempt. Thl
new Counsellors saw it to be necessary , so:
their own safety, to change their measure,
and instead of pursuing him with such impla.
cable resentment, to enter into terms of ac
commodation with an adversary, fRill so ca
pable of creating them trouble. Four wer,
named, on each fide, to adjust their differences
They met not far from Dalkeith. And whet
they had brought matters near a conclusion
Alorton, who was too lagacious not to improve
the advantage which their security and thei
attention to the treaty afforded him, set ou
in the night-time ( May 24.) for Stirling, air
having gained Murray of Tillibardin, Mar'
uncle, was admitted by him into the castle
and managing matters there with his ufu:
dexterity, he soon had more entirely the coti

'- Cald. ii. 535,

mand of the fort, than the Earl himself. He
was likewise admitted to a feat in the privy
council, and acquired the fame a'cendant in
it. *)

As the time appointed for the meeting of

parliament at Edinburgh now approached, this
gave him tome anxiety. He was afraid of
carrying the young King to a city, whose in-
habitants were so much at the devotion of the
adverse faction. He was no less unwilling to
leave James behind at Stirling. In order to
avoid this dilemma, he issued a proclamation,
in the King's name, changing the place of
meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caftle. This
Athol and his party represented as a ftep alto-
gether unconstitutional. The King, said they,
is Morton's pritoner; the pretended counsellors
are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the
nobles may repair without fear, and where
they may deliberate with freedom,is absolutely
neceflary for fettling the nation, after disorders
.of such long continuance. But in an assembly,
.called contrary to all form, held within the
walls of a garrison, and overawed by' armed
men, what safety could members expe&? what
liberty could prevail in debate? or what benefit
result to the publick? The Parliament met, how-
ever, on the day appointed, (July 25.) and,
notwitlhftanding the protestation of the Earl of
') Cald, ii. 53S.

# Argyll and Athol take arms against him.

AMontrofe and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's ac.
ceptance of the government was confirmed; the
at granted to Morton, for his security, ratified;
some regulations, vith regard to the numbers
and authority of the privy council, were agreed
upon; and a pension for life granted to the
Countess of Mar, who had been so initrnmen-
tal in bringing about the late revolution. *)

Argyll and Athol take arns against him.

Meanwhile, Argyll, Athol, and their fol.

lowers, took arms upon the specious pretence
of rescuing the King from captivity, and the
kingdom from opprefion. James himself, im-
patient of the servitude in which he was held,
by a man whon lie had long been taught to
hate , secretly encouraged their enterprise;
though, at the fame time, he was obliged not
only to disavow them in publick, but to levy
forces againfi them, and even to declare, by
proclamation, that he was perfecly free from
any conflraint, either upon his person, or his
will. .'¢Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll
and Athol were at the head of 7000 men; the
Earl of Angus, Morton's nephew, met them
(Aug.I I.) with an army 5000ooo frong; neither par-
ty, however, was eager to engage. Morton diftruiiL
ed the fidelity of his own troops. The two Earls

were
') Cald. ii. 547, Parl. 5. Jac, VI,

# Elizabeth negotiates an accommodation between them.

were sensible that a single victory, however
complete, would not be decisive; and as they
were in no condition to undertake the siege of
Stirling catIle, where the King was kept, their
strength would soon be exhautled, while Mor-
ton's owvn wealth, and the patronage of. the
Queen of England , might furiifh himn with
endless resources.

Elizabcthl negotiatLes an accoinniodatioii betxwcee themn

By the mediation of Bowcs, whom El]i-

zabetl had sent into Scotland to rneotiate an
accommodation between the two fai.ions, a
treaty was concluded, in coniequence of \iwhich,
Argyll and Atho! were ad-iirted into the King's
presence; some of their party were added to
the Privy Council; and a Convention of nobles
called, in order to bring all remaining differen-
ces to an amicable iffne. *')

So soon as James aitl;ired the government

into his own hands, he difiatched the Abbot
of Dunferniling to inform Elizabeth of that
event; to offer to renew the alliance between
the two kingdoms; and to demand poffel'ion
of the el-ate, which had lately fallen to him
by the death of his grandmother, the Countess
oF Lennox. That Lady's second fol had left
one daughter, Arabella Stewart, who was

') Crawf. Mene. 307.
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. It. F

born in England. And as the chief objeaior t~
against the pretensions of the Scottish line to t
the Crown of England , was that maxim oi
lAnglifh law, which excludes aliens from any t
right of inheritance within the kingdom, Eli. t
zabeth, by granting this demand, would have
established a precedent in James's favour, that X
might have been esteemed decisive, with regard
to a point, which it had been her constant care
to keep undecided. Without funlering this de. x
licate queflion to be tried,or allowing any new,
light to be thrown on that, which she confidered
as the great mystery of her reign, she com-
manded the rents of the estate to be sequestered
by Lord Burleigh, Master of the Wards; and
by this method of proceeding, gave the Scottifi
King early warning how neceflary it would be
to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success
in claims of greater importance, but equally
liable to be controverted. *)

After many delays, and with much diffi.

culty, the contending nobles were at last brought
to some agreement. But it was followed by a
tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcile-,
nent, having invited the leaders of the oppo-.
Iite party to a great entertainment, Athol the
Chancellor was. soon after, taken ill, an died
(April 24. 1579.) within a few days. The
symptoms and violence of the disease gave rife

) Carnd. 461,

# Morton's illegal proceedings against the family of Hamilton.

to frong suspicions of his being poisoned; and
though the physicians, who opened his body,
differed inr opinion as to the cause of the distemper,
theChancellor's relations publiccly accused Mor-
ton of that odious crime. Tile advantage which
visibly accrued to him; by the removal )f a
man of great abilities, and averse from all his
measures, was ftil'icient proof of his guilt to
the people, who are ever fond of imputing the
death of eminent persons to extraordinary
caules. *)
Mlorton's illegal proceeditngs ngainft the family of Ha;miltol.

The office of Chancellor was bestowed

upon Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled,
in a great measure, to Morton's adminifiration.
He had now recovered all the authority he pof-
fefled during his Regency, and had entirely
broken, or baffled, the power and cabals of
his enemies. None of the great families re-
mained to be the objeas of his jealousy, or to
obftrut his designs, but that of Hamilton.
The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
i recovered the shock which he received from the ill

success ofhis passion for the Queen, and had no\V
altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the fe-

d cond brother, was in possession of the family
eeftate. Lord Claud was Commendator of Paif-
e ley; both of them young men, ambitious, and

") Spotfw, 3Q6,

I \ li W2.~~~~~~~~~~~r

enterprising. Mlorton dreaded their inflaenee
in the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to share
their spoils among them; and as all Princes
naturally view their fucceflbrs with jealoul'y
and hatred, it was easy to inftuf these pallons
into the mind of the young King. A pretence
was at hand to justify the most violent proceed.
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty
of Perth, did nor extend to thoce who were
accessary to the murder of the Reagents MIlrray
or Lennox. Lord John and hIls brother were
fufpeded ofbeing the authors of both theif crines,
and had been included in a general ad: of at-
tainder on that account. Wiithout fummoniin
them to trial, or examining a tingle xvitnefi&
to prove the charge, this attainder was now
thought sufficient to subjet them to all thel
penalties which they would have incurred by
being formally conviced. The Earls of Mlor.
ton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the
Lords Ruthven, I3oyd, and Cathcart, received
a commifion to seize their persons and eflates.
On a few hours warning, a considerable body
of troops was ready, and marched towards
Hamilton in hostile array. Happily the two
brothers made their escape, though with great
difficulty. But their lands were confiscated;
the caflfes of Hamilton and Draffan befleged;
those who defended them punished. The Earl
of Arran, though incapable, from his situation,
of committing any crime, was involved,by a

# Negotiations for a marriage between Elizabeth and the Duke of Alençon.

shameful abuse of law, in the common ruin of
his family; and as if he, too, could have been
guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner.
These proceedings, so contrary to the funda-
mental principles of justice, were all ratified in
the fibfequeit parliament. *)

About this time Mary sent , by Naue her

secretary, a letter to her ton, together with tome
jewels of value, and a vest embroidered with
her own hands. But as she gave him only
the title of Prince of Scotland, the merfenger
was difmiif'ed, without being admitted into his
pretence. :)
Negotiations for a inartii:ie between Eiiiabetli and the

u)lke of Aleiil;,tr .

Though Elizabeth had, at this time, no

particular reason to fear any attempt of the
Popish Princes in Mlary's favour, fle flill con-
tinued to guard her with the fame anxious
care. The acquisition of Portugal, on the one
hand, and the defence of the Netherlands, on
the other, fully employed the councils and
arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces by in-
teftine commotions, and under a weak and
capricious Prince, despised and distrusted by
his own fabjecs, was in no condition to dif-
turb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long amused

') Crawf. Mem. 31I. Spotfw. 306.
"') Crawf. Mern, 3t14

# Two favourites gain an ascendant over James.

that court by carrying on a treaty of marriag
with the Duke of Alengon, the King's brother
But whether, at the age of forty-five, si;
really intended to marry a Prince of twentyi
whether the pleasure of being flattered an:
courted, made her liflen to the addresses of f:
young a lover, whom fhe.allowed to visit bhe
at two different times, and treated with thi
mofl dillinguifhing refpeEt? or whether confi.
derations of interelt predominated in this, ai
vell as in every other tranfaftion of her reign.
are problems in history which we are not con.
cerned to resolve. During the progress of thii
negotiation, which was drawn out to an extra.
ordinary length, Mary could expeEt no afffi.
ance from the French court, and seems to hav
held little correspondence with it. And thene
was no period in her reign, wherein Elizabeth
enjoyed more perfect security.

Two favourites gain an arcendant over Jarnes.

Morton seems at this time to have been

equally secure; but his security was not so well
founded. He had weathered out one florAn,
had crushed his adversaries, and was again in
pofleflion of the sole direction of affairs. But
as the King was now of an age, when the
charafter and dispositions of the mind begin t
unfold themselves, and to become visible, the
finalleft attention to these might have convinced
him, that there was reason to expe& new and

more dangerous attacks on his power. James
early discovered that exceflive attachment to
favourites which accompanied him through his
whole life. This passion, which naturally arises
from inexperience and youthful warmth of
heart, was, at his age, far from being culpable;
nor could it well be expeEted that the choice
of the objects, on whom he placed his affections,
should be made with great skill. The most
considerable of them was Efme Stewart, a na-
tive of France, and son of a second brother of
the Earl of Lennox. He was distinguished by
the title f Lord D'Aubignu, an estate in France,
which descended to him from his ancet-ors,
on whom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour and services to the French Crown.
He arrived in Scotland, about this time, (Sept.
S.) on purpose to demand the estate and title
of Lennox, to which he pretended a legal right.
He was received, at first, by the King with
the refpe& due to so near a relation. The grace-
fulness of his person, the elegance of his
dress, and his courtly behaviour, made a great
impression on James, who, even in his more
mature years, was little able to resist these
frivolous charms; and his affection flowed witrh
its usual rapidity and profafion. Within a fenv
days after Stewart's appearance at court, he
was created Lord Aberbrothock , soon after
Earl, and then Duke of Lennox, Governor of
Dunbarton castle, Captain of the guard, firIt

Lord of the bed-chamber, and Lord High
Chamberlain. At the fame time, and without
any of the envy or emulation which is ufuia
among candidates for favour, Captain James
Stewart , the second son of Lord Ochiltree,
grew into great confidence. But notwithftand.
ing this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart
-were persons of very opposite characters. The
former was naturally gentle, humane, candid;
but unacquainted with the slate of the country,
and milled, or misinformed by those whom he
truited; not unworthy to be the companion of
the young King in his amusements, but utterly
disqualified for acting as a Minister in directing
his alfairs. The latter was remarkable for all
the vices which render a man formidable to his
country, and a pernicious counsellor to his
Prince; not did he possess any one virtue to
counterbalance these vices, unless a dexterity
in conducting his own defgns, and an enter-
prifing courage, superior to the sense of dan-
ger, may pass by that name. Unrestrained by
religion, regardless of decency, and undifmay-
ed by opposition, he aimed at objets seemingly
unattainable; but under a Prince void of expe-
rience, and blind to all the defeEts of those
wvho had gained his favour, his audacity was
successful; and honours, wealth, and power,
were the reward of his crimes.

# They labour to undermine Morton's authority.

They laboiur to undermllie i orton's 'l:,!orjity,

Both the favourites concurred in employing

their whole address to undermine Mulrton's cre-
dit, which alone obilrucred their full. poff'elion
of power. And as James had been bred up
with an aversion for that nobleman , who en-
deavoured rather to maintain the authority of a
Tutor, than to acn with the obfeqaioufnefs of.
a minister, they found it no difficult matter to
accoimplifh their design. Morton, .who coulld
no longer keep the King fhnlt p v .itlhin thte
walls of Stirling -castle, havin.g e?,ald a par-
liament to meet (Othob. 7. ) at dtinburgh,
brougit him thither. Jarnes made Iiis entry
into the capital witih rcat folenmiity; the ci-
tizens received him ..ith the loudetc acclama-
tions of joy, and witl! m any expennive pageants,
accordi, ng to the mode of that age. After a long
period of thirty-feven yeais, during; ,!hich, Scot-
land had been fTibjtLied to the delegated po\vwe
of Regents, or to the feeble government of a
woman, and had fi'tered all the miseries of
civil war, and felt tle insolence of foreign ar-
mies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre
once more in the l:ands of a King. Fond even
of that flladow of authority, which a Prince
of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered
themnfelves, that union, order, and tranquillity
would now be reitored to the kingdom. James

# Morton endeavours to prevent them.

opened the parliament 'with extraordinary pomp,
but nothing remarkable pasted in it.

These demonstrations, however, of the

people's love and attachment to their Sovereign,
encouraged the favourites to continue their in.
finuation against Morton; and as the King now
resided in the palace of Haly-rud- house, to
which all his fubjets had access, the cabal
against the Earl grew daily stronger, and the
intrigue, which occasioned his fall, ripened
gradually.

Morton endeavours to prevent them.

Morton began to be sensible of his danger,

and endeavoured to put a flop to the career
of Lennox's preferment, by representing him
as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Reli-
gion, a secret agent in favour of Popery, and
a known emissary of the house of Guise. The
clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Len-
nox, either out of complaisance to his master,
or convinced by the arguments of some learned
Divines, whom the King appointed to infirul
him in the principles of the Protefcant Religion,
publickly renounced the errors of Popery, in
the Church of St. Giles , and declared hinfelf a
member of the Church of Scotland , by signing
her Confession of Faith. This, though it did
not remove all suspicions, nor silence some zealous

# Elizabeth interposes in his behalf.

preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force
of the accusation. :)

On the other hand, a rumour prevailed

that Morton was preparing to seize the King's
person, and to carry him into England. Whe-
ther despair of maintaining his power by any
other means, had driven him to make any
overture of that kind to the English court, or'
rwhether it was calumny invented by his adver-
saries to render him odious, cannot now be
determined with certainty. As he declared at
his death that stich a design had never entered
intohis thoughts, the latter seems to be most
probable. It afforded a pretence, however, for
reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain, vwhich had
been for some time difrtied. That honour was
conferred on Lennox. Alexander Erskine,
Morton's capital enemy, was his deputy; they
had under them a band of Gentlemen, who
were appointed constantly to attend the King,
and to guard his person. '*)

Elizabetii inierpores in his behalf.

Morton was not ignorant what his enemies

intended to insinuate by such unufnal precau-
tions for the King's safety; and as his last re-
source, applied to Elizabeth, whose protetion
had often flood him in fead in his greatest dif,

") Crawf. Mem. 319. Spots, 30S.
*') Crawf, Mem. 320.

# Morton accused of the murder of the late King.

ficulties. In consequence of this application,
Bowes her Envoy accused Lennox of practices
against the peace of the two kingdoms, and
infifed , in her name, that he should initantly
be removed from the Privy Council. Such an
unprecedented demand was confidered by the
Counsellors as an affront to the King, and an
encroachment on the independence of the king-
don. They atTe&ed to call in question the
Envoy's powers, and upon that pretence refuf-
ed him farther audience; and he retiring in
disgust, and without taking leave, Sir Alexan-
der Home was sent to expostulate with Elizabeth
on the subject. After the treatment which her
Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below
her dignity to admit Home into her presence.
Burleigh, to whom he was commanded to im-
part his commiiffon, reproached him with his
inafter's ingratitude towards a benefacrefs,
who had placed the Crown on his head, and re-
quired him to advise the King to beware of fa-
crificing the friendship of so necefary an ally
to the giddy humours of a young man, without
experience, and strongly fufpeted of principles,
and attachments, incompatible Jwith the happi-
ness of the Scottish nation.

Morton accused of the murder of the late hing.

This accusation of Lennox hastened , in

all probability, Morton's fall. The aft of in-
demnity, which he had obtained when he re-

signed the Regency, was worded with such
scrupulous exaFtnics, a; anmolt screened him
from any legal prosecut:ion. The murder of
the late King was the only crime which could
not, with decency, ie inserted in a pardon
granted by his Con. Hlere Morton frill lay open
to the penalties of the law. And Captain
Stewart, who flhunned no a&ion, however
desperate, if it ledt to power or to favour, en-
tered ( Decenib. -o. I 5o.) the council-cham-
ber while the Icng and nobles were afiembled,
and falling on his knees, accused Morton of
being acccfl-ry, or according to the language
of the Scottish law , art and part, in the con-
fpiracy against the life of his Majetly's father,
and offered, under the usual penalties, to ve-
rify this chirge by legal evidence. Morton,
who was present, heard this accusation with
lirmnefs; and replied with a disdainful fmnile,
proceeding either from contempt of the infa-
mous charaCter of his accnfer, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence , " that his
knovwn zeal in punishing those who were sus-
pedted of that deteflable crime, might well
exempt hiinfelf from any suspicion of being ac-
cefl'ary to it; nevertheless , he would cheer-
fully submit to a trial, either in that place, or
in any other court; and doubted not but his
own innocence, and the malice of his enemies,
would then appear in the clearest light." Ste-
wart, who was still on his knees, began to

enquire how he would reconcile his beflowing
so many honours on Archibald Douglas, whon
he certainly knew to be one of the murderers,
with his pretended zeal against that crime,
IMorton was ready to anfxser. But the Ki;.g
commanded both of therm to be removed The
Earl was confined, firfi of all (January a. 158I.)
to his own houle, and then committed to the
castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Elf-
kine was Governor; and as if it had not been
a ftfficient indignity to subjet him to the
power of one of his enemies, he was, soon
after, (Jan. 18.) carried to Dunbarton , of
which Lennox had the command. A warrant
was, likewise, issued for apprehending Archi-
bald Douglas; but he, having received timely
intelligence of the approaching danger, fled into
England. *)

The Earl of Angus, who imputed thefc

violent proceedings not to hatred against Mor-
ton alone, but to the ancient enmity between
the houses of Steward and ofDouglas, and who
believed that a conspiracy was now formed for
the defiruftion of the whole name, was ready
to take arms in order to rescue his kinsman.
But Morton absolutely sorbad any such attempt,
and declared that he would rather susser ten
thousand deaths, than bring an imputation on
*) Crawf. AMem. 33.

# Elizabeth's measures in order to save him.

his own charater by seeming to decline a
trial. *)

Elizabeth's measures in order to save hirm,

Elizabeth did not fail to interpose, with

warmth in behalf of a man who had contributed
so much to preserve her influence over Scotland.
The late tranfation in that kingdom had given
her great unealinefs. The power which Len-
nox had acquired independent of her was dan-
gerous; the treatment her Ambassadors had met
with, dillered greatly from the refpe&t with
which the Scots were in u(e to receive her Mi-
nifters; and the attack now made on Morton
fully convinced her that there was an intention
to sow the feeds of discord between the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new al-
liance with France, or into a marriage with some
Popish Princess. Full of these apprehensions,
she ordered a considerable body of troops to be
assembled on the borders of Scotland, and diC-
patched Randolph as her Ambaflador into that
kingdom. He addrefied himself not only to
James, and to his council, but to a convention
of estates, met at that time. He began with
enumerating the extraordinary benefits which
Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottish nation:
That without demanding a single foot of land
for herself, without encroaching on the liber-
:. ) Johnl, 64. SpotfW, 31.

ties of t;e kingdom in'the smallest article, si:.
had, at the expence of the blood of her sub.
jeets, and the treasures of her Crown, reCcuet;
the Scots from the dominion of France, elta.
blifhed among them true religion, and put thts:?
in pofleffion of their ancient rights: Th!.i
from the beginning she had protected those wlij
espoused the King's cause, and by her affiiance['a
alone, the Crown had been precrved on his head,
and all the attempts ofthe adverse faftion baflled:|
That an union, unknown to their ancestors, In 4
equally beneficial to both kingdoms, had sub.
'fited for a long period of years; and thoughV
so many Popish Princes had combined to diiafrl
this happy slate of things, her care, and their
constancy, had hitherto defeated all these es-
'forts : That she had observed, of late, an
unusual coldners, distrust, and estrangement in.
the Scottish Council, which she could impute
to none but to Lennox, a subje&f of France,
a retainer to the house of Guise, bred up in
the errors ofPopery, and still suspected of fa-
vouring that fiperftition. Not satisfied with
having mounted so fast to an uncommon heigh
of power, which he exercised with all the
rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of a
llaranger; not thinking it enough to have de-
prived the''Earl Morton of the authority due to
his abilities and experience, he had conspired
the ruin of that nobleman, who had often ex.
posed his life in the King's caufg, who hi:id

contri'

contributed more than any other subjea: to place
him on the throne, to resist the encroach-
ments of Popery, and to preserve the union
between the two kingdoms. ,If any zeal for
religion remained among the nobles in Scotland,
if they wished for the continuance of amity
with England, if they valued the privileges of
their own order, he called upon them, in the
name of his Aliftrefs, to remove such a perni-
cious counsellor as Lennox from the presence of
the young King, to rescue Morton out of the
hands of his avowed enemy, and secure to him
the benefit of a fair and impartial trial: And
if force were necellary towards accomplifihing
a design so salutary to the King and kingdom. he
promised them the proteEtion of his Mistress in
the enterprise , and whatever assistance they
should demand either of men or money. ')

But these extraordinary remonirances, ac-

companied with such an unufiul appeal from
the King to his fubjets , were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth in favour of Mor-
ton, and against Lennox. She persuaded the Prince
of Orange to fend an agent into Scotland, and
under colour of complimenting James on ac-
count of the valour which many of his fubje&ts
had displayed in the service of the States, to
enter into a long detail of the refilefs enter-

') Cald. iii. 3. Strype, ii, Gó t
Iift. of Scotl. Vol. II. O

ties of tl;e kingdom in'the fnallefl article, fi:t
liad, at the expence of tie blood of her sub.
jetes , and tlh treasures of l;er Crown, re('cued
the Scots f:rom the dominion! of France, cita.
blifled among them true religion, and put thlui
in pof!'efi'on of their ancient rights: That
from the beginning flie had protected those who
cfpoufed the Kintg's cause, and by her affilrance
alone, the Crown had been prelerved on his head,
and all the attempts ofthe adverte faction bal'll;d:
That an union, unknown to their anceflors, burt
equally beneficial to both kingdoms , had sub-.
filled for a long period of years; and though
so many Popish Princes had combined to dirt-urb
this happy tlate of things, her care, and their
conflancy, had hitherto defeated all these es-
forts: That t she had observed, of late, an
unusual coldness, diflruft, and estrangement in
the Scottish Council, which fle could impute'
:o none but to Lennox, a fubjeft of France,
a retainer to the house of (Guise, bred up in
the errors of Popery, and fiill fnfpe&ted of fa-
vouring that fupertiftion. Not satisfied with
having mounted so farf to an uncommon heighlt
of power , which he exercised with all the
rashness of youth , and all the ignorance of a
firanger; not thinking it enough to have de-
prived the' Earl Morton of the authority due to
his abilities and experience, he had conspired
the ruin of that nobleman, who had often ex-
posed his life in the ling's cause, whvo h:d

contri-

contributed more than any other subjet to place
him on the throne, to resist the encroach-
ments of Popery, and to preserve the union
between the two kingdoms . If any zeal for
religion remained among the nobles in Scotland,
if they wished for the continuance of amity
with England, if they valued the privileges of
their own order, he called upon them, in the
name of his Mistress, to remove such a perni-
cious counsellor as Lennox from the presence of
the young King, to rescue Morton out of the
hands of his avowed enemy, and secure to him
the benefit of a fair and impartial trial: And
if force were neceelary towards accomplishing
a design so salutary to the King and kingdom. he
promised them the protetion of his Miltrefs in
the enterprie , and whatever assistance they
should demand either of men or money. *)

But these extraordinary remonltrances, ac-

companied with such an unusual appeal from
the King to his fubjeEs , were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth in favour of Mor-
ton, and against Lennox. She persuaded the Prince
of Orange to fend an agent into Scotland, and
under colour of complimenting James on ac.
count of the valour which many of his fubjeats
had displayed in the service of the States, to
enter into a long detail of the restless enters

") Cald. iii. 3, Strype, ii, 621i
Iift. of Scotl. Vol.II. O

# James determines to proceed against him.

prises of the Popish Princes sgainil: the Protest.
ant Religion; to beseech him to adhere in.
violably to the alliance with England, the only
barrier which secured his kingdom against tleir
dangerous cabals; and above all things, to dif-
trust the insinuations of those who endeavoured
to weaken or to difiolve that union between
the British nations, which all the Protestants
in Europe beheld with so much pleasure. *)

Juanes deterrmines to proceed againr hlni.

James's Counsellors were too intent upon

the deftruftion of their enemy to litlen to these
remonfirances. The officious interposition of
the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Eli.
zabeth's meflage, and her avowed attempt to
excite subje&'s to rebel against their Scvereign,
were confidered as unexampled insults on tha
majesty and independence of a crowned head.
A general and evasive answer was given to
Randolph. James prepared to aflert his owni
dignity with fpiric. All those fufpeeted of fa-j
vouring Morton were turned out of office,
some of them were required to surrender them-
selves prisoners; the sensible men throughout
the kingdom were commanded to take auis;
and troops were levied, and ported on tle
borders.' The English Ambassador, finding
that neither the publick manifesto which he had

') Cnld. iii. 9

delivered to the Convention, nor his private
cabals with the nobles, could excite them to
arms, fled in the night- time out of Scotland,
where libels against him had been daily pub-
lifhed, and even attempts made upon his life.
In both kingdoms every thing wore an lloftile
afpeat. But Elizabeth, though she wished to
have intimidated the Scottish King by her prepa-
rations, had no inclination to enter into a wvar
with him, and the troops on the borders,
which had given such umbrage , were soon
dispersed. *)

The greater solicitude Elizabeth diicovered

for Morton's safety , the more eagerly did
his enemies drive on their schemes for his de-
ftruftion. Captain Stewart, his accuser, was
first appointed Tutor to the Earl of Arran, and
soon after both the title and estate of his un-
happy ward, to which he advanced some fri-
volous claim, were conferred upon him. The
new - made Peer was commanded to conduct
Morton from Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned
what fate he might expeft, but had the cruel
mortification of feeing his deadly enemy already
loaded with honours, in reward of the malice
which he had contributed to his ruin.

") Crawf. lesm. 328, Strype, ii. App. 13g"

(A'

# He is tried and condemned.

# His death.

lle is tried and condemned.

The records of the Court of Justiciary at

this period are loft. The account which our
hiflorians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate
and unfatisfa&orv. The whole proceedings
'eem to have been violent, irregular, and op-
preffive. Arran , in order to extort evidence,
tortured fevcral of the Earl's domefticks with
unusual cruelty. During the trial, great bodies
of armed men were drawn up in different parts
of the city. The jury was conpo)fed of the
Ls arl's known enemies; and though he challeng-
ed several of them, his objections were over-
ruled. After a short consultation, his Peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of being
art and part in the conspiracy againti the life of
the late King. The firit part of the verdi& did
not surprise him, but he twice repeated the
words art and part with some vehemence, and
added, ,, God knows it is not so." The doom,
which the law decrees against a Traitor, was
pronounced. The King , however , remitted
the cruel, and ignominious part of the sentence,
and appointed that he should susser death next
day, by being beheaded. *')

Ilis dentll.

During that awful interval, Morton pof-
sessed the utmofl composure of mind. He fupped

'")Spotr.314. Iohnit.65. Crawf.Mem. 333. Cald. ii. 4».

eheerfully; fiept a part of the night in his usual
manner, and employed tle rer0 or his tine in
religious conferences, and in a&s of devotion,
with some Minilfers of the city. The Clergy-
man who attended him, dealt freely with his
conscience, and prefied his crimes home upon
him. What he confessed with regard to the
crime for which he suffered is remarkable, and
supplies, in some reafure, the imperfeeion of
our records. He acknowledged , that on his
return from England after the death of Rizio,
Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy
againit the King, which the Queen, as he told
him, knew of and approved; that he solicited
him to concur in the execution of it, which,
at that time, he absolutely declined; that Coon
after, Bothwell himnelf, and Archibald Douglas,
in his name, renewing their felicitations to the
fame purpose, he had required a warrant under
the Queen's hand, authorising the attempt, and
as that had never been produced, he had re-
fured to be any farther concerned in the matter.
,,But, continued he, as I neither conrented
,, to this treasonable aEt, nor afflfted in the com-
,,mitting of it, so it was impossible for me to
, reveal, or to prevent it. Tho whom could I
,,make the discovery? -The Queen was the au-
,,thor of the enterprise. Darnly was such a
,,changeling, that no secret could be safely
,,communicated to him. Huntly and Bothwell,
,,who bore the chief sway in the kingdom,

,,were themselves the perpetratdrs of the
,,crime. " These circumstances , it muft.be
conferTed, go some length towards extenuating
Morton's guilt; and though his apology for the
favour he had shewn to Archibald Douglas,
whom he knew to be one of the conspirators,
be far less fatisfaftory, no uneasy refletions
seem to have disquieted his own mind on that
account. *) When his keepers told him that
the guards were attending, and all things in
readiness, ,.I praise my God, said he, I am
,,ready likewise. " Arran commanded thele
guards; and even in those moments, when the
most implacable hatred is apt to relent, the
malice of his enemies could not forbear this in.'
fult. On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm;
his countenance and voice unaltered; and after
some time spent in devotion, he suffered death
with the intrepidity which became the name of
Douglas. His head was placed on the publick
gaol of Edinburgh; and his body, after lying
till sun-set on the scaffold, covered with a beg-
garly cloak, was carried by common porters
to the usual burial-place of criminals. None of
his friends durst accompany it to the grave, or'
discover their gratitude and refpe&t by any
fyrptoms of sorrow. *')

') Crawf. Mem. App. lii.
") Crawf. Mem, 334. Spots, 314.

# Odious conduct of Arran.

Odioiu condu&l of Arran.

Arran, no less profligate in private life; tliarn

audacious in his publick condui, floon after
drew the attention of his: countrymen , by his
infamous marriage with the Countess of March.
Before he grew into favour at court, lie had
been often entertained in her husband's hoiife,
and without regarding the laws of hospitality
or of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue
with the wife of his benefa&cor, a woman young
and beautiful, but, according to the de'cription
of a cotemporary Historian, ,, intolerable in all
,the imperfections incident to her sex. " Impa-
tient of any retraint upon their mutual desires,
they, with equal ardour, wiflied to avow their
union publickly, and to legitimate, by a mar-
riage, the offspring of their unlawful pafiion.
The Countess petitioned to be divorced from
her husband, for a reason which no modest
woman will ever plead. The judges, overawed
by Arran, paired sentence without delay. And
this infamous feene was concluded (July 6. )
by a marriage, solemnized with great pomp,
and beheld by all ranks of men with the utmost
horror. *)
A Parliament was held this year,(Ot.z 4. 581)
at the opening of which disputes arose between
Arran and the Earl now created Duke of Lennox.
Arran haughty by nature, and pushed on by

# Ecclesiastical affairs.

h'is wife's ambition , began to asset an equality
'with the Duke, under whose protetion he had
hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form a party in the council
against Lennox, he found him fixed so firmly
in the King's affections, that it was impossible
to shake him, and rather than lose all interest
at court, from which he was banished, he made
the most humble fubmiflions to the favourite,
and again recovered his former credit. This,
rupture contributed, however, to render thel
Duke still more odious to the nation. During
the continuance of it, Arran affected to court
the clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for
the Protestant religion, and laboured to confirm
the lulpicions, which were entertained of his
rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and
a favourer of Popery. As he was supposed to
be acquainted with the Duke's most secret
designs, his calumnies were listened to with
more credit, than was due to his charater.
To the fame cause we must ascribe several acts
of parliament uncommonly favourable to the
Church, particularly one, which abolished the
practice, introduced by Morton, of appointing
but one minister to several parishes.

Ecclesiastical affairs.

No notice hath been taken for feveralyears

of Ecclesiastical affairs. While the civil govern-
ment underwent so many extraordinary revolu-

tions, the Church was not free from convulsions.
Two objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention
of the Clergy. The one was the forming a
system of discipline , or Eccleliaflical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this
was at last brought to fotne degree of perfection,,
The Afiembly folerniily approved of it, and
appointed it to be laid before the Privy Council,
in order to obtain the ratification of it in Parlia-
ment. But Morton, during his adminillration,
and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried
into execution; and by farting difficulties, and
throwing in objections, prevented it from re-
ceiving a legal fanEtion. The other point in
view was the abolition of the Episcopal order.
The Bishops were so devoted to the King, to
whom they owed their promotion, that the
funsion itself was by some reckoned dangerous
to civil liberty. Being allowed a feat in Par-
liament, and diflinguifhed by titles of honour,
these not only occasioned many avocations from
their spiritual employments, but soon rendered
their charater and manners extremely different
from those of the Clergy in that age. The
nobles viewed their power with jealousy; the
populace confidered their lives as profane; and
both wished their downfal with equal ardour.
The personal emulation between Melvil and
Adamson, a man of learning, and eminent for
his popular eloquence, who was promoted, oa

the death of Douglas, to be Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, mingled itself with the passions on
each fide, and heightened them. Attacks were
made, in every affernbly , on the order of
iBifhops; their privileges were gradually cir.
c-unfcribed; and at last an a& was passed, de.
claring the office of Bishop, as it was then
exerci'ed within the realm, to have neither
foundation nor warrant in the word of God;
and requiring, under pain of exco'nmmunicatiun,
all who now possessed that office, infiantly to
resign it, and to abstain front preaching or ad.
ministering the sacraments, till they should
receive permission from theAfiembly. The court
did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy
happening, Coon after, in the fee of Glasgow,
Montgomery Minifler at Stirling, a man vain,
fickle, prefumptuLous, and more apt, by the
blemishes in his char &er, to have alienated
the people from an order already beloved, than
to reconcile them to one which was the object
of their hatred, struck up an infamous bargain
with Lennox, and on his recommendation was
chosen Archbishop. The Presbytery of Stirling,
of which he was a member, the Presbytery of
Glasgow, whither he was to be translated, the
General AfremIbly, vied with each other 1i
prosecuting him on that account. In order to
screen Montgomery, James made trial ( 1582.)
both of gentle and of rigorous measures, and
·oth were equally inetfeaual. The General

assembly was jufc ready to pronounce againfi
him the sentence of excommunication, when an
Hlcrald entered, and commanded them, in the
King's name, and under pain of rebellion, to
flop further proceedings. Even this injunt:tion
they despised. And though Montgomery, 'by
his tears, and seeming penitence, procured a
short respite, the. sentence was at last iflucd by
their appointment, and publifhied in all the
churches throughout the kingdom.

The firmness of the Clergy in a collective

body, was not greater than thie oldness of some
individuals, particularly of the Minillers of
Edinburgh. They inveighed daily against the
corruptions in the adminiilration, and, with
the freedom of fpecch admitted into the pulpit
in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the
chief authors of the grievances under which the
church and kingdom groaned. The courtiers,
in their turn, complained to the King of the
insolent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In
order to check the boldness of their discourses,
James iTued a proclamation, commanding Dury,
one of the most popular Ministers, not only to
leave the town, but to abstain from preaching
in any other place. Dury complained to the
judicatories of this encroachment upon the im-
munities of his office. They approved of the
doCtrine which he had delivered; and he deter-
mined to disregard the royal proclamation. But
the magistrates being determined to compel hifti

# His favourites engage the King in unpopular measures.

to leave the city, according to the King's orders,
he was obliged to abandon his charge, after
protesting publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh,
against the violence which was put upon him.
The people accompanied him to the gates with
tears and lamentations; and the Clergy denoun.
ced the vengeance of Heaven agaiuft the, authors
of this outrage. *)

In this perilous situation stood the Church;

the authority of the judicatories called in
queflion, and the liberty of the pulpit restrained,
when a sudden revolution of the civil govern-
ment procured them unexpected relief.

His favourites engage the Kiging it unpopular meafurcs.

The two favourites, by their ascendant

over the King, possessed uncontrouled power inl
the kingdom and exercised it with the utmofl
.Wantonness. Janes usually resided at Dalkeith
or Kinneil, the feats of Lennox and of Arran,
and was attended by such company, and em-
ployed in such amusements, as did not suit his
dignity. The services of those who had contri-
buted most to place the Crown on his head,
were but little remembered. Many who had
opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoy-
ed the rewards and honours to which the others
were entitled. Exalted notions of regal prero-
gative, utterly inconsistent with the constitution

) Cald. Affeutblies, I576 - 83. Spotrw. 377, &c.

# The nobles conspire against them.

of Scotland, being instilled by his favourites into
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep imprellion
there, and became the source of almost all his
subsequent errors in the government of both
kingdoms. *) Courts of justice were held'in
almolt every county, the proprietors of land
were called before them, and upon the slightest
niegle& of any of the numerous forms, which
are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined
with unusual and intolerable rigour. The Lord
Chamberlain revived the obsolete jurifdiation of
his office over the Boroughs, and they wer&
fubjeced to exations no less grievous. A design
seemed, likewvile, to have been formed to ex-
afperate Elizabeth, and to diflblve the alliance
with her, which all good Protestants esteemed
the chief security of their religion in Scotland.
A close correspondence was set on footbetween
the King and his mother, and confiderabie pro-
grefs made towards uniting their titles to the
Crown, by such a treaty of aflbciation, as
klaitland had projeated; which could not fail of
endangering or diminishing his authority, and
nmufl have proved fatal to those who had ated
againit her with greatest vigour. **)

The nobles collfpire againfl them.

All these circumstances irritated the im-

patient spirit of the Scottish nobles, who re-

') Cald. iii. 15-.
") Cald. iii. 157,

# Seize the King's person at Ruthven.

solved to tolerate no longer the insolence of the
two minions, or to fland by, while their pre.
rumption and inexperience ruined both the
King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, hodurin
the administration of the four Regents, had tie
entire dire&tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt
herself deprived of all influence in thatkingdon
ever fnce tlhe death of Morton, and was ready
to countenance any attempt to rescue the iiirn
out of the hands of favourites, wNho were lead.
ing him into measures so repugnant to all her
views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairnl, Lord
Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glarnis, tile
lMafter of Oliphant, with several Barons and
gentlemen of diftintion, entered into a conbi.
nation for that purpose; and as changes in ad.
ininiftration , which, among polished nations,
are brought about slowly and silently, by arti-
flce and intrigue, were in that rude age effect-
ed suddenly and by violence, the King's fitua-
lion, and the security of the favourites, en-
couraged the conrpirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

Seize the King's perCon at Ruithven.

James, after having resided for tome time

in Athol, where he enjoyed his favourite amru-
sement of hunting, was now returning towards
Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited
to Ruthven-caflle, which lay in his way; and

.s he fufpefted no danger, he went thither
(August u22. 15 2.) in hopes of farther sport. The
multitude of strangers whom he found there
gave hirnm ome uneasiness; and as those who
were in the secret arrived every moment from
different parts, the appearance of so many new
£aces increased his fears. He concealed his un-
easiness, however, with the utmost care; and
.ne.t morning prepared for the field, expeoting
to find there tome opportunity of making his
escape. But just as he was ready to depart,
the Nobles entered his bed-chamber in a body,
and presented a memorial against the illegal and
oppressive aftions of his two favourites, whom
they represented as most dangerous enemies to
.the religion and liberties of the nation. James,
though he received this rernonftrance with the
complaisance which was necessary in his present
tituation, was extremely impatient to begone;
but as he approached the door of his apartment,
the Tutor of Glarnis rudely flopped him. The
King complained, expoftulated , threatened,
and finding all these without eflfe, burst into
tears; ,,No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better
children weep than bearded men. " These
words made a deep impression on the King's
mind, and were never forgotten. The confpi-
rators, without regarding his tears or indigna-
tion, dismissed fiich of his followers as they
fufpeted; allowed none but their own party
to have access to him; and though they treated

# Commit Arran to prison.

him with great refpet, guarded his person with
the utmost care. This enterprise is usually called,
ioy our historians, The raid of Ruthven. *)

Coaintit Arran to prison.

Lennox and Arran were astonished to the

Saft degree at an event so unexpected, and so
fatal to their power. The former endeavoured,
but without fiuccefs, to excite the inhabitants
of Edinburgh to take arms in order to re'cue
their Sovereign from captivity. The latter with
his usual impetuosity, mounted on horfebackl
the moment he heard what had befallen the
King, and with a few followers, rode towards
Ruthven-cafle; and as a considerable body of
the conspirators , under the command of the
Earl of Mar , lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himself from his companions,
and with two attendants arrived at the gate of
the castle. At the fight of a man so odious to
his country, the indignation of the conspirators
rose, and inflant death mull have been the pu-
nifhment of his rashness, if the friendship of
Gowrie, or tome other cause not explained by
our historians, had not saved a life so perni-
cious to the kingdom. He was confined, how-
ever, to the cafle of Stirling, without being
admitted into the King's presence.

Commalld
") Caid. iii, 134, Spatfw. 330. Melv. 357.

# Command Lennox to leave the kingdom.

# The conspirators countenanced by Elizabeth.

Command Lennox to leave the kingdom.

The King though really the prisoner of his

own fubjeEts, with whose conduct he could not
help discovering many symptoms of disgust, was
obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying
his approbation of their enterprise, declaring th"t'
hinifelf was at full liberty, without any retiraint
or violence offered to his person; and forbidding
any attempt agaiunf those concerned in the Raid
of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing him out
of their hands. At the fame time, (ALiguft 32.)
he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before
the 2oth of September. ")

The collnirators countenanced by Elizabeth.

Soon after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes,

arrived as ambafifdors from. Elizabeth. The
pretext of their embafr w\vas to inquire after
the King's safety ; to encourage and counte-
nance the conspirators was the real notive of it.
By their intercelfion, the Earl of Algus, who,
ever since the death of his uncle Miorton, had
lived in exile, obtained leave to return. And
the accession of a nobleman so powerful and b,
popular strengthened the fation. *")

Lennox, whose amiable and gentle qualities

had procured him many friends, and who re..

:) Cald. iii. 135. 138.

) Cald. iii. 'lAS
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. IT, H

# Their conduct approved by an Assembly and a Convention of Estates.

ceived private afi'rances that the King's favour
towards him was in no deg'ree abated, seemed
resolved, at first, to pay no regard to a cot,.
mand extorted by violence, and no lets tiif
agreeable to James, than it was rigorous with
regard to himself. But the power of his enemies,
who were rnarters of the King's person, whi,
were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and openly
applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from
an enterprise, the success of which was dubious,
and the danger certain , both to himself and to
his Sovereign. He put off the time of his de-
parture, however, by various artifices, in
expeEtation either that James might make his
efeape from the conspirators, or that fortune
might present some more favourable opportunity
of taking arms for his relief.

Their conduft approved by an Afnembly and a Conentlolt

of Ef!ates.

On the other hand, the conspirators were

extremely solicitous not only to secure the ap-
probation of their countrymen, but to obtain
fomre legal sanction of their enterprise. For
this purpose they published a long declaration,
containing the motives which had induced them
to venture on such an irregular itep, and endea-
voured to heighten the publick indignation
against the favourites , by representing in the
strongest colours, their inexperience and info-
lence , their contempt of the nobles, their

# Lennox's departure from Scotland.

violation of the privileges of the Church, and
their oppression of the people. They obliged
the King, who could not with safety refuse any
of their demands, to grant them a remifijon in
the moit anple form; and not satisfied with
that, they applied to the Assembly of the Churth,
and easily procured an a&t, (Oa. 3.) declaring,
,, that they had done good and acceptable service
,,to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native
, country; " and requiring all sincere Protest-
ants. to concur with them in carrying forward
such a laudable enterprise. In order to add the
greater weight to this aft every Minister was
enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to
inllid the Censures of the Church on those who
set themselves in opposition to so good a cause.
A Convention of estates afiembled a few days
after, paled an aft to the fame es'ee, andA
granted full indemnity to the conspirators for
every thing they had done. <:)

Lennox's departtre fro-m Scctiand.

James was conduaed by them, first to

Stirling, and afterwards to the palace of Haly-
rud-houfe; and though he was received every
where with the external marks of refpe& due
to his dignity, his motions were carefully ob-
served, and he was under a restraint no less

Cad. iH

177. 1 , . aPt .
3) Cold. iii. 177. 187. 3oo. Spotfw. 3;3,

strict than at the first morent when he xvae
seized by the conspirators, Lennox, after elud.
ing many commands to depart out of the king.
dom, was at laIt obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered , however, for some time in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had iill
intended to make one effort towards restoring
the King to liberty. But either from the gentle-
ness of his own disposition, averse to bloodshed
and the disorders of civil war, or from foime
other cause unknown to us, he abandoned the
design, and set out for France, by the way of
England. The King issued (Dec. 3. 1532.) the
order for his departure, with no less reluctance
than the Duke obeyed it ; and both mourned
a reparation, which neither of them had power
to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France.
the fatigue of the journey, or the anguish of
his mind, threw him into a fever. In his last
moments he discovered such a firm adherence
to the Protestant faith, as fully vindicates his
memory from the imputation of an attachment
to Popery, with which he had been unchari-
tably loaded in Scotland. *) As he was the
earliest, and best beloved, he was, perhaps,
the most deserving, though not the most able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and ten-
dernefs of his TllMafter's afeftion for him was not
abated by death itself. By many acts of kind-

') Spo;'"w. ",;4,

# Mary's anxiety about her son.

ness and generoaity towards his posterity, the
King not only did great honour to the memory
of Lennox, but set his own claratcer in one
of the moll favourable points of view.

larvy's anxiety about her son.

The success of the conspiracy, which de-

prived James of liberty, made great noise over
all Europe; and at lall reached the ears of Mary
in the prison to which she was confined. As her
own experience had taught her what injuries a
captive Prince is exposed to fufder; and as many
ofthofe, who were now concerned in the enter-
prise against her son, were the fame persons
whom she confidered as the chief authors of
her own misfortunes, it was natural for the
tenderness of a mother to apprehend that the
ihme calamities were ready to fall on his head;
and such a profpedt did not fail of adding to the
distress and horror of her own Situation. In
the anguish of her heart, she wrote to Eliza-
beth, complaining in the bitterest terms of the
unprecedented rigour with which she herself
had been treated, and beseeching her not to
abandon her son to the mercy of his rebellious
fubjets; nor permit him to be involved in the
farme misfortunes under'which she had so long
groaned. The peculiar vigour and acrimony of
style, for which this letter is remarkable, dif-
cover both the high spirit of the Scottish Queen,
unfubdued by her sufferings, and the violence

# Ambassadors arrive from France and England. (1583.)

of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the
end she had in view, and accordingly it neither
procured any mitigation of the rigour of het
own confinement, nor any interpositioninfavour
of the King. *)

Ambassadors arrive from France and England. ( 15t3t)

Henry III. who, though he feared and hated

the Princes of Guise , was often obliged to
court their favour, interposed with warmth, in
order to extricate James out of the hands of a
party f" intirely devoted to theEnglifh intercl.
He commanded M. de la Mutte Fenelon, his
ambassador at the court of England, to repair
to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmost
endeavours towards placing James in a situation
more suitable to his dignity. As Elizabeth could
not, with decency, refuse him liberty to exe-
cute this commiflion, she appointed Davison to
attend him into Scotland as her Envoy, under
colour of concurring with him in the negotia-
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upon his
motions, and to obstruct his success. James,
whose title to the Crown had not hitherto been
recognised by any of the Princes on the con-
tinent, was extremely fond of such an honour-
able embassy from the French Monarch; and, on
that account, as well as for the fake of the

P) fCand, 49,

# James escapes out of the hands of the conspirators.

errand on which he came, received Fonelon
(Jan. 7. 1583. ) with great refpe&t. The
nobles, in whose power the King was, did not
relish this interposition of the French court,
which had long loft its ancient influence over
tne affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarm-
ed at the danger to which religion would be
exposed, if the Princes of Guise should recover
tny afcendanc over the publick councils. And
though the King tried every method for refirain-
ing them within the bounds of decency, they
declaimed against the court of France, against
the Princes of Guise, against the Ambaflador,
against entering into any alliance with fnich no-
torious perfecuters of the Church of God, with
a vehemence, which no regular government
would now tolerate, but which was then ex-
tremely common. The Ambassador, watched
by Davison, diftru'ted by the nobles, and ex-
posed to the insults of the Clergy, and of the
people, returned into England without procur-
ing any change in the King's situation, or re-
ceiving any answer to a proposal which he
made, that the government should be carried
on in the joint names of James, and the Queen
his mother. -)

lames escapes out of the hands of the confl)iritors.

Meanwhile, James, though he diflembled

with great art, became,every day more uneasy
') Cald. iii. o07. Spotrw. 324. See Appond. No. VIl,

under his confinement; his uneasiness renderer
him continually attentive to find out a propel
opportunity for making his escape; and to th.s
attention he at last owed his liberty, which tie
King of France was not able, nor the Queen if
England willing, to procure for him. As the
conspirators had forced Lennox out of the king.
dom, and kept Arran at a distance from court,
they grew secure; and imagining that time bar
reconciled the King to them, and to his fitua.
tion, they watched him with little care. Some
oceafions of discord had arisen among themselves;
.and the French Ambassador, by fomenting these,
during the time of his residence in Scotland,
had weakened the union, in which alone their
safety conlifted. -) Colonel William Stewart,
the commander of the band of gentlemen lwho
guarded the King's person, being gained by
James, had the principal merit in the scheme
for restoring his Master (June 27. ) to liberty.
Under pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of
Mlarch his grand uncle, James was permitted to
go from Falkland to St. Andrew's. That lie
might not create any suspicion, he lodged at
firfr in an open defenceless house in the towxn,
but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no
sooner was he entered with some of his attend-
ants whom he could trust, than Colonel Stew-
art commanded the gates to be shut, and ex-

* Candt 48X*

# Resolves, however, to treat them with moderation;

eluded all the reit of his train. Next rlorning
tile Earls of Argyll, Hnntly , Crawford, Mlont-
3ofe, Rothes, with others to whonl the secret
had been communicated, entered the town with
their followers ; and though Mar, with several
of the leaders of the fafion, appeared in arms,
they found theml'elves so far out-numbered, that
it was in vain to think of recovering pofl'cfion
of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months.
James was naturally of so soft and dutile a
temper, that those who were near his person
commonly made a deep impreflion on his heart,
whiclh was formed to be under the sway offa-
vourites. As he remained implacable and un-
reconciled to the conspirators, during so long
a time, and at a period of life when resentments
are rather violent than lasting, they mult either
have improved the opportunities of insinuating
themselves into favour with little dexterity, or
the indignation with which this first insult to
his person and authority filled him, rmuf have
been very great.

RrPolves, howeeve;, to treat them with moderation;

His joy at his escape was youthful and ex-

cefiive. He resolved, however, by the advice
of Sir James Melvil, and his wisest counsellors,
to at with the utmost moderation. Having
called into his presence the leaders of both sac-
tions, the neighbouring gentry, the deputiesof

# But Arran regains his ascendant over him.

*the adjacent boroughs, the Ministers, and tie
heads of colleges, he declared, that although
he had been held under restraint for some tinie
by violence, he would not impute that as a
crime to any man, but without remembering
the irregularities, which had been so frequent
during his minority, would pass a general aft
of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeEts with
undiftinguifhing and equal affleion. And as
an evidence of his sincerity, he vilited the Earl
of Gowrie at Ruthven-caPfle, and granted him
a full pardon of any guilt he had contra&ed,
by the crime committed in that very place. *)

But Arran regains his afcelidait over himn,

But James did not adhere long to this pru-

dent and moderate plan. His former favourite,
the Earl of Arran, had been permitted for some
time to reside at Kinneil, one of his country
feats. As soon as the King felt himself at li-
berty, his love for him began to revive, and he
expressed a strong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion,
whafe insolent and overbearing temper they
dreaded, as much as the nation detested his
crimes. James, however, continued his im-
portunity, and promising thathefhould continue
with him no longer than one day, they were
obliged to yield. This interview rekindled an-

*) Melv ? 2C.

# and the King pursues another plan.

eient affe&lon; the King forgot his promiCe;
Arran regained his ascendant over him; and
within a few days resumed the exercise of
power, with all the arrogance of an undeferving
favourite, and all the rashness peculiar to
himlnelf. ':)

mald the King lirfues another plan.

The firtl effe& of his influence was a pro,

clamation with regard to those concerned in the
Raid oflRuthven. They were required to acknow-
ledge their crime in the humbletl manner; and
the King promised to grant them a full pardon,
provided their future conduat were such as did
not oblige him to remember past mircarriages.
The tenour of this proclamation was extremely
different from the aft of oblivion, which the
conspirators had been encouraged to expet.
Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely o.n
a promise clogged with such an equivocal con-
dition, and granted by a young Prince under
the dominion of a minister void of faith, re-
gardlefs of decency, and transported .by the
desire of revenge even beyond the usual fero-
city of his temper. Many of the leaders, who
had at first appeared openly at court, retired
to their own houses; and foreseeing the dan-
gerous form which was gathering, began to
look out for a retreat in foreign countries. '*)

') Melv. 274.
") Id. 978. Spotrw. 3Z6. Cald. iii. 330.

# Elizabeth's solicitations in behalf of the conspirators.

# Walsingham's embassy into Scotland.

Elizabeth's solicitations in behalf of the conrpirators.

Elizabeth, who had all along prote&edthe

conspirators, was extremely difgufed with imea-
fures which tpnded so visibly to their deftruEtion,
and wrote (Aug. 7.) to the King a harfil and
haughty letter, reproaching him in a style very
uncommon among Princes, with breach of faith
in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence
in proceeding so rigorously against his betr and
molt faithful iubjets. James, with abecoming
dignity, replied, that prormiCes extorted by
violence, and conditions yielded out of fear,
were np longer binding, when there were re-
moved; that it belonged to him alone to chufe
what minitiers he would employ in his service;
and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency,
it was necessary, for the support of his au-
thority, that such an insult on his person should
not pass altogether uncenfured. *)

\Valfingham's embassy into Scotland.

Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed

(Sept. . ) by Walsingham her secretary, whom
she appointed her Ambafiador to James, and
who appeared at the Scottish court with a
'splendour and magnificence well calculated to
please and dazzle a young Prince. Walsingham

') Mclv, z79.

v.as admitted to several conferences with James
liinfelf, in which he infified on the fame topicks
contained in the letter, and the King repeated
his former anfvcrs.

After surfering several indignities from tile

arrogance of Arran and his creatures, he return-
ed to England, without concluding any new
treaty with the King. *Walsingham was, next
to Burleigh, the Minifler on whom the chief
weight of the English administration refled ;
and when a person of his rank slept so far out
of the ordinary road of business , as to under-
take a long journey in his old age, and under
a declining state of health, some affair of con-
sequence was supposed to be the cause, or some
important event vas expeCted to be the efiec:
of this measure. But as nothing conspicuous
eitder occasioned, or followed this embalay, it
is probable that Elizabeth had no other inten-
tion in employing this sagacious Minister, than
to discover, with exa&nefs, the capacity and
disposition of the Scottish King, who was now
arrived at a time of life, when, with some de-
gree of certainty, conjetures might be formed
concerning his character and future conduct.
As James polefl'ed talents of that kind, which
make a better figure in conversation than inl
acion, he gained a great deal by this interview
with the English secretary, who, notwithfiand-
in;g the cold reception he met with, gave such
an advantageous representation of his abilities.

as determined Elizabeth to treat him, hence.
forward, with more decency and refpea. *)

Elizabeth's eageriiefs to protet the con-

fpirators rendered James more violent in his
proceedings against them. As they had all re-
fused to accept of pardon upon the terms which
he had offered, they were required, by a ne,,
proclamation, to surrender thernfelves prisoners.
The Earl of Angus aione complied; the reft
either fled into England, or obtained the King's
licence to retire into foreign parts. A Con
vention of eflates was held , the members of
xwhich, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Ar
ran's, declared (Decemb. 17.) those concerned
in the Raid of Ruthven to have been guilty of
high teatfon; appointed the aft pafled laftyear
approving of their condut to be expunged out
of the records; and engaged to support the King
in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmoftri-
gour of law.

The confplrators, though far from having

done any thing that was uncommon in a bar-
barous age, among mutinous nobles, and under
an unsettled slate of government, muff be
acknowledged to have been guilty of an as of
treason againit their Sovereign; and James, who
confidered their condust in this light, had good
reason to boat of his clemency, when he offered
to pardon them upon their confefing their crime.

Melv. 293. Ca9ld ii.
1 a8. IJbb, ii. 536.

# The Clergy favour the conspirators, and irritate the King.

urt, on the other hand, it must be allowed that, as..
ter the King's voluntary promise of a general
oblivion, they had some reason to complain of
breach of faith, and could not, without the
molf unpardonable imprudence, have put their
lives in Arran's power.

The Clergy favour the conspirators, and irritate the Kings

The interest of the Church was confiderabty

alffeted ( 584.) by these contrary revolutions.
\While the conspirators kept poffefion ofpower,
the Clergy not only recovered, but extended
their privileges. As they had formerly de-
clared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they tool;
some bold measures towards exterminating the
Episcopal order out of the Church; and it was
owing more to Adamson's dexterity in per-
plexing and lengthening out the process for
that purpose, than to their own want of zeal.
that they did not deprive, and perhaps excom-
municate all the Bishops in Scotland. When
the King recovered his liberty, things put on a
very different aspe&t. The favour beflowed
upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of
thole nobles, 'who had been the most zealous
defenders of the Protestant cause, were confi-
dered as sure presages of the approaching ruin
of the Church. The Clergy could not conceal
their apprehensions, nor view this impending
danger in silence. Dury, who had been re-

stored to his office as one of the Ministers of0
Edinburgh, openly applauded the Raid of Ruth.
yen in the pulpit, at which the King was so
enraged, that, notwithstanding some fynmptoms
of his fubmiiion, he commanded him to resign
his charge in the city. lMr Andrew Melvil,
being summoned before the Privy Council to
answer for the dofrine he had uttered in a
sermon at St. Andrew's, anld :ccufed of com-
paring the present grievances of the nation wvirh
those under James Ii1. and of intimating obliq!uel
that they ought to be redrefled in the firne
manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave
with greater iirmnefs. He declined the juri'-
diction of a Civil court, in a cause which lie
maintained to be purely Fcclefaftical; the
Presbytery, of which he was a member, had,
as he contended, the sole right to call him iu
account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the
first instance, of the doctrine delivered by Preach.
ers, without violating the immunities of the
Church. This exemption from civil jurisdiction
was a privilege which the Popish Ecclefiafticks,
admirable judges of whatever contributed to inl
create the lustre or power of their body, hal
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If
the fame plea had now been admitted, the
Protestant clergy would have become indepen-
dent on the civil M'agistrate; and an order of
men extremely useful to society while they in-

culcate

culcate those duties which tend to promote its
happiness and tranquillity, might have become
no le's pernicious by teaching, without fear or
controul, the molt dangerous principles, or by
exciting their hearers to the most del'erateand
lavlefs aftions. The King, jealous to excess
of his prerogative, was alarmed at this daring
encroachment on it; and as Melvil, by his
learning and zeal, had acquired the reputation
and authority of head of the party, he resolved
to punish him with the rigour which that pre-
eminence rendered necessary, and to discourage,
by a timely severity, the revival of such adan-
gerous claim. Melvil, however, avoided his
rage, by flying into England; and the pulpits
resounded with complaints that the King had
extinguished the light of learning in the king-.
dom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and
most faithful guardian of its liberties and dif-
cipline. :)

These violent declamations of the Clergy

againit the measures of the court were extre-
mely acceptable to the people. The confpira-
tors, though driven out of the kingdom, still
poltefled great influence there; and as they had
every thing to fear from the resentment of a
young prince, irritated by the furious counsels
of Arran, they never ceased soliciting their ad-,

') Spotfw. 330. Cald. iii. 3o4,
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. II. I

lherents to take arms in their defene. Gowrie,
the only perCon among therm who had submitted
to the King, and accepted cf a pardon, soon re.
pented of a itep which loft him the efteemr o'
one party, without gaining the confidence of
the other; and, after suffering many rnortifica.
tions from the King's negleft, and the haugh-
tiness of Arran, he was at last commanded to
leave Scotland, and to reide in France. Wvhil
.he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to em-
bark, he was informed that the Earls of Angus,
iAlar, and the Tutor of Glamis, had concerted
a fcheine -for surprising the castle of Stirling. In
his situation, little persuasion was necelrary to
draw him to engage in it. Under various pre-
texts, he put off his voyage, and lay ready to
take arms on the day fixed by the conspirators
for the execution of their enterprise. His linger-
ing so long at Dundee, without any apparent
reason, awal;ened the hffpicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed thl
success of the conspiracy. Colonel William
Stewart surrounded the house where he lodged
with a body of soldiers, and, in spite of his
resistance, took him prisoner. Two days after,
Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized the castle of
Stirling, and erecing their standard there, pub-
lifhed a manifesto, declaring that they took arms
for no other reason but to remove from the
King's presence a minion who had acquired
power by the most unworthy actions, and whe

# A Parliament held. Severe laws against the Church.

exercised it with the most intolerable infolenceo
The account of Gowrie's imprisonment firuck a
damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to
treachery on his part, and fufpeEed, that as
he had formerly deserted, he had now betrayed
them. At the fame time, a umr of money,
with which Elizabeth had prornifed to uapply
them, not being duly paid, and their friends
and vassals coming in slowly, they appeared ir-
resolute and disheartened; and as the King,
who ated with great vigour, advanced towards
them at the head of oa,ooo men, they fled
precipitately towards England, and with diffi-
culty made their escape. *') This rash and
feeble attempt produced such effecs as usually
follow disappointed conspiracies. It not only
hurt the cause for which it was undertaken, but
:dded strength and reputation to the King;con-
firmed Arran's power; and enabled them to
pursue their rneafures with more boldness, and.
greater success. Gowrie was the first viEim
of their refentrnent. After a very informal
trial, a jury ofPeers found him guiltyoftreafon,
and he was publickly beheaded at Stirling.

A Parliament held. Severe laws again[f the Church,

To humblethe Church was the King's next
frep. But as it became neceflary, for thispar-

) o 's Hir. of loue of

. 76. W 33
') Hoina's Hit. of Htouse of Doiil. 3~ G. S!r'óls',. 33;.

pose, to call in the aid of the legislative au-
thority, a Parliament was hastily finmoned:
'(lay 22.) and while so many of the nobles
were banished out of the kingdom. or forbidden
to appeal in the liing's presence; while Arran's
haughtiness kept some at a distance, and inti.-
midated others; the meeting consisted only of
thore who were absolutely at the devotion of
the court. In order to conceal the laws which
were framing from the knowledge of the Clergy,
the Lords of the Articles were sworn to fc-
crecy; and when some of the Miuitlers, who
either fufpefted , or were informed of the dan-
ger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized
at the palace-gate, aud carried to a distant pri-
son. Others, attempting to enter the Parlia-
ment-houfe, were refuted admittance; *) and
such laws were pasted, (Mlay 22.) as totally
overturned the conltitution and difciplineofthe
Church. The refuting to acknowledge the ju-
rifdition of the Privy Council; the pretendiln
an exemption from the authority of the civil
courts; the attempting to diminish the rights
and privileges of any of the three estates in
parliament, were declared to be high treason.
Thfi holding assemblies, whether Civil or Ec-
cleeaftical , without the King's permiflion or
appointment; the uttering , either privately or

**) Cald. iHi. 3(,5 ?

publickly, in fertnons or in declamations, any
jalfe and scandalous reports against the King,
his ancefrors, or ministers, were pronounced
capital crimes. *)

When there laws were published at the

cress of Edinburgh, according to the ancient
custom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St. Cuth-
bert's, and one of the Lords ofSeffion,foleminly
protested against them, in the name of his
brethren, because they had been passed with-
out the knowledge or consent of the Church.
Ever since the Reformation, the pulpits and ec-
clefiaftical judicatories had both been esteemed
sacred. In the former, the Clergy had been
accuflomed to censure, and admonish with un-
bounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised
an uncontrouled and independant jurisdiction.
The blow was now aimed at both these privi-
leges. These new statutes were calculated to
render churchmen as inconsiderable as they
were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles
had firipped them of the wealth, the King's
ambition was about to deprive them of the power
which once belonged to their order. No wonder
the alarm was universal, and the complaints
loud. All the Minilters of Edinburgh forsook
their charge, and fled into England. The most
eminent Clergymen throughout the kingdom
imitated their example. Desolation and aftonifl:-
':) Parl, 8. Jat, VI.

nment appeared in every part of the Scottirh
Church; the people bewailed the lofsofPaftors,
whom they efteerned; and full of consternation
at an event so unexpected, openly expressei
their rage against Arran, and began to fufpe&
the King himself to be an enemy to the Reform.
ed Religion. *)

'I Spotrw,333,

# BOOK VII.

# Throgmorton's conspiracy against Elizabeth.

THE
HISTORY

OF
S COTLAND.

13OOK VII.

Throgmorton's conspiracy ngainIt Elizabeth,

VV HILE Scotland was 'torn by intestine sac-
tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the rumour
of a projet in agitation for letting Mary at li-
berty. Francis Throgmorton, aChefhire gentle-
man, was suspected of being deeply concern-
ed in the design, and on that futpicion he was
taken'into custody. Among his papers were
found two lilts, one of the principal harbours
in the kingdom, with an account of their ii-
tuation, and of the depth of water in each;
the other, of all the eminent Roman Catholicks
in England. This circumstance confirmed the
suspicion against him, and some dark and def-
perate conspiracy was supposed just ready to
break out. At sirs: he boldly avowed his in-
nocence, and declared that the two papers were:
forged by the Queen's Ministers, in order to
intimidate or insnare him; and hle even endured

# Designs of Mary's adherents against Elizabeth.

the rack with the utmost fortitude. But being
brought a second time to the place of torture,
his resolution failed him, and he not only ac-
knowledged that he had held a secret corre.
fpondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif.
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng.
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, urdc rtook
to furnish troops, and to conduEt the enterprise,
The Pope and King of Spain were to supply
the money necessary for carrying it on; all the
English exiles were eager to take arms; niny
of the Catholicks at home would be ready to
join them at their landing; Miendoza, tile Spia.
nifh Ambassador , who was the life of the coii-
fpiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the spirit
of difaffetion among the English, or in hafitP-
ing the preparations on the Continent; andby
his command, he made the two lifts, the co-
pies whereof had been found in his po.fefi.on.
This confession he retrasted at his trial; return-
ed to it again after sentence was palVed upon
him; and retrafted it once more at the place of
execution. *)

Designs of Mary's adherents agaiuft Elizabeth.

To us in the present age, who are affifled

in forming our opinion of this matter by the
light which time and hiflory have thrown upon
the designs and charaEters of the Prilices of
*) Hdiingrheid, 1·370.

Guise, many circumfiances of Throgmorton's
confeion appear to be extremely remote from
truth , or even from probability. Tile Duke of
Guile was, ac that jtncture, far from being in
a situation to undertake foreign conquests.
Without either power or office at court; hatedby
the King, and persecuted by the favourites, he
had no leisure for any thoughts of disturbing
the quiet of neighbouring flates; and his vast
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in
laying the foundation of that famous league
which shook the throne of France. But about
the time Elizabeth deteced this conspiracy, the
close union between the house of Guise and
Philip was remarkable to all Europe; and as
their great enterprise against Henry III. was
not yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to con-
ceal that under their threatenings to invade
England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared to
be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who
knew how ardently all the parties mentioned
by him xvifhed her downfal, thought that she
could not guard her kingdom with too much
care. The indifcrect zeal of the English exiles
increased her fears. Not satisfied with. incessant
outcries againit her severity towards the Scot-
tifh Queen, and her cruel persecution of her
catholiclk fubjeets, not thinking it enough that
one Pope had threatened her with the sentence of
excommunication, and another had atually pro-
nounced it, they now began to disperse books and

# She endeavours to reestablish her influence in Scotland, by gaining Arran.

writings, in which they endeavoured to per.
fuade.their disciples, that it xwould be a meri-
torious a&tion to take away her life; they
openly exhorted the maids of honour to treat
lier as Judith did HIolofernes, and, by such an
illuitrious deed, to render their own names
lionourable and sacred in the Church throughout
all luTure ages. *) For all these reasons, Eli-
zabeth not only inflited the punishment of a
traitor on Throgmorton, but commanded the
Spanish ambassador infrantly to leave ]England;
and that she might be in no danger of being
attacked within the illand, she determined to
use her utmost efTorts, in order to recover that
influence over the Scottish councils, which she
had for some time entirely lolt.
She endeavours to reestablish her influence in Scotlind, by

gaining Arran.

There were three different methods, by

which Elizabeth might hope to accomplih this;
either by furnishing etffeual aid to the banished
nobles, as would enable them to resume the
chief diretion of affairs; or by entering into
such a treaty with Mary, as might intimidate
her son, who being now accuflomed to govern,
would be apt to agree to any terms rather than
resign the sceptre, or admit an af'ociate in the
') Camd. 497.

throne; or by gaining the Earl of Arran, to
secure the dirertion of the King his maifer. The
!ft wars not only the easiest and fpcedieft, but
most likely to be successful. This Elizabeth
resolved to pursue ; but without laying the other
two altogether aside. With this view she sent
Davison, one of her principal fecrctaries, a
man of abilities and address, into Scotland. A
Minister so venal as Arran, hated by his owrn
countrymen , and holding his power by the
most precarious of all tenures, the favour of a
young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's oi'ers with-
out hcsitation, and esteemed the acquisition of
her protertion to be the molt solid foundation
of his own greatness. Soon after (August 13.)
he consented to an interview with Lord Huns-
don the Governor of Berwick, and being ho-
noured with the pompous title of Lieutenant
General for the King, he appeared at the place
appointed with a fplcndid train. In lunfdon's
presence he renewed his promises of an invio-
lable and faithful attachment to the English
interest , and assured him that James should
enter into no negotiation, which might tend
to interrupt the peace between the two king-
donms; and as Elizabeth began to entertain the
fame fears and jalousies concerning the King's
marriage, which had formerly disquieted her
with regard to his mother's, he undertook to
prevent James from listening to any overture

# Severe proceedings against the banished Lords.

of that kind, till he had previously obtained
the Queen of England's consent. ;*)

Severe proceedings against the banished Lords.

The banished Lords and their adherents

soon felt the effects of Arran's friendship with
England. As Elizabeth had permitted them
to take refuge in her dominions, and several of
lher Ministers were of opinion that she ought
to employ her arms in defence of their cause,
the fear of this was the only thing which re-
£trained James and his favourite, from proceed-
ing to fucb extremities against them, as might
have excited the pity or indignation of the
E~nglish , and have prompted them to exert
themselves with vigour in their behalf. But
every apprehension of this kind being now
removed, they ventured to call a parliament,
(August az.) in which an aft was passed, at-
tainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great
number of their followers. Their estates de-
volved to the Crown, and according to the
practice of the Scottish Monarchs, who were
obliged to reward the faction which adhered to
them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
vanquished, James dealt out the greater part
of these to Arran and his associates. **)

i) Cald. iii. 491. Melv. 315. See Append.. No. IX.
t') Cald. iii. 52.,

# Against the Clergy.

Against the Clergy.

Nor was the treatment of the Clergy lefg ri-

gorous. All Ministers, readers, and profetfors
of Colleges were enjoined to subscribe, within
forty days, a paper testifying their approbation
of the laws concerning the Church enacted in
last parliament. Many, overawed or corrupted
by the Court, yielded obedience; others liood
out. The stipends of the latter were sequester-
ed, some of the more active committed to pri-
son, and numbers compelled to fly the king-
dom. Those who complied, fell under the
fafpicion of afting from mercenary or ambitious
motives. Those who suffered acquired high
reputation, by giving such cohvincing evidence
of their firmness and sincerity. The judicatories
cf the Church were almost entirely fupprefied-
In some places, scarce as many Minifcers re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious
worship; they soon funk in reputation among
the people, and being prohibited not only from
discoursing of publick affairs, but obliged, by
the jealousy of the administration, to frame
every sentiment and expression in such a man-
ner, as to give the court no offence, their ser-
mons were deemed languid, insipid, and con-
temptible; and it became the general opinion,
that together with the most virtuous of the
nobles, and the most faithful of the Clergy,

# New conspiracy against Elizabeth.

the power and vigour of religion were nov:
banished out of the kingdom. *)

Meanwh;le > Elizabeth -vas carrying or,

one of those fruitless negotiations with the
Queen of Scots, which it had become almof,
matter of form to renew every year. They
served not only to amuse that unhappy Princess
vwith sone profrpe of liberty, but furnished an
tapology for eluding the solicitations of foreign
powers in her behalf; and wel'e of use te
overawe James, by shewing him that she could,
at any time, set free a dangerous rival to dispute
his authority. These treaties she faffered to
proceed to what length she pleased, and never
%wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when
they became no longer necefltry. The treaty
aiow on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere
than many which preceded it; the reafois,
hiowever, which rendered it ineffetual were
far from being frivolous,

New conspiracy agaiufl Elizabeth.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing fromt Flan-

ders towards Scotland , the ship on board
of which he was a passenger happened to be
chased by pirates, who , in that age, often in-
fested the narrow seas. Grichton > in great
confusion, tore in pieces some papers in his
custody, and threw them away; but, by a

*) Cald. iii. SS9.

very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the fihip, and they were imme-
diately taken up by fomne of the pafiRngers. wlio
carried them to Wade, the Clerk of rthe privy
council. He, with great indiitry and parieece,
joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot said to have been
formed by the King of Spain , and the Ditke of
Guise, for invading l[ ng land. The people
were not yet recovered from the fear and an-
xiety occasioned by the conspiracy in which
Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his
dilcoveries appeared now to be confirmed by
additional evidence, not only all their former
apprehensions recurred, but conPternation be-
came general and excessive. As all the dangers,
with which England had been threatened for
some years, li.uwed either immediately from
Mary herlelf, or from those who made use of
her name to justify their insurrection and con-
fpiracies, this gradually diminished the com-
paifion due to her situation, and the English,
instead of pitying, began to fear and to hate
her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and pacificc
reign the English enjoyed tranquillity, and had
opened sources of wealth unknown to their an-
ceflors, was extremely beloved by all her
people; and regard to her safety, not less than
to her own interest , animated them against
the Sgottifi Queen.

# Occasions an association in opposition to Mary.

# Which greatly alarms her.

Occasions an afTociation in opposition to VMary.

In order to discourage her adherents, it

,was thought necessary to convince them, by
some publick deed, of the attachment of the
English to their own Sovereign, and that any
attempt against her life would prove fatal to
her rival. With this view, an Afrociation was
framed,(O&ob.i 9.15 84-.)the subscribers of whicl
bound themselves by the most solemn oaths,
,, to defend the Queen against all her enemies,
, foreign and dotneftick; andif violence should
,, be olrered to her life, in order to favour the
,, title of any pretender to the Crown, they
,, not only engaged never to allow or acknow-
,, ledge the person or persons by whom, or
,, for whom, such a deteflable a6t should be
,, committed, but vowed., in the presence of
,, the eternal God, to prosecute such person or
,, persons to the death, and to pursue them,
,, with their utmost vengeancee to their utter
,, overthrow and extirpation." ':) Persons ol
all ranks subscribed this combination, with the
greatest eagerness and unanimity. **)

Which greatly alarns her.

Mary confidered this combination,not only
as an avowed design to exclude her from all

right

*) State Trials, I. I12-
*) Camd, 499,

right of succession, but as the certain and im-
mediate forerunner of her deftruetion. In
order to avert this, she made such feeble eflorts
as were still in her power, and sent Naue her
secretary to court, with offers of more entire
reflgnation to the will of Elizabeth, in every
point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her fufl'erings hitherto
had been able to extort. ':) But whether Mary
adhered inllexibly to her privileges as an inde-
pendent Sovereign, or yielding to the necessity
of her situation, end avoured, by concefiions,
to sooth her rival, file was equally unsuccessful.
Her firnmnes was imputed to obstinacy, or to
the Cecret hope of foreign affilance; her con-
celions were either believed to be insincere,
or to flow from the fear of tome immninent
danger. Her present willingness, however,
to .o ply with any terms were so great, that
Walsingham warmly urged his mistress to come
to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth
was persuaded, that it was the spirit railed by
the association which had rendered her so paflive
and compliant. She always imagined that
there was something mysterious and deceitful
in all Mary's aCtions, and fufpested her of
carrying on a dangerous correspondence with
the English Catholicks, both within and. vwithouc

') Camd. 499.
HiR. ofScotl. Vol.It, K

# She is treated with greater rigour.

the kingdom. Nor were her suspicions alta-
gether void of foundation. Mary had, about
this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Ingle-
field, urging him to haften the execution of
what she calls the Great plot or Designment,
without hesitating on account of any danger in
which it might involve her life, which she
would most willingly part with, if, by that
sacrifice, she could procure relief for so great a
number of the oppressed childern of the Church.) )

She is treated with greater i"otilr.

Intfead, therefore, of hearlcening to the

overtures which the Scottish Queen made, or
granting any mitigation of the hardships of
which she complained, Elizabeth resolved to
take her out of the hands of theEarl ofShrewl-
bury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet and Sir
Drue Drury to be her keepers. Shrewsbury
had difeharged his trult with great fidelity,
during fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had
treated Mary with gentleness and refpef, and
had always fwveetcned harsh commands by the
humanity with which he put them in execution.
The fame politeness was not to be expeded
from men of an inferior rank, whose severe
vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommend-
ation to that employment, and the only merit

") Strype, iii. 46,

# Gray a new favourite of the King's.

by which they could pretend to gain favour or
preferment. ;)

Gray a new favourite of the King's.

As James was no less eager, than ever,

to deprive the banished Nobles of Elizabeth's
protetion, he appointed the Maftler of Gray
his Ambalfador to the court of England , and
intrulled him with the conduct of a negotiation
for that purpose. An honour for which he
indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl
of Arran. Gray poffeded all the talents of a
Courtier; a graceful person , an indinuating
address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. Daring his residence in Franllce,
he had been admitted into the most intimate
familiarity with the Duke of Guise, and in
order to gain his favour, had renounced the
Protestant Religion, and profel'ed the utnlofl
zeal for the captive Queen , \lho carried on a
secret correspondence with him, from vwich
ilhe expected great advantages. On his return
into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary assiduity, and his accompllifhmnents
did not fail to make their ufaal inprellion on
the King's heart. Arran, who had introduced
him, began quickly to dread his growing fa-
vour; and flattering himself, that absence would
efface any sentiments of tenderness from the

'") Caind. 500,

# His interest with the court of England.

mind of a young Prince, pointed hinm out, by
his malicious praises, as the most proper person
in the kingdom, for an embassy of such impor-
tance; and contributed to raise him to that
high dignity, in order to haflen his fall. Eli-
zabeth, who had an admirable dexterity in dif-
covering the proper inftrunients for carrying
on her designs, endeavoured, by carefles, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest.
The former flattered his vanity, which was
great; the latter supplied his profufenefs,vwhich
was still greater. He abandoned himself with-
out reserve to Elizabeth's direction, and not
only undertook to retain the King under the
influence of England, but afted as a spy upon
the Scottish Queen, and betrayed to her rival
every secret that he could draw from her by
his high pretensions of zeal in her service. ')

Hiis interelt withl the court of England.

Gray's credit with the English court xnas

extremely galling to the banished nobles. Eli-
zabeth no longer thought of employing her
power to restore them; she found it easier to
govern Scotland by corrupting the King's fa-
vourites; and, in compliance with Gray's soli-
'citations, she commanded (Decem.3 . 15 84.) the
exiles to leave the north of England, and to
remove into the heart of the kingdom. This

') Strype, iii, 30,. Melv, %1ó.

# Arran's corruption and insolence. (1585.)

rendered it difficult for them to hold any corre-
fpondence with their partizans in Scotland, and
almost impossible to return thither without her
permission. Gray, by gaining a point which
James had so much at heart, rivetted himl'elf
more firmly than ever in his favour; and' by
acquiring greater reputation, became capable
of serving Elizabeth with greater success. *)

Arran's coiruption and inrolence. (15SS.)

Arran had now possessed for some time,

all the power, the riches, and the honours,
that his immoderate ambition could delire, or
the fondness of a Prince, who set no limits to
his liberality towards his favourites , coulIt
bestow. The office of Lord Chancellor, the
highest and most important in the kingdom,
was conferred upon him, even during the life
of the Earl of Argyll, who succeeded Atiol
in that dignity; :':) and the publick beheld, witll
astonishment and indignation, a man educated
as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and
a contemner of justice, appointed to preside
in parliament, in the privy council, in the
court of session, and intrusted with the supreme
disposal of the property of his fellow- fubjeas.
Hie was, at the fame time, governor of the
aftles of Stirling and Edinburgh , the two

') Cald. iii. 643.
") Crawf. OBic of State, App. 447.

principal forts in Scotland; Provost of the city
of Edinburgh; and as if by all these accumu-
lated dignities his merits were not fufliciently
recompenfed, he had been created Lieutenant
General over the whole kingdom. No person
was admitted into the King's presence without
his permission; no favour could be obtained
but by his mediation. James, occupied with
youthful arnufements, devolved upon him the
whole regal authority. Such unmerited ele-
vation increased his natural arrogance , and
rendered it intolerable. He was no longer
content with the condition of a fubje&, but
pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that
his title to the Crown was preferable to that
of the King himifelf. But, together with
these thoughts of royalty , he retained the
nmcannefs suitable to his primitive indigence.
His venality as a judge was scandalous , and
was exceeded only by that of his wife, who,
in defiance of decency, made herself a party
in almost every question which came to be
decided., employed her influence to corrupt
or to overawe the judges, and almost openly
dictated their decisions. ') His rapaciousness
as a Minifler was insatiable. Not satisfied with
the revenues of so many offices; with the
estate and honours which belonged to the fa-
i) Cald. iii. . 33. ScotRarvet's Staggering State, 7,

Ilily of Hamilton; or with the greater part of
(owvrie's lands, which had fallen to his flare;
he grasped at the pofteffions of several of the
nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange
part of his estate , for the forfirted lands of
l(inneil; and because he was unwilling to quit
an ancient inheritance for a possession so pre-
carious, he Itirred up against him, his here-
ditary rival, the Laird of Johnston, and in-
volved that corner of the kingdom in a civil
war. He committed to prilon the Earl of
Athol, Lord Home, and the liafter of Callils;
the firi , because he would not divorce his
wife, the daughter of the Earl of Gowrie, and
entail his estate on him; the second, becauel
lie was unwilling to part with some lands ad-
jacent to one of his estates; and the third, for
refusing to lend him money. His spies and
informers filled the whole country, and in-
truded themselves into every company. The
nearest neighbours difirufted and feared eacih
other. All familiar society was at an end.
Even the common intercourses of humanity
were interrupted, no man knowing in whom
to confide, or where to utter his complaints.
There is not perhaps in hislory, an example
of a Mitiifterfo universally detestable to a nation,
or who more justly deserved its detestation. *)

') Spotrw. 337, 335.

# Parry's conspiracy against Elizabeth.

Arran, notwithstanding, regardless of the

sentiments, and despising the murmurs of the
people, gave a loose to his natural temper, and
proceeded to adcs flill more violent. David
Home of Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having
received letters from one of the banished Lords,
about private business, were condemned and
put to death, for holding correspondence with
rebels. Cunninghame of Drumwhafel, and
Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of honour
and reputation, were accused of having con-
spired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's
person. A single witness only appeared; the
evidence they produced of their innocence was
unanl\verable; their accuser hirnfelf not long
after acknowledged that he had been suborned
by Arran; and all men believed the charge
against them to be groundless: They were
found guilty, notwithifanding, and suffered
(Feb. 9. 1585.) the death of traitors. :)

Parry's conspiracy against Elizabeth.

About the fame time that there gentlemen

were. punished for a pretended conspiracy, Eli-
zabeth's life was endangered by a real one.
Parry, a Dofor as laws , and a Member of
the. House of Commons, a man vain and fantaftick,
but of a resolute spirit, had lately been recon-
ciled to the Church of Rome; and fraught with

$ SportsA. 338. CRMd iii7 734.

# A severe statute, which proved fatal to Mary.

the zeal of a new convert, he offered to de-
monftrate the sincerity of his attachment to the
religion which he had embraced, by killing
Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a
book, to prove the murder of an excommuni-
cated Prince to be not only lawful, but a me-
ritorious acion. The Pope's Nuncio atVenice,
the Jesuits both there and at Paris, the English
exiles,all approved of the design. The Pope himself
exhorted him to persevere; and granted him,
for his encouragement , a plenary indulgence,
and remiflion of his fins. Cardinal di Como
wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often got accees to the Queen, fear,
or forme remaining sense of duty, restrained him
from perpetrating the crime. Happily, his
intention was at last discovered by Nevil, the
only person in England to whom he had com-
municated it; and he himself having voluntarily
confefled hi's guilt, he fufered (March 3.) the
punishment which it deserved. ")

A severe statute, which proved fatal to lary.

These repeated conspiracies againit their

Sovereign awakened the indignation of the
English parliament, and produced a very ex-
traordinary statute, which, in the end, proved
fatal to the Queen of Scots. By this law the
association in defence of Elizabeth's life was
i ) State Trials, vol. i. 103.

ratified, and it was further enafted, ,, That if any
,, rebellion fhallbe excited in the kingdom, orany
,, thing attempted to the hurt of her Mlajety's
,, person, by or for any person pretending a titre
,, to the Crown, the Queen shall empower
,, twenty-four persons, by a commission under
,, the Great Seal, to examine into, and pals
,, sentence upon such offences; and after judg-
,, ment given, a proclamation shall be ilTueil,
,, declaring the persons whom they find guilt;,
, excluded from any right to the Crown; and
,, her Maijefy's fubjec&s may lawfully purf!te
,, every one of them to the death , with all
,, their aiders and abettors: And if any de.
,, ign againit the life of the Queel' take efiecd,
,, the persons, by or for whom such a detcft-
,, able aRt is executed, and their ifftes, bceiQg
,, in any wife assenting or privy to the fame,
,, shall be disabled for ever from pretending to
,, the Crown, and be pursued to death in the
,, like manner. " *) This act was plainly le-
velled at the Queen of Scots; and whether we
confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety,
or whether we impute it to the influence which
that artful Princess preserved over her parlia-
ments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with
the general principles of justice or humanity.
Mary was thereby rendered accountable not

') State Trials, vol. i. Ij,,

# The rigour with which she was treated, increased.

only for her own ations, but for those of
others ; in consequence of which , she might
forfeit her right of succession, anti even her
life itself.

The rigour viii Mlli.:h fie mwas treateld , increased.

Mary justly confdered this aa as a warningp

to prepare for the worst extremities. Eliza-
beth's ministers , it is probable, had resolved,
by this time, to take away her life; and susser-
ed books to be published, in order to persuade
the nation, that this cruel and unprecedented
measure was not only necefi.ary, but jut. ::)
Even that short period of her days w.hich re-
mained, they rendered uncomfortable, by every
hardship and indignity which it was in their
power to inllit. Almofc all lier servants were
difmniffed; she was treated no longer with the
refpeEt due to a Queen; and though the rigour
of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her
constitution, she w-as confined to two ruinous
chambers, scarce habitable, even in the middle
of furmmer, by reason of cold. Notwithftand-
ing the scantiness of her revenue, she had been
accustomed to distribute regularly some altus
among the poor in the village adjoining to the
castle. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to
perform this pious and humane office, which
had afforded her great consolation, amidst her
'') Strype, iii. 399.

# A breach between Mary and her son.

own sufferings. The castle in which she re.
fided, was converted into a common prison;
and a young man, fufpefed of Popery, was
confined there, and treated under her eye, with
such rigour, that he died of the ill usage. She
often complained to Elizabeth of these mu1ti.
plied injuries, and expoftulated as became a
woman, and a Queen; but as no politic,!
reason now obliged that Princess to amuse lier
any longer with fallacious hopes, far from
granting her any redress, she did not even
deign to give her any anfver. The King of
France, closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom
he depended for affitance, was afraid of efpo.f-
ing Mary's cause with any warmth ; and all his
solicitations in herbehalf were feeble, formal, and
inefficacious. But Caftlenau, the French am-
baffador, whose compaflion and zeal for the
unhappy Queen supplied the defets in his in-
fLruftions, remonstrated with such vigour against
the indignities to which she was exposed, that,
by his importunity, he prevailed at length to
have her removed to Tuthbtiry; though she
was confined, the greater part of another win-
ter, in her present wretched habitation. :)

A breach between Mary and her son.

Neither the insults of her enemies, nor
the neglect of her friends, made such an im-

s) Jebb, v. 2. 576 - 598.

prefilon on Mary, as the ingratitude of her son.
James had hitherto treated his mother with
filial refpef, and had even entered into nego-
tiations with her, which gave umbrage to Eli-
zabeth. But as it was not her interest that his
good correspondence should continue, Gray,
who, on his return into Scotland, found his
favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embalff, persuaded him to write
a harsh and undutiful letter to his mother, in
which he exprefslv refused to acknovle( ge her to
be Queen of Scotland, or to conlider his affairs
as connected, in any wife, with hers. This
cruel requital of her maternal tenderness over-
whelmed Mary with sorrow and despair. " Was
, it for this, said she, in a letter to theFrench
,, Ambassador, (PMarch 24.) that I have en-
,, dured so much, in order to preserve for him
,, the inheritance, to which 1 have a just right?
,, Iam far from envying his authority in Scotland.
, I desire no power there; nor wish to set my
, foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the
,, pleasure of once embracing a son, whom I
,, have hitherto loved with too tender assec-
,, tion. Whatever he either enjoys or expeEts,
,, he derived it from me. From him I never
,, received assistance, supply, or benefit of any
i, kind. Let not my allies treat him any'
,, longer as a King; he holds that dignity by
,, my consent; and if a speedy repentance
,, does not appease my just refentmente I will

# Dangerous situation of Elizabeth; from the progress of the League; and from the power of Philip II.

,, load him with a parent's curse, and surrender
,, my Crown, with all my pretensions, to one
, who will receive them with gratitude, and
,, defend them with vigour. " *) Tie love
which James bore to his mother, whom he I:ad
never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to conlider as the most abandoned person
of her sex, cannot be supposed ever to have been
ardent; and he did not now take any pains to
regain her favour. But whether her indignadion
at his undutiful behaviour, added to her bigoted
attachment to Popery, prompted Mary at any
time to think seriously of disinheriting her iol;
or whether these threatenings were uttered in
a sudden sally of disappointed affe&tion, it is
now no easy matter to determine. Some papers
which are fiilt extant seem to render the former
not improbable. ;':)

Dangerous fituatioil of Elizabeth; from the progress of

the League ; and fromt te powner of Philipli,

Cares of another kind, and no less disquiet.

ing, occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm,
which she had long enjoyed, seemed now o be
at an end; and fnch frorms were gathering ia
every quarter, as filled her with just alarm. All
the neighbouring nations had undergone revo-
lutions extremely to her disadvantage. The

') Jebb, ii. 571. See Append, No. X,
';) See Append, No. XI,

t

creat qualities which Henry III. had displayed
in his youth, and which raised the expectations
of his fubjeEs so high, vanished on his ascend-
ins the throne; and his acquiring supreme
power seems nut only to have corrupted his
heart, but to have impaired his understanding.
lie soon loll the efteenm and al'eation of the na-
tion; and a life divided between the aufterities
of a litpertticions devotion, and the extravagan-
cies of the moit dilrolute debauchery, rendered
limn as contemptible ashe was odious on account
of his rapacioufnlcfs, hisprofufion, andthe fond-
ncl's with which he doated on many unworthy
minions. On the death of his only brother,
those fentirnents of the people burst out witli
violence. Hlenry had no children, and though
but thirty-two years of age, the succession of
thle Crown was already confidered as open. The
King of Navarre , a distant descendant of the
royal family, but the undoubted heir to the
Crown, was a zealous Protefrant. TheprofpeEt
of an event so fatal to their Religion, as his
afending the throne of France, alarmed all
the Catholicks in Europe, and the Duke of
Guise, countenanced by the Pope, and aided
by the King of Spain, appeared as the defender
of the Romish faith, and the aflerter of the Car-
dinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, distinguished by the name of the
Holy League. All ranks of men joined in it

with emulation. The spirit spread with the ir.
resistible rapidity, .vhich was natural to religious
passions in that age. The deftruelion of the
Reformation, not only in France, but all over
Europe, seemed to be the obje& and wish of
the whole party; and the Duke of Guise , the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired
authority in the kingdom, far superior to that
which the King hirnfelf pofiefled. Philip !1.
by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly in-
creased the naval power of Spain, and had at
last reduced under his dominion all that portion
of the Continent, which lies beyond the Py-
renean mountains, and which Nature seems to
have destined to form one great monarchy. Wil-
liam, Prince of Orange, who first encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to alYert their
liberties, and whose wisdom and valour formed
and protected the riling commonwealth, had
fallen by the hands of an assassin. The superior
genius of the Prince of Parma had given an en-
tire turn to the fate of the war in the Low
Countries; all his enterprises, concerted with
consummate skill, and executed with equal
bravery, had been attended with success; and
the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were
on the point of falling under the dominion of
their ancient master.

# Her wife and vigorous conduct.

Her wife and vigorous condua,

None of those circumstances, to which Eli-

zabeth had hitherto owed her security, existed
any longer. She could derive no advantage
from the jealousy which had fibfifted between
France and Spain; Philip, by means of his con-
federacy with the Duke of Guise, had an equal
fvay in the councils of both kingdoms, The
Hugonots were unable to contend with the
owver of the League; and little could be ex-
peftedfrom any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long employ the arms, or divide the strength,
of Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Eu-
rope, it became neceflary for Elizabeth to form
a new plan of conduEt; and her wisdom in
forming it, was not greater than the vigour
with which she carried it on. The measures,
nmoft suitable to her natural temper, and which
she had hitherto pursued, were cautious and
fife; those she now adopted, were enterprising
and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was
not afraid of war; and was capable, whencom-
pelled by necessity, not only of defending her-'
self with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness which averted danger from her
own dominions. She immediately furnified the
Hugonots with a considerable supply in money,
She carried on a private negotiation with Hen-
ryIII. who, though compelled to join the League)

HiR. of Scotl. Vol.II. L.

# Resolves to punish Mary, and to gain the King.

hated the leaders of it, and wirhed for their
deftrution. She openly undertook the proteftion
of the Dutch commonwealth, and fenta power-
ful army to its afliftance. She endeavoured to
form a general confederacy of the Proteflant
Princes, in opposition to the Popish League.

Resolves to pullifh Mary, and to gain the King.

She determined to proceed with the utmost

rigour against the Queen of Scots, whose sts-
ferings and rights afforded her enemies a fpe-
cious pretence for invading her dominions. She
resolved to redouble her endeavours in orderto
efTet a closer union with Scotland, and to ex-
tend and perpetuate her influence over the coun-
cils of that nation.

She found it no difficult matter to induce

most of the Scottish courtiers to promote all her
designs. Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had
been advanced to the office of Secretary, which
his brother formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden,
the Justice Clerk, who had succeeded Gray as
the King's resident at London, were the perions
in whom she chiefly confided. In order to
diret and quicken their motions, fhedifpatcheed
(May 29.) Sir Edward Wotton along with
Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred, and entertaining; he excelled in all
the exercises for which James had a paflion;
and amused the young King by relating thead-
ventures be had met with, andthe observations

# Proposes a league with Scotland.

he had made, during a long residence in foreign
countries; but under the veil of these fuperfi-
cial qualities, he concealed a dangerous and in-
triguing spirit. He soon grew into high favour
wvith James, and while he was feeminglyatten-
tive only to pleasure and diversions, he acquired
influence over the publick councils, to adegree
which was indecent for a stranger to poflefs.;::)

Proposes a league witil Scotland.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable

to the nation, than the proposal he made of a
ftriRt alliance between the two kingdoms, in
defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid
and alarming progress of the Popish League
feemned to call on all Proteflant Princes to unite
for the preservation of their common faith.
James embraced the overture with warmth, and
a Convention of estates empowered him to con-
clude such a treaty, and engaged to ratify it in
parliament.*") (July 29.) The alacrity with
which James concurred in this measure muff not
be wholly ascribed either to his own zeal, or
to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to
Elizabeth's liberality. As a mark of her mo-
therly affecion for the young King, fhefettled
on him an annual pension of 5000 pounds; tho

L

# Undermines Arran's power.

fame fum which her father had allotted her be-
fore she ascended the throne. This circum-
stance, which she took care to mention, render-
ed a fum, which in that age was far from being
inconsiderable, a very acceptable prefentto the
King, whose revenues, during a long minority,
had been almost totally diffipatied. :')

Undermines Arran's poer.

But the chief objet of Wotton's intrigues,

was to ruin Arran. While a minion so odious
to the nation continued to govern the King, his
assistance could be of little advantage to Eliza-
beth. And though Arran, ever since his inter-
view with Hunfdane, had appeared extremely
for her interest, she could place no great con-
fidence in a man, whose conduct was so ca-
pricious and irregular, and who, notwithftand-
ing. his protestations to the contrary, still con-
tinued a secret correspondence both with Mary
and with the Duke of Guise. The banished
Lords were attached to England fromtafretion,
as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the- Scots whom, in any dangerous exi-
gency, she could thoroughly trust. BeforeBel-
lenden left London, they had been fimmoned
thither, under colour of vindicating themselves
from his accusations, but, in reality, to concert
with him the most proper measures for reltoring

*) crid. iii. sos'·

# Assists the banished nobles.

them to their country. Wc-tton pursued this
plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for executio1n;
and it was greatly facilitated by an event neither
uncommon nor considerable. Sir John Forster,
and Ker of Ferniherft, the English and S'cottish
wardens of the middle marches, having mret,
according to the cUstom of the borders, about
midsummer, a'fray arose, and Lord Ruflel, the
Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but
Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design formed
by Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve
the two kingdoms in war. She insisted that
both of them should be delivered up to her;
and though James eluded that demand, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and
Ker in Aberdeen.

Allifts the bnirhied nobles.

During his absence from court, Wotton and

his associates carried on their intrigues without
interruption. By their advice, the banished
nobles endeavoured to accommodote their dif-
ferences with Lord John and Lord Claud, the
Duke of Chatelherault's two sons, whom Mor-
ton's violence had driven out of the kingdoms
Their common futerings, and common interert,
induced both parties to bury in oblivion the an-
cient discord which had subsisted between ti.:
houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabetl's
permiflion, they returned (Of. i6.) in a body

# They return into Scotland, and are reconciled to the King.

to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who had
again recovered favour, insisted on putting the
kingdom in a posture of defence. But Gray,
Bellenden, and Maitland secretly thwarted all
his measures. Some necessary orders they prc-
vented from being issued; others they rendered
ineffeAual, by the manner of execution; and
all of them were obeyed slowly, and with re.
luaance. *)

Wotton's fertile brain was, at the fame

time, big with another and more dangerous plot.
lHe had contrived to seize the King, and to carry
him by force into England. But the design
was happily discovered; and, in order to avoid
the puniifment his treachery merited, he de-
parted without taking leave. :';)

They return into Sc.tlaid, and are reconciled to

the lKiig.

Meanwhile the banished Lords haftenedthe

execution of their enterprise; and as their friends
and vasals were now ready to join them, they
entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they
were welcomed as the deliverers of their coun-
try, and the tioft fervent prayers were addresscd
to Heaven for the success of their arms. They
advanced, without losing a moment, towards
Stirling, at the head of io,ooo men. TheKing,

*) Spotfw. 340.
**) Melv. 335.

# A Parliament. Dec. 10.

though he had aflcmbled an army superior in
number, could not venture to meet them inthe
field, with troops whose loyalty was extremely
dubious, and who, atbefl, were far from being
hearty in the cause; nor was either the town
or cattle provided for a siege. The gates, how-
ever, of both were shut, and the nobles en-
camped at St. Ninian's. That fame night (Nov. 2.)
they surprised the town, or more probably it
was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who
had undertaken to defend it, was obliged to
save himself by a precipitate flight. Next
morning they invested the castle, in which there
were not provisions for twenty-four hours ;and
James was necelftated immediately to hearken
to terms of accommodation. They were notfo
elated with success, as to urge extravagant de-
mands, nor was the King unwilling to make
every reasonable concetion. They obtained a
pardon in the mofc ample form, of all the of-
fences they had committed; the principal forts
in the kingdom were, by way of security, put
into their hands; Crawford, IMontrofe, and Co-
lonel Stewart were removed from the King's
presence; and a parliament was called, to establish
tranquillity in the nation. *)

A Parliament. Dec. lo.

Though a great majority in this parliament

consisted of the confederate nobles, and their
') Cald. iii, 795.

# Church affairs.

adherents, they were far from discovering a
vindi&tive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an
aft, restoring them to their ancient honours
and estates, and ratifying the pardon granted
by the King, they seemed willing to forgetall
past errors in the adtniniftration, and spared
James the mortification of feeing his MNinifters
branded with any publick note of infamy. Ar-
ran, alone, deprived of allhis honours, firipped
of his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy
to his country by publick proclamation , funk
back into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be
mentioned by his primitive title of Captain Ja-
nes Stewart. As he had been, duringhisun-
nerited prosperity, the objeCt of the hatred and
indignation of his countrymen, they beheld his
fall without pity, nor did all his sufferings mi-
tigate their resentment in the least degree.

Church affairs.

The Clergy were the only body ofmen who

obtained no redress of their grievances by this
revolution. The confederate nobles had, all
along, asseted to be confidered as guardians of
the privileges and discipline of the Church. In
all their manifestos they had declared theirre-
solution to restore these, and by that popular
pretence had gained many friends. It was now
natural to expe& foroe fruit of these promises,
and some returns of gratitude towards many of
the mrs eminent preachers who had suffered

in their canfe, and who demanded the repeal
of the laws pafled the preceding year. The
King, however, was resolute to maintain these
laws in full authority; and as the nobles were
extremely solicitous not to disgust him, by in-
fiting on any disagreeable request, the claims
of the Church in this, as well as in many for-
mer inflances, were sacrificed to the interest of
the laity. The Ministers gave vent to their in-
dignation in the pulpit, and their impatience
under the disappointment broke out in fomecx-
pressions, extremely difrefpeciful even towards
the King himself. ")

The Archbishop of St. Andrew's , too, felt

the effeEts of their anger. The Provincial Synod
of Fife summoned him to appear, and to antser
for his contempt of the decrees of former A-.
femblies, in presuming to exercise the funtion
of a Bishop. And though he refuted to acknow-
ledge the jurifdiEtonof the court, and appealed
from it to the King, a sentence of excommuni-
cation, equally indecent and irregular, was
pronounced against him. Adamson, with no
lets indecency, thundered his archiepiscopalex-
communication against Melvil, and fomen other
of his opponents.

Soon after, a General Aflembly was held,

(April 13. x586. ) in which the King, with
some difficulty, obtained an aft, permitting the
') Spotfw, 343.

name and office of a Bishop flill to continue in
the Church. The power of the 'order, how.
ever, was considerably retrenched. The exer.
cife of discipline, and the infpetion of lifeand
doEtrine of the Clergy, were committed to Pref-
byteries, in which Bishops should be allowed
no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as
perpetual moderators. They themselves were
declared to be fubje&, in the fame manner as
other pastors, to the jurifdiation of the General
Aflembly. And as the difcufiion of the Arch-
bishop's appeal might have kindled unusual
heats in the Assembly, that affair was terminat-
ed by a compromise. He renounced any claim
of supremacy over the Church, and promised to
demean himself suitably to the charater of a
Bishop, as described by St. Paul. The As-
fembly, without examining the] foundations
of the sentence of excommunication, declared
that it should be held of no effect, and restored
him to all the privileges which he enjoyed be-
fore it was pronounced. Notwithflanding the
extraordinary tenderness shewn for the honour
of the fynod, and the delicacyand refpe&twith
which its jurifdicEion was treated, several mem-
bers were so zealous as to protest against this
decision. *)

n) Cald. iii. 894. SpotfW, 346.

# A league with England concluded.

A league with England concluded.

The court of Scotland was now filled with

persons so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that
the league between the two kingdoms, which
had been proposed last year, met with no iu-
terruption, but from D'Efneval the French en-
voy. James himself firit offered to renew the
negotiation. Elizabeth did not susser such a fa-
vourable opportunity to flip, and instantly dif-
patched (July 5. ) Randolph to conclude a
treaty, which she so much desired. The dan-
ger to which the Protestant religion was ex-
posed, by the late combination of the Popifli
powers for its deftrnution, and the necessity of
a stria confederacy among those who had em-
braced the Reformation, in order to obstruct
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as
the foundation of the league. The chief arti-
cles in it were, that both parties should bind
thenfelves to defend the Evangelick Religion;
that the league should be offensive and defen-
five against all who shall endeavour to disturb
the exercise of religion in either kingdom ;that
if one of the two parties be invaded, the other'
notwithstanding any former alliance, should
not, dire&ly or indirectly, assist the invader;
that if England be invaded in any part remote
from Scotland, James flould assist the Queen
vith zooo horse and 5000 foot; that if the
enemy landed or approached within sixty miles

of Scotland) the King should take the field with
his whole forces, in the fame manner as he
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Eli.
zabeth, in return, undertook to aft in defence
of Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the
fame time, she assured the King that no ftep
should be taken, which might derogate in any
degree from his pretensions to the English
Crown. *) Elizabeth expreffedgreat fatisfa&ion
with a treaty, which rendered Scotland an use.
ful ally, instead of a dangerous neighbour, and
afforded her a degree of security on that fide,
which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none
of them had been able to obtain. Zeal for re.
ligion, together with the bleflings of peace,
which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a
considerable period, had so far abated the vio-
lence of national antipathy, that the King's
condu& was universally acceptable to his own
people. **)

The acquittal of Archibald Douglas, atlthis

time, exposed James to much anddefervedcen-
sure. This man was deeply engaged in the con.
fpiracy against the life of the King his father.
Both Morton and Binny one of his own ser-
vants, who suffered for that crime, had accused
him of being present at the murder. *":*) He

') Spotfw. 35r.
**) Camd. 513.

$*) ssi -Appood. No. X11,

# Rise of Babington's conspiracy against Elizabeth.

had escaped punishment by flyinginto England,
and James had often required Elizabeth to de-
liver up a person so unworthy of her prote&ion.
He now obtained a licence, from the King him-
self, to return into Scotland; and after under-
going a mock-trial, calculated to concealrathei
than to deteEt his guilt, he was not only taken
into favour by the King, but sent back to the
court of England, with the honourable cha-
rater of his ambailador. James was now of
such an age, that his youth and inexperience
cannot be pleaded in-excure for this indecent
tranfa&ion. It must be imputed to the excef-
five facility of his temper, which often led him
to gratify his courtiers at the expence of his.
own dignity and reputation. *)

Rife of Babi:liton's conrpiracy agnillf Elizabeth.

Not long after, the inconsiderate assertion

of the English Catholicks towards Mary, and
their implacable resentment against Elizabeth,
gave rife to a conspiracy which proved fatal to
the one Queen, left an indelible stain on the
reputation of the other, and presented a fpetacle
to Europe, of which there had been hitherto
no example in the history of mankind.

Dotor Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, andHodg-

son, priests educated in the feminaryatRheims,
had adopted an extravagant and enthufiaflick
') Spotfw, 348. Cald. iii. 9X7,

notion, that the Bull of Pius V. against llza.
beth, was dictated immediately by the Holy
Ghofl. This wild opinion they instilled into
Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted
for his furious zeal and daring courage; and
persuaded him that no service could be so ac-
ceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of
an excommunicated Heretick. Savage, eager
to obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound him-
self by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. 13al-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time
(April 26.) come over to Paris, and solicited
Mendoza, the Spanish ambalf'ador there, to
procure an invasion of England, while the as-
fairs of the league were so prosperous, and the
kingdomr left n:aked by fending so many of r[e
Queen's best troops into the Netherliils,
Paget and the English exiles demonstrated the
fruitleflnefs of such an attempt, unless Eli-
zabeth were first cut off, or the invaders
secured of a powerful concurrence on their
landing. If it could be hoped that either
of these events would happen, eFe&Etual aid
was promised; and in the mean time Ballard
was sent back ( May 13.) to renew his in-
trigues.

He communicated his designs to Anthony

Babington, a young gentleman in Derbyshire,
of a plentiful fortune, and many amiable quali-
ties, who having contrasted, during his relidrn'e
in France, a familiarity with, the Archbishop of

# The scheme of the conspirators.

Glafgovw, had been recommended by him to
the Queen of Scots. He concurred with Paget,
in confidering the death of Elizabeth as a ne-
ceflary preliminary to any invasion. Ballard
gave him hopes that an end would soon be put
to her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow,
who was now in London waiting for an op-
portunity to itrike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of to much importance, to
rely on a tingle hand for the execution of it,
and proposed that five resolute gentlemen should
be joined with Savage, in an enterprise, the
ficcefs of which was the foundation of all their
hopes. He offered to find out persons willing
to undertake the service, whose honour, fe-
crecy, and courage they might safely trust.
He accordingly opened the matter to Edward
\'indfor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles Tilney,
Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John Tra-
vers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry
Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all of
them, except Polly, whose bustling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen
of good families, united together in the bonds
of private friendship, strengthened by the more
powerful tie of religious zeal.

The scheme of the conspirators,

Many consultations were held; (June 1586.)

their plan of operations was at last fettled; and
their different parts assigned, Babington hin-

p

# Discovered by Walsingham.

self was appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots;
Salisbury, with some others, undertook to ex-
cite several counties to take arms; the murder
of the Queen, the most dangerous and impor-
tant service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Sa-
vage, with four associates. And so totallyhad
their bigoted prejudices extinguished the prin-
ciples of honour, and the sentiments of ha.
nanity suitable to their rank, that, without
scruple or compunftion, they undertook an
afion which is viewed with horror, even when
committed by the meanest and most profligate
of mankind. This attempt, on the contrary,
appeared to them no lets honourable than itwas
desperate; and in order to perpetuate the me-
mory of it, they had a piEture drawn con-
taining the portraits of the fix assassins, with
that of Babington in the middle, and a motto
intimating that they were jointly embarked in
some hazardous design.

DiCcovered by Waltinghlam.

The conspirators, as appears by this wan-

ton and imprudent instance of vanity, seem to
have thought a discovery scarce possible , and
neither diftrulfed the fidelity of their compa-
nions, nor doubted the success of their under-
taking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried on with the most
profound and impenatrable secrecy, every ftep
they took was fully known to Walsingham.

Polly

# They are seized and punished.

Polly was one of his spies, and had entered
into the conspiracy with no other design than
to betray his aflociates. Gilbert Gifford too,
having been sent over to England to quicken the
motions of the conspirators, had been gained by
\Vralfingham, and gave him fare intelligence of
all their projedts. That vigilant minister imme-
diately imparted the discoveries which he had
made to Elizabeth; and without communicating
the matter to any other of the Counsellors,
they agreed, in order to underhand the plot
more perfectly, to wait till it was ripened into
some form, and brought near the point of exe.
cution.

They are seized and punilhed.

At last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous

and criminal to expose her own life, and to
tempt Providence any farther. Ballard, the
prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was
arrested. (August 4. ) His associates, difcon-
certed and struck with astonishment, endeavour-
ed to save themselves by fight. But, within
a few days , all of them, except Windsor, were
seized in different places of the kingdon , and
committed to the Tower. Though they had
undertaken the par' they wanted the firm and
determined spirit of alaffins; and, influenced
by fear or by hope, discovered all they knew,
The indignation of tho people, and their impa-

Hilt, of Scotl. Vol. II. M

# Mary is accused of being an accomplice in the conspiracy.

tience to revenge such an execrable combination
againif the life of their Sovereign , haflened
their trial and all of them fulfered (Sept. 20.)
the death of traitors. *)

Mary is accused of beiiig an ccuo lplice in the confpliracy.

Thus far Elizabeth's conduct may be pro.

nounced both prudent and laudable, nor can
she be accused of violating any law of hunia-
nity, or of taking any precautions beyond whlat
were necefltry for her own safety. But a tra-
gical scene followed, with regard to uwhich
potlerity will pass a very different judgment.

The frantick zeal of a few rash young men

accounts fulliciently for all the wild and wicked
designs which they had formed. But this was
not the light in which Elizabeth and her Mi-
nifters chose to place the conspiracy. They
represented Babington and his aflociates to be
infiruments employed by the Queen of Scots,
the real though secret author of so nmany
attempts againit the life of Elizabeth, and the
peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters,
which they aferibed to her, in support of this
charge. These, as they gave out, had come
into their hands by the following singular and
mysterious method of conveyance. Gifford, on
his return into England, had been intrusted by
some of the exiles with letters to Mary; but il

') Cared, 515. Stte Triali, Vol. 1, Xie.

order to make a trial of his fidelity and address,
they were only blank papers made up in that
form. These being safely delivered by him,
he was afterwards employed without farther
scruple. Walsingham having found means to
gain this man, he, by his permission, and the
connivance of Paulet, bribed a tradesman in the
neighbourhood of Chartley, whither Mary had
been conveydd, who deposited the letters in a
hole in the wall of the cafle , covered with a
loose stone. Thence they were taken by the
Queen, and in the fame manner her answers
returned. All these were carried to Walsingham,
opened by him, decyphered, fealed again so
dexterously that the fraud could not be per-
ceived, and then transmitted to the persons to
whom they were directed. Two letters to Ba-
bington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Engle-
field, and the English fugitives, were procured
by this artifice. It was given out, that in these
letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and
even of the affaflination; that she dire&ed them
to proceed with the utmoftl circumnpe&ion, and
not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were
ready to join them; that she recommended the
Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young
Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons to
condut and to add reputation to their enter-
prise; that she advised them , if polffble, to
excite at the fame time some commotion in Ire-

M n

# The indignation of the English against her on that account.

land; and above all, besought them to concert
with care the means of her cfcape, suggesting
to them leveral expedients for that purpose.

The indignation of the Englill agl'ilml lr on thal.

acco Illt,

All these circumstances were opened at the

trial of the conspirators. And while the nati6u
was nnder the influence of thoCe terrors which
the aflbciation had railed, and the late danger
bad augmented, they were believed without;
heitation or inquiry, and spread a general
alarm. Mrary's zeal for her religion was w-ell
Inown; and in that age, examples of the violent
and fanguinnry spirit which it inspired were
numerous. All the cabals againfi the peace of
the kingdom for many years had been carried
on in her nanme; and it now appears evidently,
said the English , that the safety of the one
Queen is incompatible with that of the other.
Why then added they, should the tranquillity
of England be facriiced for the fake of a tiran.
ger? Why is a life so dear to the nation ex-
posed to the repeated assaults of an exasperated
rival? The cafe supposed in the aflociation has
now happened, the sacred person of our So-
vereign has been threatened, and why should
not an injured people execute that juit revenge
which they had vowed?

# Elizabeth resolves to proceed to the utmost extremities against her.

# Her domesticks, papers, &c. seized.

i.lizabeth resolves to proceed to the utnmo l extremities

againfi her.

No sentiments could be more agreeable than

these to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They
themselves had at first propagated them atnong
the people, and they now served both as an
apology and a motive for their proceeding to
such extremities against the Scottish Queen as
they had long meditated. The more injuries
Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the more she feared
and hated that unhappy Queen, and came at
last to be persuaded that there could beno other
security for her own life, but the death of her
rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted
so zealously all her measures with regard to
Scottish affairs; and had a&ed, with so little
reerve, in opposition to Mary, that they had
reason to dread the moit violent efl'eErs of her
resentment, if ever file should mount the throne
of England; and therefore they endeavoured
to hinder an event so fatal to themselves,
by confirming their Mistress's fear and hatred
of the Scottish Queen.

Her domeflicks, papers, &c. seized.

Meanwhile, Mary was guarded with un-

usual vigilance, and great care was taken to
keep her ignorant of the discovery of the con-
fpiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent
from court to acquaint her both of it, and of
the imputation with which she was loaded as

# Deliberates concerning the method of proceeding.

accefTary to that crime; and he surprised her
wihh the account just as she had got on horse-
back to ride out along with her keepers. She
was firuck with affonifhment, and would have
returned to her apartment, but she was not
permitted; and in her absence, her private
closet was broke open, her cabinet and papers
were seized, fealed, and sent up to court. Her
principal domefticks too were arrelled , and
committed to different keepers. Naue and
Curie, her two secretaries, the one a native of
France, the other of Scotland , were carried
prisoners to London. All the money in her
cuflody, amounting to little more than 2000
pounds, was secured. And after leading her
about, for Come days, from one gentleman's
house to another, she was conveyed to Fotle-
ringay, a strong castle in Northamptonshire. ')

Deliberates concerning the method of proceeding.

No farther evidence could now be expeted

against Mary, and nothing remained but to
decide what should be her fate. With regard
to this, Elizabeth, and those Miniflers in whom
she chiefly confided, seen to have taken their
resolution; but there was ffill great variety of
sentiments among her other Counsellors. Some
thought it sufficient to dirmifs all IMary's attend-
ants, and to keep her under such clofereflraint,

3 Carnd. 517.

# Determines to try her publickly.

Is would cut ofl all possibility of corresponding
wxirh the enemies of the kingdom ; and as her
constitution, broken by long confinoment, and
her spirit dejected with so many cares, could
not long flupport such an additional load, the
Queen and nation would soon be delivered front
all their fears. But though it might be easy to
secure Mary's own person, it was iinpoffible to
diminish the reverence which the Roman Catho-
licks had for her name, or to extinguish the
compassion with which they viewed her fulTer-
ings; while the'e continued, infurreftions and
invasions would never be wanting for her relief,
and the only efl'e& of any new rigour would be
to render them more frequent and dangerous.
For this reason the expedient was rejeated.

Detertiinies to try ier iul'!ir. c y.

A publick and legal trial , though the molt

unexampled, was judged the most unexceptio-
nable method of proceeding; and it had, at the
fame time, a semblance of justice, accompanied
with an air of dignity. It was in vain to search
the ancient records for any statute or precedent
to jaftify such an uncommon ftep, as the trial
of a foreign Prince, who had not entered the
kingdom in arms, but had fled thither for re-
fuge. The proceedings against her were found-
ed on the as of last Parliament, and by applying
it in this manner, the intention of those who

had framed that severe statute became mtnr
apparent. *)

Elizabeth resolved that no circumstance cf

pomp or solemnity should be wanting, xhicl
could render this tranfafion such as became the
dignity of the person to be tried. She appoint.
ed by a commnifiion under the great feal, forty
persons, the most illustrious in the kingdom by
their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great caule.
Mlany difficulties were fiarted by the lawyers
about the name and title by which Mary flhoutd
be arraigned; and while the essentials of jiuftice
were so grossly violated, the empty forms of
it were the objecs of their care, They at length
agreed that she should be flyled ,, Mary, daugh.
y,ter and heir of James V. late King of Scots,
,,commonly called Queen of Scots, and Do\v-
:, ager of France. 1' *:")

After the many indignities which she had

lately suffered, Mary could no longer doubt
but that her deftrution was determined. She
expe&ed, every moment, to end her days by
poison, or by some of those secret means usually
employed against captive Princes. And left the
malice of her enemies, at the fame time that
it deprived her of life, should endeavour like-
wife to blast her reputation, she wrote to the

q) Carud, 519. Johnft. Hist. 113.
V) Strype, iii. 3629

# The trial at Fotheringay.

# Mary refuses at first to plead.

Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the
strongest terms, from the imputation of encou-
raging or of being accessary to the conspiracy
for afaffinating Elizabeth. *) In the solitude
of her prison, the strange resolution of bringing
her to a publick trial had not reached her ears,
nor did the idea of any thing so unprecedented,
and so repugnant to regal Majesty, once enter
into her thoughts.

The trial at Fotheringay.

On the eleventh of O&ober, the Commii-

fioners appointed by Elizabeth arrived atFothe-
ringay. Next morning they delivered a letter
from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest
reproaches and acculations, she informed her,
that regard to her own safety had, at last, ren-
dered it neceflary to make a publick inquiry into
her conduEt, and therefore required her, as
fle had lived so long under the proteftion of
the laws of England , to submit now to the
trial, which they ordained to be taken of her
crimes.

Mary rerlises at first to plaad.

Mary, though surprised at this tneffage,

\vas neither appalled at the danger, nor un-
mindful of her own dignity. She protested, in
the most solemn manner, that she was innocent
') lebb. ii. 2S3.

of the crime laid to her charge, and had never
countenanced any attempt against the life ofthe
Queen of England; but, at the Came time, re.
fused to acknowledge the jurifdielion of her
cornmiffioners. ,, I came into the kingdom. '
said flie, ,,an independent Sovereign, to in.
,,plore the Queen's affifance , not to fibjeft
,, ryfelf to her authority. Nor is my spirit io
,,broken by its pall misfortunes, or so intimi.
,,dated by present dangers, as to stoop to any
,,thing unbecoming the Majelcv of a crownc.d
,,head , or that will dil'grac the ancefrors 'rotm
, whom I am descended, and the son to vwhuon
,I fllall leave my throne. If I tnufl be tried,
,, Princes alone can be my Peers. Thle Queen
, of England's subje-s , however noble their
,,birthi may be, are of a rank inferior to mine.
, Ever since my arrival in this kingdom , I lhave
,,been confined as a prifhner. Its laws nev(c
, afforded me any proteCtion. Let tl:em 7no-
,, now by perverted, in order to tawke away vi.'
,, life. "

The Commifiioners employed arruments

and intreaties to overcome M'la:v's rel'oluilion.
They even threatened to proceed according to
the forms of law, and to pass sentence againlft
her on account of her contumacy in refusing
to plead; she persisted, however , for two
days to decline their jurifdition. An argument
used by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain, at lit
prevailed. He told her, that, by avoiding a

# Consents however to do so.

trial, she injured her own reputation, and de-
prived herself of the only opportunity of setting
her innocence in a clear light; and that nothing
would be more agreeable to them, or more ac-
ceptable to the Queen their Mitiirefs , than to be
convinced , by undoubted evidence, that she
had been injultly loaded with foul afperlfons.

Consents however to do so.

No wonder pretexts so plausible should ia-~

pose on the unwary Queen, or that fhc , un-
alifed, at that time, by any friend or coun-
fellor, should not be able to detct land elude
all the artifices of Elizabeth's ablest Ministers.
In a situation equally melancholy, and under
circumnfances nearly imilar , her (randfon,
Charles I. refuied, with the utmost tirmnerfs, to
acknowledge the usurped jurifdiltion of the
High Court of Jufiice; and posterity has ap-
proved his conduct, as suitable to the dignity
of aKing. If Mary was less constant in her re-
solution, it must be imputed solely to her an-
xious desire of vindicating her own honour.

At her appearance before the Judges,

(Ocr. I4. ) who were feated in the great hall
of the catle, where they received her with
much ceremony, she took care to protest, that,
by condefeending to hear and to give an anf\ver
to the accusations which should be offered
against her, she neither acknowledged the
jurifdiation of the court, nor admitted of the

# The accusation against her.

# Her defence.

validity and justice of those acts by which tlhe
pretended to try her.

The Chancellor, by a countel-prnteftatiol,,

endeavoured to vindicate the authority of the
court.

The accusation against hier

Then the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor

opened the charge against her, with all the
circumstances of the late conspiracy. Copies
of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Engle-
field, and Paget were produced. Babington's
confession, those of Ballard, Savage, and the
other conspirators, together with the decl.
rations of Naue and Curie her secretarics, weere
read, and the whole ranged in the most specious
order which the art of the lawyers could devil'e,
and heightened by every colour their eloquence
could add.

Mary listened to their harangues attentively,

and without emotion. But at the mention of
the Earl of Arundel's name, who was then con-
fined in the Tower on suspicion of being accef-
fary to the conspiracy, she broke out into this
tender and generous exclamation: ,, Alas! how
,, much has the noble House of Howard suffercd
,, for my fake! "

Her defence.

When the Queen's counsel had finished,
Mary flood up, and with great magnanimity,

and equal presence of mind, began her defence.
She bewailed the unhappiness of her own 'itua-
tior, that after a captivity of nineteen years,
during which she had fuflered treatment no less
cruel than unmerited, she was at laif loaded
with an accusation, which tended not only to
rob her of her right of fuccefion, and to de-
prive her of life itielf, but to tranlinit her name
w'ith infamy to future ages: That, without re-
garding the sacred rights of Sovereignty , she
was now fubje&ed to laws framed againtl pri-
vate persons; though an anointed Queen, corn-
,anded to appear before the tribunal of sub-
jess; and, like a common criminal, her honour
exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers,
capable of wresting her words, and of mifre-
presenting her actions: That, even in this dif-
honourable situation, she was denied the privi-
leges usually granted to criminals, and obliged
to undertake her own defence , without the
presence of any friend with whom to advise.
without the aid of counsel, and without the use
of her own papers.

She then proceeded to the particular articles

in the accusation. She absolutely denied any
correspondence with Babington: The name of
Ballard was not so much as known to her:
Copies only of her pretended letters to them
were produced; though nothing less than htr
hanld-riting or subscription was sufficient to
convif her of such an odious crime: No proi:f

could be brought that the letters were delivered
into her hands, or that any arfwer was renirned
by her direction: .The confefilons of wrercris
condemned and executed for such a deteifib!e
aCion, were of little weight; fear or l,.p;
might extort from them many things incoMiiient
-with truth, nor ought the honour of a Quern
to be stained by fach vile testimony. file
declaration of her secretaries was not n,''e
conclusive: Promises and threats might e::fl'.
overcome the resolution of two ilrangers; in
order to screen themselves, they might thi,l'i
the blame on her; but they could discover ino-
thing to her prejudice, without violating, intli
first place, their oath of fidelity; and their per-
jury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy
of credit in another: The letters to theSpnii h
AmbafTador were either nothing more than co-
pies, or contained only what was perfectly in-
nocent: ,, I have often, " continued she,
,,made such efforts for the recovery of my li-
,,berty, as are natural to a human creature.
,,And convinced, by the fad experience of so
,,many years, that it was vain to expect it
,,from the justice or generosity of the Queen of
,,England, I have frequently solicited foreign
,,Princes, and called on all my friends to em-
,,ploy their whole interest for my relief. I
,,have, likewise, endeavoured to procure fur
,, the English Catholicks some mitigation of the
, rigour with which they are now treated; and

,itIf could hope, by my death, to deliver them
,,from oppreilion, I am willing to die for their
,,alke. L wish, however, to imitate the example
,,of Either, not of Judith, and would rather
,,make interceflion for my people, than shed
,,the blood of the meanelt creature, in order to
.,lave them. 1 have often checked the intem-
,perate zeal of my adherents, when either the
.,everity of their own persecutions, or indig-
,,nation at the unheard-of injuries which 1 have
,,endured, were apt to precipitate them into
,,violent councils. I have even warned the
,,Queen, of dangers to which these harsh pro-
,,ceedings exposed herself. And worn out, as
,,I now am, with cares and fufl'erings , the
.,profpeEt of a Crown is not To inviting, that E
,,should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. 't
,,am no ltranger to the feelings of humanity,
,,nor unacquainted with the duties of religion,
.,and abhor the detestable crime of aflaffination,
,,as equally repugnant to both. And, if ever
,,Ii ave given consent by my words , or even
,,by my thoughts, to any attempt against
,,the life of the Queen of England , far from.
, declining the judgment of men, I shall not
,,even pray for the mercy of God." *)

Two ditferent days did Mary appear before

thle Judges, and in every part of her behaviour
maintained the magnanimity of a Queen, term-

) Carud. 520,

# Sentence against her. (Octob. 25.)

# Irregularities in the trial.

pered with the gentleness and modesty of a
wroman.

Sentence against ler. ( Ouob. 2 )

The Commissioners, by Elizabeth's expre!s

command, adjourned, without pronouncing any
sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Weftminller.
When afiernbled in that place, Naue and Curie
were brought into court, and confirmed their
former declaration upon oath. And after re-
viewing their whole proceedings, the Cominifl
fioners unaniroufly declared Mary ,, To be
, accessary to Babington's conspiracy, and to
,,have imagined diverse matters, tending to the
,,hurt, death, and deftrutio6n of Elizabeth,
,contrary to the exprelf words of the statute,
,, made for the security of the Queens life."'')

Irregularities in the trial.

It is no easy matter to determine whether

the injustice in appointing this trial, or the irre-
gularity in conducing it, were greatest and
most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth
claim authority over an independent Queen?
Was Mary bound to comply with the laws of a
foreign kingdom ? How could the fubjeAs of
another Prince become her judges? or if fucl
an insult on royalty were allowed, ought not
the common forms of justice to have been ob-

served
') Camd, 5t5.

ierved ? If the testimony of Babington and his
:tflociates were so explicit, why did not Eliza-
ibeth fplare tlleri for a few weeks, and, by con-
fronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with
tihe full conviction of her crinies ? Naue and
Carle were both alive, wherefore did not they
appear at Fotheringayp and for what reason
were they produced in the Star-Chamber, where
Slary was not present to hear what they de-
posed? Was this suspicious evidence enough to
condemn a Queen? Ought the meanest criminal
to have been found guilty upon fulch feeble and
;hconclufive proofs?

Ic was Iot, however, on the evidence

produced at her trial, that the sentence againfr
Mary was founded. That servcd as a pretence
to jLftify, but was not the caufc of the violent
steps taken by Elizabeth and her lklinifers
towards her deiruftlion; and was employed to
giv'e ifote appearance of jultice to what was
the offspring of jealonfy and fear. And the
nation, blinded with resentment agaiiit lary,
and solicitous to secure the life of its own So-
vereign from every danger, observed no irre-
gularities in the proceedings, and attended to
no defets in the proolf but grasped at suspicions
and probabilities, as if they had been irrefra-
gable demnonftrations,

iiifr.of Scotl. Vol. Il.

# The parliament confirm the sentence, and demand the execution of it.

Tlie parliament confirm the sentence, and demand

ttle execultioll o' it.

The parliament met a few days after fen.

tence was pronounced against Mlary. In that
illustrious assembly more temper and discern-
ment than are to be found among the people,
might have been expefted. Both Lords and
Commons, however, were equally under the
dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and
the fame excesses of zeal or of fear, M hicli
prevailed in the nation, are apparent in nal
their proceedings. They entered with impa.
tience upon an enquiry into the conrpiracy. :nnd
the danger which threatened the Queen's liif
and the peace of the kingdom. All the papers
which had been produced at Fotheringay, were
laid before them. And after many violent in-
vecives against the Queen of Scots, both Hol-
fes, unanimously, ratified the proceedings us
the Commifiioners by whom she had been tried,
and declared the sentence againit her to be just
and well founded. Not satisfied with this, tliey
presented a joint address to the Queen, beseech- i
ing her, as she regarded her own safety, the
preservation of the Proteflant religion, the wel-
fare and wishes of her people, to publish the
sentence; and without farther delay to infli&
on a rival, no lets irreclaimable than dan-
gerous, the punishment which she had mlerlted
by fIo many crimes. This request, dictated by
fears unlwortlh of thati great Assembly, v.'

enforced by reasons fill more unworthy. They
\were drawn not from justice, but from conve-
niceicy. Tlhe most rigorous confinement, it
was pretended, could not curb Mvlary's intriguing
spirit; her address was found by long expe,
rience, to be an overmatch for the vigilance and
jealousy of all her keepers : The feverelt penal
laws could not restrain her adherents, who,
while they believed her person to be sacred,
would despise any danger to which themselves
alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes
were ready to second their attempts, and wait-
ed only a proper opportunity for invading the
lingdom , and asserting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. k-er life, for these reasons,
w:s incompatible with Elizabeth's safety; and
if hle were spared out of a false clemency, the
Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the
kingdom , could not be one moment secure.
Xeceeiity required that she should be sacrificed
in order to preserve these; and to prove this
sacrifice to be no lel's just than necellary, several
examples in history were produced, and many
texts of scripture quoted, but both the one and
the other vwere mifaipplied , and diitorted from
their true meanilg.

N .

# Elizabeth's dissimulation.

}liz. b;':h's difinUl:.i: on,*

Nothing, howxever, could be more ac.

ceptable to Elizabeth than an address in this
strain. It extricated her out of a situation ex.
tremely embarrassing ; and without deprivinig
her of the power of sparing, it enabled her to
punish her rival with less appearance of blanr.
If she chose the former , the whole honiiar
would redound to her own clemency. If fiiu
determined on the latter , whatever was ri-
gorous might now seem to be extorted by tec
solicitations of her people, rather than to ilo\v
from her own inclination. Ieir answer, lio\-
ever, was in aftyle which she often used, am-
biguous and evasive, under the appearance ol
openness and candour; full of such profefliuis
of regard for her people, as served to heighte:!
their loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's ingra-
titude, as were calculated to excite their indign^.-
tion; and of such insinuations that her own lile
was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive tlieir
fears. In the end, she besought them so fah'e
her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a
Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punif. ment;
and to confider wvhether it might not still be
poflible to provide for the publick security.
witlout forcing her to imbrue her hands ill
royal blood.

The true meaning of this reply was c:lil(
underflood. The Lords and Commons rciicvwcd

# France interposes seebly in behalf of Mary.

their former request, with additional importu-
lnity, which was far from being either unex-
pe&ed or offensive. Elizabeth did not return
any answer more explicit; and having obtained
such a publick sanCtion of her proceedings,
there was no longer any reason for protra&inl
this scene of dissimulation; there was even
some danger that her feigned difficulties might
at lafl be treated as real ones; she therefore
ad'ourned (he parliament, and reserved in her
own hands the sole disposal of her rival's fate. *)

France interpcres felely in belalf of Mary.

All the Princes inEurope observed the pro-

ceedings against lary with astonishment and
horror; and even Henry 1IT. notwithstanding
his known aversion to the house of Guise, was
obliged to interpose in her behalf, and to ap-
pear in defence of the common rights of royal-
ty. Aubefpine his resident Ambassador, and
Bellievre, who was sent with an extraordinary
commission to the fame purpose, interceded
(Nov. 2x.) for Mary with great appearance of
warmth. They employed all the arguments
which the cause naturally suggested; they plead-
ed from justice, from generosity, and huma-
nity; they intermingled reproaches and threats.
i: But to all these Elizabeth continued deaf and
inexorable; and having received some intirma-

) Carnd. 526. D'F.wes, 37,.

# James endeavours to save his mother's life.

tion of Henry's real unconcern about the fai
of the Scottish Queen, and knowing his anti.
pathy to all the race of Guifc , she truftlc!,
that these loud remonetrances would be follo,.
ed by no violent resentment. ::)

]ames endeavours to save his othrher's life.

..She paid not greater regard to the folici.

tations of the Scottish King, which, as they
were urged with more iincerity, merited more
attention. Though her cornmitiioner.s had been
extremely careful to sooth James, by publi'th
ing a declaration that their sentence against
Mary did, in no degree, derogate from lh 'i
honour, or invalidate any title which he sor-i
merly possessed; he beheld the indignities to
which his mother had been exposed with lilial
concern, and with the sentiments which be.
came aKing. The pride of the Scottish nation
was roured, by the infuit offered to the blood of
theirMonarchs, and called upon him to employ
the most vigorous efforts, in order to prevent
or to revenge the Queen's death.

At first, he could scarce believe that Eli.

zabeth would venture upon an aftion so un-
precedented, which tended so visibly to render
the persons of Princes lets sacred in tle eves
of the people, and which degraded the regal
dignity, of which, at other times, fihl was so

*) CatImri l3!.

remarkably jealous. But as soon as the ex-
traordinary steps which she took discovered her
intention, he dispatched Sir William Keith to
London; who, together with Douglas his Am-
baffador in ordinary , remonstrated , in the
strongest terms, against the injury done to an
independent Queen, in fubjectiing her to be
tried like a private person, and by laws to
xlhicli she owed no obedience; and besought
Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by fttfiering
a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonour-
able to the King of Scots, to be put into
execution. *)

Elizabeth returning no answer to there

remonfirances of his anmbaffador, James wrote
to her with his own hand, complaliing in the
bitterest terms of her conduct, not wxithout
threats that both his duty and his honour would
oblige him to renounce her friendship, and to
aft as became a son when called to revenge his
mother's wrongs. '') At the fame time he
assembled the nobles, who promised to itand
by him in so good a cause. He appointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denmark,
in order to implore the aid of there courts;
and took other steps towards executing his
threats with vigour. The high firain of his
letter enraged Elizabeth to fich a degree, that

') See Append. No. XIII.
"') Birch, Mem. i. 7,2.

# The sentence against Mary published.

she was ready to dismiss his ambaftadors with..
out any reply. But his preparations alarmed
and embaraffed her Ministers, and at their in.
treaty she retourned a soft and evasive answer,
promising to liften to any overture from the
King', that tended to his mother's safety; and
to suspend the execution of the sentence, till
the arrival of new ambaf'adors from Scotland.,)

iThe fetent ce aginfl Mary ptili[hed.

Meanwhile, she commanded the sentence

againfl Mlary to be published, (Decem. 6.) and
forgot not to inform the people, that this was
extorted from her by the repeated intreaty oh
both houses of Parliament. At the fame time
she dispatched Lord Buckhurll and Beale to
acquaint Tvlary' xith the sentence, and howy|
importunately the nation demanded the execu-
tion of it; and though she had not hitherto
yielded to these solicitations, she advised her to
prepare for an event which might become ne-
ceffary for securing the Proteflant religion, as
well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary
received the message not only without fymp-
toms of fear, but with expressions of triumph.
,, No wonder, said she, the Engliflf should
,, now thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince,
,, they have often ollered violence to their own
, Monarchs, But after so many fufferingsg

') Spotfw. a2S'l Cald, iv. ,.

# She is treated with the utmost rigour.

,, death comes to me as a welcome deliverer,

I am proud to think that my life is effeemed.
,, of importance to the Catholick religion, and

as a martyrfor it I am now willing to die." *)

She is treated -with tile titltofr :f '.tL, lr.

After the publication of the sentence, Manla

was stripped of every remaining mark of royal-
ty. The canopy of slate in her apartment was
pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, an,.
approached her person without any ceremony;
and even appeared covered in her presence.
Shocked with there indignities, and o!"'ended
at this gross familiarity, to which she had
never been accustomed, Mary once more com-
plained to Elizabeth; (Decem. I9. r2 .C-) and
at the fame time, as her last requcl, intreated
that she would permit her servants tai carry her
dead body into France, to be laid amon:r her
ancestors, in hallowed ground; thi t fonK- o0'
her domefticks might be present at her death.
to bear witness of her innocence, and iirnm
adherence to the Catholick faith; that all her
servants might be fufTered to leave the kingdom,
and to enjoy those small legaci.s which she
should bestow on them, as testimonies of her
affe&tion; and that. in the mean time, her
almoner, or some other Catholick PriefC, might
be allowed to attend her. and to assist her in

" Cam , 538, lel'l 2.3o0t.

# James renews his solicitations in her behalf.

preparing for an eternal world. She befoug;
her, in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progeni.
tor, by their near confangninity, and the roval
dignity with which they were both invefled, I0
gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge
her lb far as to signify her compliance, by a
letter under her own hand. Whether' lary's
letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncer-
tain. No an iCwer was returned; and no regard
paid to her requefis. She was offered a Pro-
teftant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them
she rejected , and without any clergyman to
direa her devotions, she prepared, in great
tranquillity, for the approach of death, which
fie now believed to be at no great difltace.*)

James renews his f elicitations in her behalf.

James , without losing a momient , sent

(January I. 1 587.) new ambassadors to London.
These were the Mailer of Gray, and Sir Robert
Melvil. In order to remove Elizabeth's fears.
they offered that their Blaster would become
buond that no conspiracy should be undertaken
againit her person, or the peace of the kingdom.
with Mary's consent; and for the faithful per-
formance of this, would deliver some of the
molt considerable of the Scottifli nobles as hof-
tages. If this were not thought fulficient, they

') Cam«ii. 3:8. }.'ib, ii. ay3:.

# Elizabeth's anxiety and dissimulation.

proposed that Mary should refigh all her rights
and pretensions to her son, from whom no-
thing injurious to the Protefi'ant religion, or in-
consistent with Elizabeth's safety , could be
feared. The former proposal Elizabeth rejefted
as insecure; the latter, as dangerous. Th'e
Ambafindors were then inftru&ed to talk in a
higher tone; and Melvil executed the con-
milion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray,
w ith his u i'n:l perfidy, deceived his M.aster,
who trufled him wvith a negotiation of so mucii
importance, and betrayed the Queen whom.
he was employed to save. He encouraged and
urged Elizabeth to execute the fentencce againftl
her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial
sentence, ,, The dead cannot bite. " And
whatever should happen, he undertook to p;i-
cify the King's rage, or at lealf to prevelt any
violent el'eEts of his refentnment. s:)

Elizalieli's anxiety and disnill lati,ii.

Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the

iymptoms of the most violent agitation and
dil'quietude of mind. She shunned society, lhe
was often found in a melancholy and mr:;ing
posture, and repeating, with inuch emphaiis,
tiefe sentences which she borrowed from fonim
of the devices then in vogue; Ant ser nut feri;
ne feriare, feri. MIuch, no donbt, of this

apparent uneasiness must be imputed to diliitnu.
lation ; it wvas impossible , however, that a
Princess , naturally so cautious as Eilizabeth,
should venture on an aftion, which might
expose her memory to infamy, and her life and
kingdom to danger, without reflefting deeply, ,
and hesitating long. The people waited her
determination in 1ffpenfe and anxiety; and les
their fear or zeal should subside, rumours of danger
were artfully invented, and propagated x\witl
the utmost industry; Aubefpine , the French
Ambassador, was accnfed of having suborned
an aflaffin to murder the Queen. The Spanifli
fleet was said by some to be already arrived
at Milford - haven. Others affirmed that the
Dule of Guise had landed -with a frrong army
in Suffex. Now, it was reported that the
Northern Counties were up in arms; next day,
that the Scots had entered England with all
their forces; and a conspiracy, it was whisper-
ed, was on foot for seizing the Queen , and
burning the city. The panick grewv every
day more violent; and the people, aflonifhed
and enraged, called for the execution of the
sentence againif Mary, as the only thing which
could restore tranquillity to the kingdom. ')

** C,<;id. s?3, ~;i;,

# Warrant for Mary's execution signed.

Warrant for Mary's executiotn ignei.!

While tlefe fentirnents prevailed among

lier subje&s, Elizabeth thought she milht!
safely venture to strike the blow, which she
had so long meditated. She commanded
Davison, one of the secretaries of state, to
bring to her the fatal warrant; (February i.)
and her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly
shewed that it is not to humanity that we
most subscribe her forbearance hitherto. At tle
very moment she was fubl'cribing the writ which
gave up a woman, a Queen, and her o!wn
nearest relation, into the hands of the exe-
cutioner, she 'as capable of jefing. ,, Go,
iaid she to Davilfn , and tell wVaalfni'liam what

hiave now done, though [ am artaid he will
,ie for grief when le hears it." lier ci;ief
anxietvy was now to fecu.'e the advantages
which wvould arile from Mary's deathl, without
appearing to have given her con.ent to a deed
so infamous. S;he often hinted to Pai'let and
Drury, as well as to fume other courtiers, that
'now was the time to di'cover the Iincerity of
their concern for her safety, and that file
expected their zeal would extricate her out of
her present perplexity. But they were wife
enough to seem not to underlland her meaning.
'Even after the warrant was signed, she comn-
nmanded a letter to be written to Paulet, in
!etf ambiguous terms, complaining of his re-

mifi/nefs in sparing so long the life of iher capital
enemy, and begging him to remember at last
v.;hat was incumbent on him as an affectionate
fubje&t,and to deliver his Sovereign from contiiual
fear and danger, by fiortenilng the days of his
prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and harfii, ai d
often brutal in the discharge of what he thought
his duty, as Mlar,'s keeper, was nevertheless
a man of honour and integrity. He reje&ed
the propofsal with disdain; and lamenting thai
he should ever have been deemed capable of
ading the part of an afiaflin, he declared that
the Queen might dispose of his life at her
pleasure, but be would never stain his own
honour, nor leave an everlafling mark of infamy
on his posterity, by lending his hand to per-
petrate so foul a crime. On the receipt of
this answer, Elizabeth became extremely pee-
vifh ; and calling him a dainty and precise
fellow, who would promise much, but perform
nothing, flie proposed to employ one Wingfield,
whio had both courage and inclination to strike
the blow. ::) But Daviron remonstrating aga.ini
this method, as no lels dangerous than difhc-
nourable, she again declared her intention that
the sentence pronounced by the cormmifioners
should be executed according to law; and as
she had already signed the warrant, she begged
that no farther application might be made to

') P:'-.r. 15i:an.: Article Daviion.

# Mary's behaviour at her death.

jier on that head. By this the privy couinfrellrs
thought thernfelves fulliciently authorised to
proceed; and prompted,as they pretenided, by zeal
for the Queen's safety, orinitigated as is more
probable, by the apprehension of the danger to
which they would themselves be exposed, if the
life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they
assembled in the Council Chamber, and by a let-
ter under all their hands, emnpowered the Earls
of Shrewsbury and Kent, together with the
High Sherif of the county, to fee the sentence
put in execution. :)

M ary's behaviour at her death.

On Tuesday the 7th of February, the two

Earls arrived at lotllerin l-, and demalnded
accc's to the Queen, rcad in her pr:rFfeice the
\warrant for execution and requiLrd l;cr to
prepare to die next morning. ]Ilary heard
them to the end without emotion, and crofiing
lerfelf in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the ioiy Ghorf, ., That foul,
fald fie. ,, is not worthy tile joys of 1Heavcn,
which repines becanfe the body niufc endure
the stroke of the executioner; and though I
did not expeEt tlhat the Queen of Eligland would
set the first example of violating the sacred
person of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly fubrlit
to that which Providence has decreed to be my
*)CanIl. ,34.1 Stirype , iii. 3,61. 3ó.1.

lot. " And laying her hand on a Bible, wiich
happened to be near her, she solemnly protest.
ed that she was innocent of tlat coifpiracy
which Babington had carried on against Eliza.
beth's life. :) She then mentioned the requefs
contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but obtain.
ed no fatisfastory answer. She entreated with
particular earneitnefs, that now in her laift mo.
nents , her Almoner might he suffered to attend
her, and that fhle might enjoy the confolatiom
of those pious institutions prelcribed by her re-
iigio. Even this favour, which is usually
granted to the vilell criminal, was absolutely
denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation,

\were bathed in tears, and though overawed by
the presence of the two Earls, vith diflicilry
l'upprel''ed their anguish ; hut no sooner did
tKent and Sllrewfbuily wvithdrav , than tlh.e' ran
to their Mifirefs, and burst out into the inolf
patfionate expreilions of tenderneis and forlrow.
.iary, however, not only retained perfe't conn-
poifre of mind, but endeavoured to nioierate
their exceflive grief. And falling on her kinees.
xvith all her domeilicks round her, she t:hanked
Heaven that her fuf!ierings were now so near an
end,r and prayed that she might be enabled rti
endure what lill remained with decency and

') ith
') j¢'b, ij. 2,,;,

with fortitude. The greater part of the evening
i'he employed in fettling her worldly aflairs.
She wrote her testament with her own hand.
Her money, her jevwels, and her clothes, she
distributed among her servants, according to
their rank or merit. She wrote a short letter
to the King of France, and another to the Duke
of Guise, full of tender but nmagnanimous senti-
ments, and recommended her foul to their
prayers, and her afflited servants to their pro-
tection. At sipper, flhe eat temperately, as
ul'Lal, and converted not only with ease, but
with cheerfulness ; fle drank to every one of
her servants, and asked their forgivenels , if
ever ,he had failed in any part of her duty
towarbs them. At her wonted time she went
to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early
in the inoruing I'he retired into her closet, and

lemp)loyed a confidcrable time in devotion. At
eight o'clock, the Hligh Sheriff aild Iis officers
entered her chamber, and found her fill kneel-
ing at the altar. She immediately flarted up,
r and with a majeftick mien , and a countenance
undismayed , and even cheerful , advanced
towards the place of execution, leaning on two
of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in a
I: mourning habit , but with an elegance and
splendour which she had long laid aside, except
"n a few festival days. An Agnus Dei hung
by a pomander chain at her necl; her beads at
I H i. of Scotl. Vol. I. O

her girdle; and in her hand she carried a cru.
cifix of ivory. At the bottom of the fairs the
two Earls, attended by several gentlemen frum
the neighbouring counties, received her; and
there Sir Andrew Melvil, the Master of her
H-oufhold, who had been secluded, for fouie
weeks, from her presence, was permitted to
take his last farewell. At the Sight of a Mistress
whom he tenderly loved, in such a situation,
he melted into tears; and as he was besaiiug
her condition, and complaininng of his own hard
fate in being appointed to carry the account o0
such a mournful event into Scotland, Mary
replied, ,, Weep not, good Alelvil, there is at
present greater cause for rejoicing. Thou filalt
this day fee Mary Stuart delivered from all her
cares, and such an end put to her tedious sis-
ferings , as she has long expected. Bear wi-
ness that I die constant in my religion; firm in
my fidelity towards Scotland; and unchalgc:i
in miy tlTection to France. Commend me to my
son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious
to his kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; i
and God forgive all those who have thirsted,
without cause, for my blood."

With much difficulty, and after many in-

treaties , she prevailed on the two Earls to
allow TMlelvil, together with three of her mel'
servants, and two of her maids, to attend hc'
to the scaffold. It waus eret-ed in the fame Iai
where flhe had been tried, raised a little above

the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the
cushion, and block, with black cloth. Mary
mounted the steps with alacrity, beheld all this
apparatus of death with an unaltered counte-
nance, and signing herself with the cross, she
fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant
for execution with a loud voice, to which she
listened with a careless air, and like one occu-
pied in other thoughts. Then the Dean of Pe-
terborough began a devout discourse, suitable to
her present condition, and ol'ered up prayers
to Heaven in her behalf ; but she declared that
flie could not in conscience hearken to one,
nor join with the other; and falling on her
knees, repeated a Latin prayer. When the
Dean had finished his devotions, she, with an
audible voice, and in the English tongue, re-
conmmended unto God the aflifted slate of the
Church, and prayed for profperitv to her son,
and for a long life and peaceable reign to Eli-
zabeth. She declared that she hoped for mercy
only through the death of Christ, at the foot of
whose image she now willingly shed herblood
and lifting up, and kissing the crucifix, she
thus addrefied it, ,, As thy arms , 0 Jesus,
were extended on the Cross; so with the out-
stretched arms of thy mercy receive me, and
forgive my fins. "

She then prepared for the block, by taking
off her veil, and upper garmenlts; and one of

0 2,

# Sentiments of historians concerning her.

the executioners rudely endeavouring to asir,
she gently checked him, and said, with a smile,
that she had not been acculfomed to undrcfs
before so many fpeEtators, nor to be served by
such valets. With calm but undaunted fortitude,
she laid her neck on the block; and while one
executioner held her hands, the other, at the
second stroke , cut off her head, which I alint
out of its attire, discovered her hair alrean v
grown quite gray with cares and sorrows. 'Lhe
executioner held it up still 'i.reamiug with bloo,,
and the Dean crying out: ,,So perifhl allQueen
Elizabeth's enemies, " the Earl of Kent alone
anfwiere(i Anien. The reft of the fpetators
continued llent, and drowned in tears; being
incapable, at that moment, of any other Liin-
timents but those of pity or admiration. ::)

Sentiments of Iliforianus coniconlinll he'r.

Such was the tragical death of Mary QicpnI

of Scots, after a life of forty-four years nnd
two months, almost nineteen years of which
she passed in captivity. The political parties
which were formed in the kingdom, during her
reign, have fubflfted , under various denomi-
nations, ever since that time. The rancour,
with which they were at first animated , hati
descended to succeeding ages, and their pre-
judices, as well as their rage, have been peP-

') Canl. ,34. Spots-. 355. Jt ! 1, ii. 300. Stry!.e, ii. 3,

# Her character.

petuated, and even augmented. Among 'His-
torians , who wvere under the domiiiiou of all
tlieie passions, and who have either afrcribed
to her every virtuous and amiable quality, or
have imputed to her all the vices, of which
the human heart is susceptible, we search in
vain for Mary's real charaater. She neither
merited the exaggerated praises of the one, nor
t:ie tnldircinguifiling censure of the other.

[I r chlra ler.

To all the charms of beauty, and the uttnoft

elegance of external form, she added those ac-
complifhinents , which render their imnpre[ion
irrefiflible. Polite, a.'able, insinuating, sprightly,
and capable of speaking and of writing with
equal ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and
violent in all her attachments; because her
heart was warml and unfufpicious. Impatient
ofcontr;dition ;because the had been accuaronm-
ed from her infancy to be treated as a ltteen.
No stranger, on tome occasions, to dili :nmla-
tion; which , in tlat perfidious court where
she received her education, was reckoned among
the necessary arts of governmnent. Not insen-
fible of flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure,
with which almost every woman beholds the
influence of her own beauty. Formed with the
qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; file was an agreeable woman
rather thn an an illiufrios Queen. The vivacity

of her spirit not sufficiently tempered with fuoind
judgment, and. the warmth of her heart, which
was not, at all times, under the restraint of
discretion, betrayed her both into errors, and
into crimes. To fay that she was always un-
fortunate, will not account for that long and
almost uninterrupted succession of calamities
which besel her; we must likewise add that fie
was often imprudent. Her passion for Darnly
was rash, youthful, and excessive. And though
the sudden transition to the opposite extreme
was the natural effeEt of her ill-requited love,
and of his ingratitude, insolence, and brutality;
yet neither tlefe, nor Bothwell's artfull address
and important services, can justify her attach-
ment to that nobleman. Even the manners of
the age, licentious as they were, are no apo-
logy for this unhappy pailion; nor can they in.
duce us to look on that tragical and infamous
scene which followed upon it with less au-
horrence. Humanity will draw a veil over this
part of her charater which it cannot approve,
and may, perhaps, prompt lfme to impute her
aftions to her situation, more than to her dif-
positions; and to lament the unhappiness of the
former, rather than accuse the perverseness of
the latter. Mary's fuflerings exceed, both in
degree and in duration, thole tragical diftrefles
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and
commiseration; and while we survey them, we
are apt altogether to forget her frailties, vwe

think of her faults with less indignation , and
approve of our tears, as if they were shed for
a person who had attained much nearer to pure
virtue.

With regard to the Queen's person, a cir-

cumftance not to be omitted in writing the hiC-
tory of a female reign , all cotemporary authdrs
agree in ascribing to Mlary the utmost beauty of
countenance, and elegance of shape, of which
the human form is capable. Her hair was black,
though, according to the fashion of that age,
the frequently wore borrowed locks, and of
different colours. Her eyes were a dark gray;
her complexion was exquisitely fine , and her
hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to
shape and colour. Her stature was of an height
that rose to the majeftick. She danced, file
walked, and rode with equal grace. Her taste
for murick was just, and she both sung and
played upon the lute with uncommon skill. To-
wards the end of her life she began to grow
fat; and her long confinement, and the coldness
of the houses in which she had been imprison-
ed, brought on a rheumatism, which deprived
her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays
Brantome, ever beheld her person without ad-
miration and love, or will read her history
without sorrow.

None of her women were faffered to come
| near her dead body, which was carried into a

room adjoining to the place of execution, where
I

# Elizabeth affects to lament Mary's death.

it lay, for some days, covered with a coarf,
cloth torn from a billiard table. The block, te;
feaffold, the aprons of the executioners, and
every thing fained with her blood, were re-
duced to ashes. Not long after, Elizabeth ap-
pointed her body to be buried in the Cathedral of
Peterborough with royal magnificence. But this
vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pa-
geantry of a pompous funeral did not ellace
the memory of those injuries, which laid Mary
in her grave. James, soon after his acceflion
to the Englil'h throne, ordered her body to be
removed to \VefRminfter-abbey, and to be de.
posited among the Monarchs of England.

Eliz:beiit aflfeIt s nt iaiiieint Mary's death.

Elizabetl afrtcaed to receive the accounts

of Mary's death with the most violent cmotions
of surprise and of concern. Sighs, tears, la-
mentations and mourning, were all employed
to display the reality and greatness of lier
sorrow. Evident marks of dijfimulation and
artifice may be traced through every period
of Elizabeth's proceedings againfl the life ofthe
Scottish Queen. The commitnion for bringing
Mary to a publick trial was seemingly extorted
frotn her by the intreaties of her privy coun-
fellors. She delared publishing the fentencc
againfl her till she was twice solicited by both
Houses of Parliament. Nor did she firn the
warrant for execution without the rt:-rr: r ..

parent reluctance. One scene more of the bold-
elt and nofl lfolemn deceit remaiued to be ex-
ihibited. She undertook to make the world be-
lieve that Mlary had been put to death without
her knowledge , and against her xvill. And
)avifon, who neither fiitpeled her intentio:.
nor lis own danger, was lier infitrument in
carrying on this artifice, and fell a vit:irn to it.

It \was his duity, as Secretary of State, to

lay before her the warrant (or execution, i:i
order to be signed; and, by her command , h1
carried it to the Great Seal. Shle pretended,
however, that hle had charged him not to coi!i-
municate what flhe had done to any perion, Itor
to susser the warrant to go out of his hands,
without her express perinimion ; that, in
contempt of this order, lie had not only re-
vealed the matter to several of her lPinifters,
but had, in concert with them, anf'elnbled her
Privy Counsellors, by whom, without- her con-
sent or knowledge, the warrant \was illticd,
and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Ient im-
powered to put it in execution. Though Davi-
fun denied all this, and with circumf!ances
which bear the strongest marks of truth an:i
credibility; though it can scarce be corccei.-c
that her Privy Council , compoled of the per-
sons in whon flie most consided , of her Mtiif-
ters and favourites, would aflimble ,ithin t:c-
wvalls of her palace, and venture to tranfa; a
bnatter of so much importanie , witiloout i.r

# Elizabeth endeavours to sooth James.

privity, and contrary to her inclination; yetf~
far did she carry her difflnulation, that, Swith
all the signs of displeasure and of rage, she ba.
nifhed most of her Counsellors out of her prc.
ience; and treated Burleigh, in particular, f,
harshly, and with such marks of disgust, that
he gave up himself for loft, and in the deepef
aflliftion wrote to the Queen , begging leave to
refigu all his places , that he might retire to :
his own estate. Davison she instantly deprived
of his office, and committed him a close prisoner
to the Towers He was soon after (Mlarcb.)
brought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber;
condemned to pay a fine of io,ooo pounds,
and to be imprisoned during the Queen's plea.
sure. He languished several years in confine.
ment, and never recovered any degree of favour
or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in order
to palliate this part of her condut , Elizabeth
made no scruple of sacrificing the reputation and
happiness of one- of the most virtuous and able
men in her kingdom. ')

Elizabeth endeavours to sooth laiaej.

This solemn farce, for it deserves no better

name, furniflled Elizabeth, howevrer, with an
apology to the King of Scots. As the profpef
of his mother's danger had excited the King's

') Can-i. 53<5. Strype , ill. 370.

ilial care and concern, the account of hier death
filled him with grief and resentment. His fab-
jets felt the dishonour done to him, and to the
nation. In order to sooth both, Elizabeth in-
1tantly dispatched Robert Carey, one of Lord
Hnnfdane's sons, with a letter expreiling her.
extreme afflirio n on account of that miserable
accident, which, as she pretended, had hap-
pened far contrary to her appointment, or in-
tention. James would not permit her messenger
to enter Scotland; and with some difficulty re-
ceived a metnorial he sent from Berwick. it
contained the tale concerning Davison, dreflite
up with all the circumstances which tended to
exculpate Elizabeth , and to throw the whole
blame on his rashness or treachery. Such a
defence gave little satisfaction, and was confi-
dered as mockery added to inflllt; and mtany of
thie nobles, as well as the King, breatlhed no-
t ing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely
solicitous to pacify them, and neither wante(t
instruments nor reasons to gain her end. Lei-
cetter wrote to the King, and Wral.finghain to
Secretary Maitland. They represented the cer-
tain deltrustion to which James would expore
i himself, if, with the forces of Scotland alon:e,
I he should venture to attack a kingdom. so far
superior in power; that the history of paftages,
as well as his mother's fad experience, migh:-
convince him, that nothing cculd be more dan-
Eerous, or deceitful, than dependnnce ont so-

reign aid; that the King of France would nei-
\vif:i to fee the British kingdoms united tuielr
one Monarch, nor contribute to invefi a Prince
so nearly allied to the Honfe of Guise with si ch
formidable power; that Philip might be a rmr,re
active ally, but would certainly prove a t;i-e
dangerous one , and, under prctcnice of aflitfii'.
him, would al'ert his own right to tlhe Engli'iit
Crown , which he already began openly to
claim; that the fame itatute, on which thec
sentence of death againll his mother had bece
founded, would juflify the excluding himi frinii
the fuccc!l'i.on to the Crown; that the EllcIhI,!
naturally avcrfe from the dominion orftranllrs,
would not fail, if exasperated by iis hofi.ilitic,
'to apply it in that mnanler; that Eliza.leh v.a;
disposed to repair the wrongs which the motlier
hiad fufirred, by her tenderness and afcie:;io
towards the son; and that, by engaging ]n a
fruitless war, he would deprive hiinfclf of a
noble inilcritance , which , by cultivating hr r
friendship, hle must infallibly obtain. Tthefe
reprefentatioiis, added to the consciousness of
his own weckllefs, to the smallness of his re-
venues, to the mniinous spirit of some of the
nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to
the influence of that fation which was entirelyat
Elizabeth's devotion, convinced James that a
war with England, however jufr, would in tile
present junsture be altogether inpolitical. Al
thlfe considerations induced him to ftiilc his re,

# Disgrace of the Master of Gray.

ifntment; to appear fitided with the punil,;-
nient inflicted on Davison; aid to prefcrve all
tie fenblances of friendship with the Englif
court. *) In this manner did the cloud which
threatened such a form pal's away. Mary's
death, like that of a common criminal, remain-
ed unavenged by any Prince; and whatever
infamy Elizabeth might incur, file was exposed.
to no new danger on that account.

Dil'rnce of the IMLiaer of Gray.

Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the

,latier of Gray, and lofc him the King's favour,
wiilch he had for some time porfefled. He was
become as odious to the nation as favourites,
.'l:u acquire power without merit, and exer-
cile it without discretion , ul'nally are. Tihe
treacherous part, which he had aced during
his late embafy , was no secret, and filled
James, xvilo at length came to the knowl'e( e
of it, wvith afronislrnent. The courtiers obfcrv-
ed the symptoms of disgust arising in the King's
mind, his enemies Ceized the opportunity, and
Sir William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy
with which Gray had betrayed his brother Cap-
tain James, publickly accused hin before a Con-
vention of nobles, (May Io.) not only of hav-
ing contributed, by his advice and suggestions,
to take away the life of the Queen, but of
') Spots,. Strypc iii. 377.

holding correspondence wxith Popish Princes, in
order to subvert the religion established in the
kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the King, de.
ferted by all, and conscious of his own guilr,
made a feeble defence. Fle was condemned to
perpetual banifihment, a punishment very un.
equal to his crimes. But the King was uniil.
ling to abandon one, whom he had once fa.
voured so highly, to the rigour of julice ; and
Lord Hamilton his near relation, and the other
nobles who had lately returned from exile, in
gratitude for the zeal with which he had ferv.
ed them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

Having thus accomplished the deftrultion

of one of his enemies, Captain James thought i.
the juncture favourable for prosecuting his re-
venge on them all. I-Ie lingled out Secretary
Maitland, the mofl: eminent both for abilities
and enmity to him; and offered to prove that
lie was no less accessary than Gray to the Queen's
death, and had even formed a delign of deliver-
ing up the King himself into the hands of the
English. But time and absence had, in a great
measure, extinguished the King's affeftion for
a minion mwho so little deserved it. All the
courtiers combined against him as a common
enemy. And, infread of gaining his point, he
had the mortification to fee the office of Chan-
cellor conferred upon Maitland, who, together
vith that dignity, enjoyed all the power ard
influence of a prime miniser.

# The King attempts to unite the nobles.

In the Affemibly of the Church, lwhich met

this year, the fame hatred to the order of Bi-
shops, and the fame jealousy and fear of their
encroachments, appeared. But as the King was
now of full age, and a parliament was fum-.
mioned on that occasion, the Clergy remained
satisfied with appointing some of their number
to reprefcnt their grievances to that court, from
swhich great things were exetcted.

Thie Kilg attempts to unite tile liobl::.

Previous to this meeting oP. Parliament,

James attempted a worlk worthy of a King.
The deadly feuds which subsisted between many
of the great families , and which were tranf-
n:ittcd from one gencration to another, weaken-
ed the strength of the kingdom; contributed,
more than an- other circunftance, to prcierve
a fierce and barbarous spirit ainong the nobies;
and proved the occaninn of many difaficrs to
themselves, and to their country. After ianyly
preparatory negotiations, he invited the con-
tending parties to a royal entertainment in the
palace of Hloly-rood-houfe; and partly by his
authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
tbeir pronlife to bury their dilenlfions in perpe-
tual oblivion. From thence he conduced them,
in foleinn procefflon, through the streets of
Edinburgh , marching by pairs , each hand in
hand with his enemy. A collation of vine and
fwe'et-mcats was prepared at the publickCrofs,

# General annexation of Churchlands.

and there they drani to each othlr, witl all
the flgns of reciprocal forgiveness, and of fu-
ture friendship. The people, who were pre.
sent at a fped-.ncle so unurual, conceived the
most sanguine hopes of secing concorj and tra-
quillity eftabliriicd in every part of the king.
dom, and tefified tleir satisfaction byrepeated
acclamations. Unhappily the effets of this re-
conciliation were not correfponident either to
the pious endeavours of the King, or the lond
wishes of the ipeople.

The firll care of the parliaeinvnl wrt s

w tie

security of the lrot'elfant religion. Allte la\;s
pafied in its favour, since the Reformation,
were ratified; and a new and severe one wa:;
enafted against seminary Prieits and Jesuits,
xvhofe rctlefs indultry in making proselytes
brought many of them into Scotland about
this time. Two acts of this parliament delfrve
more particular notice, on account of the con-
sequences with which they were followed.

Genecral annexation of Clitirch! ands,

The one refpeEted the lands of the Church.

As the ptillick revenues were not fuflicientril'
defraying the King's ordinary charges; as tie
adminitiration of the government became mnlre
complicated and more expensive; as Jamesvwas
naturally profue , and a stranger to cuconomy;
it was necefflry, on all these accounts, tot'rO-
vide ibome fund proportioned to his e";igeci i'

1:r

But no considerable fum could be levied on the
Commons, who did not enjoy the benefit of an
extensive commerce. The nobles were unac-
cuflomed to bear the burden of heavy taxes.
And the revenues of the Church were the only
source whence a proper fiipply could be drawn.
Notwithltanding all the depredations of the laity
since the Reformation, and the various devices
which they had employed to seize the Church
lands, tbme considerable portion of them re-
mained frill unalienated, and were held either
by the Bishops who poileffed the benefices, or
were granted to laymen during pleasure. All
these lands were, in this parliament, annexed,
by one general law, *) to the Crowsn, and the
King was impowered to apply the rents ofthean
to his own use. The tithes alone were referv-
ed for the maintenance of the persons who
served for the cure, and the principal mansion-
house, with a few acres of land, by way of
glebe, allotted for his residence. By this great
accession of property, it is natural to conclude
that the King must have acquired a vaftincreafe
of power, and the influence of the nobles have
fuflered a proportional diminution. The very
reverse of this feemls, however, to have been
the cafe. Almost all grants of Church-lands,
prior to this a&t, were thereby confirmed; and

') l'rl, If, lac. VI. c. 29.
Hill. of Scotl. Vol. T1. P

# Lesser Barons admitted into parliament by their representatives.

titles, which were formerly reckoned precarious,
derived from thence the fan&ion of parliamen.
tary authority. James was likewise authorised,
during a limited time, to make new alienations;
and such was the facility of his temper, ever
ready to yield to the solicitations of his servants,
and to gratify their most extravagant demands,
that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually
employed in bestowing, and his parliament ill
ratifying grants of this kind to his nobles;hen;ce
little advantage accrued to the Crown fromthat
which might have been so valuable an addition
to its revenues. The Bilhops, however, were
great sufferers by the law. Butat thisjuntnre
neither the King nor his Ministers were folici-
tous about the interests of an order of men,
odious to the people, and persecuted by the
Clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with
the utmost zeal. The profpef of sharing in
their spoils induced all parties to consent toit;
and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and power
of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult mat-
ter to introduce that change in the government
of the church which soon after took place. ')

Lcffer Barons admxitted iuto plalihanent by their

rpte fentativ es.

The change which the other Statute pro-
duced in the civil constitution was no less re-

') Spotfw. 363,

mnarkable. Under the feudal system n every
Freeholder or vassal of the Crown had a right
to be present in parliament. These Freeholders
were, originally, few in number~ but poleifled
of great and extensive property. By degrees,
these vast poffillions were divided by the pro-
prietors themselves, or parcelled out by the
Prince, or split by other accidents. The num-
ber of Freeholders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: besides the ancient
Barons, who preserved their estates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order,
wNhofe rights were the fame, though their wealth
and influence were far inferior. But, in those
rude ages when the art of government was
extremely imperl'Et, when parliaments were
seldom aflemblcd, and deliberated on matters
little interesting to a martial people, few of the
Lesser Barons took their feats, and the whole
parliamentary jurifdition was exercised by the
(;reater Barons, together with the Ecclesiastical
order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of
the English conflitution, to which he had been
long accuflomed, and desirous of providing a
counterpoise to the power of the great nobles,
procured an aft in the year r427, dispensing
with the personal attendance of the Lesser Ba-
rons, and impowering those in each county to
cliufe two Commilnioners to represent them in
Parliament. This law, like many other regn-
lations of that wire Prince, produced little es-

p

fee. All the King's vafials continued, as for-
merly, poffefled of a right to be present in Par-
liament, and, unless in some extraordinary con-
junaures, none but the Greater Barons attended.
But, by means of the Reformation, the con-
ftitution had undergone a great change. The
ariflocratical power of the nobles had been
much increased, and the influence of the Ec.
clefiaftical order, which the Crown usually em.
ployed to check their ufirpations, and to ba-
lance their authority, had diminished in pr-
portion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had
been erected into temporal peerages; and the
PIroteflant Biflops, an indigent race of meil,
and odious to the nation, were far from po'-
fessing the weight and credit which their pre-
deceflors derived from the exorbitant weallih,
and the fuperititious reverence of the people.
In this situation, the King had recotrfe to the
expedient employed by James J. and obtained a
law reviving the statute of 1427; and from tlht
time the Commons of Scotland have sent their
representatives to parliament. An a&t, whicb
tended so visibly to abridge their authority, dil
not pats without oppotition from many of the
nobles. But as the King had a right to funi-
mon the LefTer Barons to attend in person,
others were apprehensive of feeing the hoult
filled with a multitude of his dependants, and
consented the more willingly to a law whici,

# The approach of the Spanish armado.

laid them under the reftri&tion of appearing
only by their representatives.

The approach of the Spaniflil arnado.

The year I588 began with an universal

expe&ation throughout all Europe, that it -as
to be distinguished by wonderful events andre-
volutions. Several aflrologers, according to
the accounts of cotemporary historians, had
predicted this; and the situation of affairs in
the two principal kingdoms of Europe was fnch,
that a sagacious observer, without any super-
natural intelligence, might have hazarded the
prediction, and have foreseen the approach of
some grand crisis. In France, it was evident
from the astonishing progress of the league, con-
dua&ed by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hi-
therto farmounted all difficulties; as well as
from the timid, variable, and impolitick coun-
cils of Henry III. that either that Monarch
muff fabrit to abandon the throne, of which
he was unworthy; orby some sudden and daring
blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly,
in the beginning of the year, the Duke of Guise
drove his Master out of his capital city, and
forced him to conclude a peace, which left him
, only the shadow of royalty; and before the

year expired, he himself fell a viEtim to Hen-
S ry's fears, and to his own security. In Spain,
the operations were such as promised romething

still more uncommon. During three years, Phi.
lip had employed all the power of his European
dominions, and exhausted the treasures of the
Indies, in vast preparations for -war. A Fleet,
the greatest that had ever appeared in the ocean,
-was ready to fail from Lisbon, and a numerous
Land army was assembled to embark on board of
it. Its destination was still unknown, though
many circumstances made it probable that the
blow was aimed, in the first place, against Eng.
land. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to
the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her proteEtion.
A numerous body of her troops was in their ser-
vice; the Earl of Leicester commanded theirar-
mies; file had great sway in the civil govern-
ment of the Republick; and some of its mofr
considerable towns were in her pofleffion. Her
fleets had insulted the coasts of Spain, inter-
cepted the Galleons from the Weft Indies, and
threatened the colonies there. Roused by so
many injuries, allured by views of ambition,
and animated by a fuperititious zeal for propa-
gating the Romish Religion, IPhilip resolved not
only to invade, but to conquer England, to
which his descent from the house of Lancaster,
and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him,
in his own opinion, a double title,

# Conduct of James on that occasion.

fondu& of James on that occasion.

Elizabeth saw the danger approach, and

prepared to encounter it with the utmoff intre-
pidity. The measures for the defence of her
kingdom were concerted and carried on, with
the wisdom and vigour which distinguished her
reign. Her chiefcare was to secure the friendship
of the King of Scots. She had treated the
Queen his mother with a rigour unknown among
Princes; she had often used himself harfily, and
with contempt; and though he had hitherto
prudently suppressed his resentment of these in-
juries, she did not believe it to be altogether
extinguished, and was afraid that, in her pre-
sent situation, it might burf: out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprise,
courted James with the utmo[t assiduity. He
excited him to revenge his Mother's wrong; he
flattered him with the hopes of sharing his con-
quests; and offered him in marriage his daughter
the Infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scot-
land swarmed with priests, his emiflaries, who
seduced some of the nobles to Popery, and
corrupted others with bribes and promises.
Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a
faftion, which openly espoused the interest of
Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving from that court,
began to assemble his followers, and to take
arms, that he might be ready to join the Spa-

niards. In order to counterbalunce "all there,
Elizabeth made the warmest professions of
friendship to the King; and Afhby, her Am-
baffador, entertained him with magnificent hopes
and promises. He aflured him that his righto[
fucceeffon to the Crown should be publicklv
acknowledged in England; that he should be
created a Dukein that kingdom; that he fhouldbe
admitted to some share in the government; and
receive a considerable penfinn annually. James,
it is probable, was too well acquainted with
Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on these pro-
mises. But he underflood his own intereit in
the present juncture, and pursued it with niuch
fleadinefs. He rejefted an alliance with Spain,
as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
presence an ambassador from the Pope. He seizcd i
Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of K
Parma. He drove many of the trafficking Priests
out of the kingdom. He marched suddenly to
Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and
took him prisoner. In a Convention of the
nobles he declared his resolution to adhere in-
violably to the league with England, and, \ith-
out listening to the suggestions of revenge, de-
termined to aft in concert with Elizabeth, against
the common enemy of the Proteflant faith. He
put the kingdom in a posture of defence, and
levied troops to obftru& the landing of the Spa-
niards. He offered to fend an army to Eli-
zabeth's assistance, and told her amba'laor,
that he expeaed no other favour from the ij:ig

# A national covenant in defence of Religion.

of Spain, but that whicl Polyphemuis had pro-
mifed to Ulylres, that when he had devoured
all his companions, he would make himn hislaft
morrel. *)

A inational coVenullt in dcFencl: u ' !':li!ion.

The zeal of the people, on this occasion,

was not inferior to that of the King; and the
extraordinary danger, with which they were
threatened, fuggefced to them an extraordinary
expedient for their security. A bond was framed
for the maintenance of true Religion, and the
defence of the King's person and governmeint,
in oppoiition to all enemies, foreign and do-
meftick. This contained a confeiiion of the
Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the mofL folemnpromife.,
in the name, and through the ffrength ofGod,
of adhering to each other in fuppor'in the

dormer, and contending againiL the latter, to

the utmost of their power. :::) The King, the
iNobles, the Clergy, and the people fubrcribeid
with equal alacrity. Stranrge or uncommon as
such a combination may now appear, many
circumstances contributed, at that time, to re-
commend it, and to render the idea faniliar to
the Scots. Wthen routed by any extraordinary
event, or alarmed by any publick danger, the

') Camd, 544. Jol.lft. T39 .

Spt . 39,

'") iDnlop's Collea, of Ccure!.', "'.; i:. *
ls, .

people of Israel were accustomed to bind themn
selves, by a foletnn Covenant, to adhere to
that Religion, which the Almighty had establish.
*d among them; this the Scots conlfidered :i
a sacred precedent, which it became them tu
imitate. In that age no considerable enterprise
was undertaken in Scotland, without a bond
of mutual defence, which all concerned reckon.
ed necessary for their security. The form of
this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed
from those political ones, of which so many
instances have occurred; the articles, ftipula-
tions, and peculiar modes of exprefflon, are
exa&ly the fame in both. Almoff all the con.
ilderable Popish Princes were then joined in a
league for extirpating the Reformed Religion,
and nothing could be more natural, or seemed
more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-
aflociation, in order to oppose the progress of '
that formidable conspiracy. To these caures
did the Covenant, which is become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed
at different times during the reign of James.) )
It was revived with great solemnity, though
with considerable alterations, in the year I638.
It was adopted by the English in the year I643,
and enforced by the civil and ecclesiastical au-
thority of both kingdoms. The political pur-
poCes to which it was then made subservient,

') Cald., iv. I20>

# The Armado defeated.

and the violent and unconflitutional measures
which it was then employed to promote, it is
not our province to explain. But at the junc-
ture in which it was firfl introduced, we may
pronounce it to have been a prudentand laudable
device for the defence of the religion and li.
berties of the nation; nor were the terms in
which it was conceived, other than might have
been expeEted from men alarmed with the im-
pending danger of Popery, and threatened with
an invasion by the molt bigoted and moit power-
ful Prince in Europe.

The Armado defeaneJ.

Philip's eagerness to conquer England did

not inspire him either with the vigour or
dispatch necelIary to ensure the success of so
mighty an enterprise. His fleet, which ought
to have failed in April, did not enter the English
channel till the middle of July. It hovered
many days on the coast, in expeatation of
being joined by the Prince of Parma, who was
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch
Squadron. Continual disasters parfued the
Spaniards during that time; successive frorms
and battles, which are well known, conspired
with their own ill conduc to disappoint their
enterprise. And, by the blessing of Providence,
which watched with remarkable care over the
Proteltant Religion and the liberties of Britain,
the English valour scattered and destroyed the

# Philip's intrigues in Scotland. (1589.)

Armado, on wlich they had arrogantly betowed
the name of Invincible. After being driven
out of the English seas, they were forced to
fieer their course towards Spain, round Scotland
and Ireland. Many of them fuflered fhipwrecl;
Ol these dangerous and unknown coasts. Though
James kept his fIibjects under arms to watch
the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent
their landing in an hostile manner, he received
-with great humanity 700 who were forced
ashore by a tempest, and after supplying them
with neceflaries, permitted them to return into
their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabethi

sent an ambassador to congratulate with James,
and to compliment him on the firmness and
generosity he had discovered during a conjunture
so dangerous. But none of Afhby's promises
were any longer remembered ; that Minister
was even accused of having exceeded lis powers, i
by these too liberal offers; and conscious of
his own falsehood, or ashamed of being difovwned
by his court, he withdrew secretly out of
Scotland. *)

Philip's intrigues in Scotland. (1589.)

Philip, convinced by fatal experience of

his own rashness in attempting the conqueR
of England by a naval armament, equipped at

'!) 1o1linil. 134t Cnd. 3.1.3

# Popish nobles conspire against the King.

so great a distance, and fubjeAEed, in all its
operations, to the delays, and dangers, and
uncertainties arising from seas and winds, re-
solved to make his attack in another form, and
to adopt the plan which the Princes of Lorrain
had long meditated, of invading England througle
Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined,
might be easily wafted over from the Low
Countries to that kingdom, and if they could
once obtain footing , or procure alffitance
there, the frontier of England was open and
defencclefs, and the northern counties full of
Roman Catholicks, whlo would receive them
with open arms. Mleanwhilile, a descent might
be threatened on the southern coast , which
would divide the English army, diflra& theiir
councils, and throw the whole kingdom int;o
terrible convulsions. In order to prepare the
way for the execution of this design, he re-
mitted a considerable fumi of money to Bruce,
a seminary priest in Scotland , and employed
himn, together with Ha\-, Creighton, and Tyrie,
Scottish Jesuits, to gain over as many persons
of diftinliion as pofilble to his interest.

'opiil ii nc'bleB coiirl)ire againii l t.le Ii.lr.

Zeal for Popery, and the artful insinuations

of these emissaries, induced several of the nobles
to favour a measure which tended so rnanifefily
to the deftruation of their country. Huntly,
though the King had lately married him to the

# The King's maxims with regard to Popery.

daughter of his favourite the Duke of Lennox,
continued warmly attached to the Romish Church.
Crawford and Errol were animated with the
zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and,
in their letters to him, offered their service te
the King of Spain, and undertook, with the
aid of 6000 men, to render him malter of
Scotland, and to bring so many of their vaifals
into the field, that he should be able to enter
England with anumerous army. Francis Stew-
art, grandson of James V. whom the King had i
created Earl of Bothwell, though influenced by
no motive of religion , for he still adhered to !
the Protestant faith, was prompted merely by
caprice, and the restlessness of his nature, to
join this treasonable correspondence.

The ling's maxims with regard'to I'opeiy.

All these letters were intercepted in Eng-

land. Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger wvhich
threatened her own kingdom, sent them im-
mediately (Feb. i7.) to the King, and re-
proaching him with his former lenity toward
the Popish party, called upon him to check
this formidable conspiracy by a proper severity.
But James, though firmly attached to the P'ro-
teftant religion, though profoundly versed in the
theological controversies between the Reformers
and the Church of Rome, though he had em-
ployed himself, at that early period of life, in

writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in
which he proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had
nleverthelefs adopted, already, those maxims
concerning the treatment of the Roman Catho-
licks, to which he adhered through the reft of
his life. The Roman Catholicks were at that
time a powerful and acive party in England;
they were far from being an inconsiderable
fafion in his own kingdom. The Pope and
ling of Spain were ready to take part in all
their nmachinations, and to second every effort
of their bigotry. The opposition of such a
body to his succession to the Crown of England,
added to the adverfenefs of the Englifll from
the government of strangers, might create him
many difficulties. In order to avoid these, he
thought it necellary to sooth rather than to
irritate the Roman Catholicks, and to reconcile
them to his fucceflion, by the hopes of gentler
treatment, and some mitigation of the rigour of
those laws, which were now in force againfl
them. This attempt to gain one party by
promises of indulgence and afts of clemency,
while he adhered with all the obstinacy of a
disputant to the doEtrines and tenets of the
other, has given an air of nyftery, and even
of contradiction , to this part of the King's
charatder. The Papists, with the credulity of
a fed firuggling to obtain power, believed his
heart to be wholly theirs; and the Protestants,
with the jealoury inseparable from those nwho

# His excessive lenity to the conspirators.

are already in pofleffion, viewed every act of
lenity as a mark of indifference, or a symptom
of apoftacy. And in order to please both, James
often aimed at an excefiive relinement, mingled
xwith diiimulation, in which he imagined the
perfeetion of Government and of king - craft to
conifR.

slis ex-cfile leiity to tild collrtiirator s.

His behaviour on this occalion was agreable

to these general maxims. Notwithstanding the
solicitations of the Queen of England, enforced
by the zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy,
a short iinprifonrnent was the only punishment
he infli&ed on Huntly and his aflociates. 13u:
he soon lad reaion to repent an act of clemency
so inconsistent with the dignity of government.
The firlt use which the conspirators made of
their liberty, was to afieinble their followers
and, under prctence of removing Chancellor
Mlaitland, an able Minister, but warmly devot-
ed to the Eng'iilh interest, from the lIing's
councils and presence, they attempted to seize
3ames himself. This atteml)t being defeated,
partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by
their own ill conductd , they were forced to re-
tire to the North, where they openly erelted
the standard of Rebellion. But as the Kings
government was not generally unpopular, or
his minilrers odious, their own vassals joined
them slowly, and discovered no zeal in ths

catif

# The King's marriage with Anne of Denmark.

cause. And the King, in perCon, advancing
against them . ith iuch forces as he could
suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on
the fidelity of the troops, which, though fu-
perior in number, followed them \with reluc-
tance, as to hazard a battle ; but fiuiering thenr
to disperse, they surrendered to the King, and.
threw thelfelves on his mercy. :ltiitly,
Errol, Crawford, and Bothwcll , -were all
brought to a publick trial. Pepeated adts of
trcafon were easily proved agaillt them. The
ling, however, did not permit any sentence
to be pronounced; and, after keeping them a
few months in confinement, he took occation,
amidit the publick feflivity and rejoicings at the
approach of his marriage, to set them at li-
berty. *)

'Tle lxiin,'s lnnrring e \with Anne or Deomarkik

As James was the only descendant of the

incieut Monarclis of Scotland, in the direEt
line; as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the
two kingdoms would have expircd with him;
as the Earl of Arran, the prefimptive heir to
the throne , was lunatick; the King's marriage
wvas, on all these accounts, an event which
the nation wished for with the utmost ardour.

') Spofwv. 373. Cald. iv. Io03
Hi-R. of Scotl. Vol. II.

He hitnfelf was no less desirous ofaccotmp!ifhing
it; and had made overtures, for that purpose,
to the eldefl daughter of Frederick IT. King of
Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every
thing that would render the acceflion of the
house ofStewart more acceptable to the glifh,
endeavoured to perplex James, ir the fae
manner she had done Mary, and employed as
many artifices to defeat or to retard his nmar-
riage. His "'minifers, gained by bribes and
promises, seconded her intention; and though
several ditrerent ambassadors were sent from
Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so
limited, or iniifted on conditions 'o e>travagant,
that Frederick could not believe the King to be
in earnest; and& fufpefting that there was some
design to deceive or amuse him, gave his daugh-
ter in marriage to the Duke of Brunfwicli
Not discouraged by this disappointment, which
he imputed entirely to the condu&t of his own'
ministers, James made addrefles to the Princess
Anne, Frederick's second daughter. And though
Elizabeth endeavoured to divert him from this,
by recommending Catherine the King of Na-
varre's fifler, as a more advantageous match;
though she prevailed on the privy council of
Scotland to declare againif the alliance with
Denmark , he persised in his choice. And
dcl'pairing of overcoming the obfrinacy of his
own miniltcrs, in any other manner, he fe-

aretly encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh to
take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces
tlie Chancellor , whom they accLued as thle
person whose artifices had hitherto disappointed
the wishes of the King, and the cxpe&ttions.
of his people. In conlrquence of this, the
Earl Marshal was sent into ;enlnark at the
liead of a Iplendid embanlily. Ile received
ampli powers and in lriiLcions, drawn with the
i;in;'s own hand. ''he mnrri:.T'e arLicles \\re
qaickily agreed upion, and the u.n, (.r coni
.i:il towards Scotland. .ames mili'de grat pr:'-
;r:aitior;, for hber recepti;,- , and a';il ed1 l;er
l;,;ntiia)g writlh all the impatience of a loIve'i ; w.. ien
the unwelcome accolunt arrived , tlia: ; vioi'lt
tempest had arilen , whicli drove back her
ileet to Norwvy, in a condition floatl-ered,
that there was lititle hope of it-s piltting again
to sea before the fpri ngi. Th s u:lex pccred
diiiappointimelt h fclt xiilh tle li a-.or fenfii-
bility. He ilniintlly ,itted oun fume fltis, anrd,
without comm unicatiing his intention to any of
his council, failed in person, attended by the
Chancellor, several noblemen , and : train of
30o persons, in quelt of his bride. [-Ie arrived
ffely (OCt. z2.) in a small hatrbour near Upflo,
where the Queen then relidcd. There the
marriage was solemnized. (Nov. :4. T59y.)
And as it would have been rafil to tri:l'r those
,oificrous seas in the winter fea!'ii , James ac-

Q 2

cepted the invitation of the court of Deinlark,
and repairing to Copenhagen, pafcdd feverai
months there, amidst continual seasing aind
amusements, iu which both the Queen anll,
hiimfelf had great delight. :)

No event in the King's life appears to be a

wider deviation from his general chara(te.r, than
this sudden sally. His son Charles 1. was ca-
pable of that excessive admiration of tl:c other
sex, !which arises from grc'at fefnlibility of icair, i
heightened by elegance of tafCle; and the ro.
mantickl air of his journey to' Spain snitcd flich
a disposition. But James :as not fifcel,title
of any refined gallantry, and always exir,.r;.l
that contempt for the female character ; ,'hit:li ?.
pedantick crudition, unacquainted witli po li.Les,
is apt to inspire. He was fretted, hewoeer,
at the many obliacles whidh had been laid i: nisi
way. He w\as anxious to secure tihe polilc:l
advantages which he expected from m::rriace;
an fearing tliat a delay might afford EIizlbctrh
and his own minnifiers, aln o po]rtunit of ithwart-
ing hin by new intrigues, he suddenly took
the resolution of preventing them, by a voyage
from which he expected to return in a ife
weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his
conduCt, and to be pleased with this appeac-
ance of amorous ardour in a young Priice.

') Melv. 3-,5. Spotiv. 377.

Notsitlihfanding his absence so long beyond
the time he expc).ed , the nobles, the clergy
and the people, vied with one another il loyal-
ty and obeCicnie ; and no period in the
King's reign wias inie rc iiarkable F'or traln-
quillity , cr ;:rc free fro:l any cript)tion of
there 'ations , which io) rftcen difturi)cd the
3ingd oni.

# BOOK VIII.

# The King and Queen arrive in Scotland.

THE

H I S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

OF
S C O'TL AN D.

13 OK) VIII.

The lKin ,, Llti Q'iici. allive ini Scoll;iil.

0 x the sirs: of li:ty 159o, the King and Queen
arrived at Icith, and were received by their
fiibjeccs, with every poflible expreflion of joy.
The foleinnity of the Queen's coro'nation was
conduc(ed with great maguliicoence; but so low
had the order of liChlops fallen, in the opinion
of the publick, that none of:them were present
on that occaflon , and iMr. Robert Bruce, a
Presbyterian Minifler of great reputation , set
the Crown on her head, administered the sacred
uncfion, and perforimed the other customary
ceremonies.

The zeal and fnccefs with which many of

the clergy had contributed towards preserving
peace and order in the kingdom, during his ab-
lence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their
persons, and even to the Presbyterian forrn oF
government. In presence of an aTfembly, whicli
met this year, (Anguft q. ) he made high enco-

# Disorders in the kingdom.

miumns on the discipline as well as the dorcclle
of the church , promised to adhere inviolably to
both, and permitted the assembly to frame such
acts as gradually abolished all the remains of
episcopal jurifdiEtion, and paved the way fora
full and legal eitablifhment of the Presbyterian
model. ':)

An event happened soon after, ( 1i9.)

which afforded the Clergy no finall triul:p,
Archbishop Adamson , their ancient enemy,
having fallen under the King's difpLleafiire, aiv-
ing been deprived of the revenues of his fee in
confeqnence of the aa of annexation, and being
oppressed with age, with poverty, and diseases,
made the meanefl submission to the clergy, and
delivered to the assembly a formal recantation
of all his opinions concerning Church govern-
ment, which had been matter of offence to the
Presbyterians. Such a confession , from the
most learned person of the order , was confi-
dered as a testimony which the force of truth
had extorted from an adversary. i:;)

Disorders in the'kingdom.

Meanwhile, the King's excessive clemency

towards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds
and encouraged such aas of violence, as brought
his government under contempt, and proved

') Cald. iv. o04.
") Spotrw,. 385. Cald. iv, 1i4.

# An attempt of Bothwell's against the King.

fatal to many'of his fubjeEts. The hiilory of
several years, about this time, is filled with
accounts of the deadly quarrels between the
great families, and of murders and afTaffintiona
perpetrated in the noft audacious ?nn er, and
with circumstances of the utmost barbarity. AH
tie defea&s in the feudal arillocracy were now
felt more sensibly, than at any other period in
the history of Scotland, and universal licence
and anarchy prevailed to a degree scarce con-
silent with the preservation of society, while
the King, too gentle to punish, or too feeble
to a&t with vigour, suffered all there enormities
to pass with impunity.

An attempt of Hoth\vell's againR tlile King.

But though James connived at real crime;,

witchcraft, which is commonly an imaginary
one, engrofled his attention, and those fufpeft-
ed of it, felt the whole weight of his autho-
rity. Many persons, neither extremely old nor
wretchedly poor, which wvere tuflally held to
be certain indications of this crime, but mas-ers
of families, and matrons of a decent rank, and
in the middle age of life, were seized and tor-
tured; and though their confeflions contained
the most absurd and incredible circurmfances,
the King's prejudices, those of the clergy and
of the people, conspired in believing their ex-
travagancies, without heritation, and in pu-
nifhing their persons without mercy. Some of

there unhappy sufferers accused Both\'vell o
having consulted them, in order to know lth
time of the King's death, and haviln emplvoy e
,their art, to raifo the torms, swhich l11ha1 n.
dangered the Queen's life, and had det.ainied
James so long in Dlenmark. Upon this evidence,
'that nobleman was committed to prison. His
turbulent and haughty spirit could neither sub.
mit to the restraint, nor brook such an indignity,
Having gained his keepers, lie made his escape,
and imputing the accusation to the artifices of
his enemy, the Chancellor, aflembled his fol.
lowers, under pretence cf driving him from the
King's councils. Beiig favoured by some of
the King's attendants, he was admitted by a
lecret passage, under cloud of night, (Dec.27.
1591.) into the court of the palace of H-oly-
rood-houfe. He advanced direcfly towards tie
royal apartment, but happily, beforc e

he cnterd,

the alarm was taken, and the doors shut. WVhili
he attempted to burst open some of them, and
to set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh
had time to run to their arms, and he ercaped
with the utmost difficulty; owing his safety to
the darkness of the night, and the precipitancy
with which he fled. *)

He retired towards the North, and the King

having unadvisedly given a comniffion to the
Earl of Huntly, to pursue him and his followers,

*) Melv. 388. Spotfw-. 36.

'vith fire and sword, he, under colour ol exe-
cuting that commiilion, gratified lis private re-
venge, and surrounded (Feb. . -592. ) the
house of the Earl of Mlurray, burnt it to the
ground, and flew Murray him elf. 'licimerdtei
,' a young nobleit-an of flch promrting vir'i-ue,
and the heir of the Regent rilurray, the dirlinj;
of the people, excited ulniverfal i'.,ignatio[:.
The citizens of Edinbi;rll r al

Wn a tunil lti:(c;::

manner ; and tlhoulh they were ref':aincd, b,y
tlie care of the imagifirates, firom any as of ' i:-
lence, they threw alide all rc!fpec for the King
and his miniiters, and openly ilnfulted and
threatened both. While tiis mutirnous f;ir't
continued, James thought it prudent to with:..
draw from the city, and fixed his reiidcnlc ror
Tome tinie at Glasgow. Thiere Hl-lntly furren-
dered hiirifelf tojutllice; and, n)otwitlitaniding
the atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours
of the people, thie power of the Chancellor,
with whom he was now closely confederated,
;ind the King's regard for the memory of the
!Duke of Lennox, whose daulgh ter he had mar-
ried, not only protcsted him from the fenitece
.vlich such ail odious attion merited , but ex-
empted him even from the formality of a
1'sblick trial. : )

') Sc-^Y 3S

38

# Presbyterian Church government established by law.

Prelbycerian Church government efiabirhed by laW.

A ftep of much importance was taken, foor.

after , with regard to the government of tlic
church. The Clergy had long c; 'coilained o0
the encroachments imade upon thleir privilegr;
and jiirifdiioii by the acts of the parliamnent
.158"4t, and thou;h these laws liad now loli
much of their force, they resolved to petition
the parliament, which' was approachhin , to
repeal them in forin. The jiunture for puriiing
such a mcal'lre was well chosen. The

' ing

had lolf n1iuclih of the publick favour, by his le-
nity towards the Pi'pifi faction, and Frill nore
by his renil in pur'uing the murderers if
the Earl of MuArray. The Chancellor had nc,[
only a pow:sitrpl party of the courtiers con iind-
ed against him, hut was heco-ne odious to the
people, who imputed to him every faire f.epin
the King's conducl. Bothwell still lurked ii
tlhe kingdom , and being secretly supported by
all the enemies of Maitland's administration, wva
ready, every moment, to renew his audacious
enterprises. James , for all these reasons, was
extremely wxilling to indulge the Clergy in
their request, and not only consented to a la]w,
whereby the aCs Ij584 were reCcinded or ex-
plained, but he carried his complaisance still
ftirther, and permitted the parliament to cilab-
lifh the Presbyterian government, its General
Aflet-blies, Provincial synods, Prcfbyrtceres, anl
Kir'; felfllons, ,iih: .l! the dil'erent bral:!;e-'s oi

their discipline and jurifdi&ion, in tile niole
ample manner. All the zeal and anthclrity of
the Clergy, even under the adnnihilfratio;n of
Regents, frcIm whom1: . ey ;lilght have expe:d-
ed the mniol partial faivour, c:uld not obtain the
fanfEioii of law, in coniitrnation ul' their niode
of Ecclefi:liical government. No Prince was
ever less disposcd than James to approve a
I'tfltem , Wlholtf republician genius inspired a
passion 'or liberty, so repugnant to llis exalted
notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
aversion be niore inveterate than hlis, to the
aullere and unconiplving charaCter of the Pref-
byterian Clergy in that age; xvho, more emi-
nent for zeal than for policy , often contradi&t-
ed his opinions , and cenluired his condutq, with
a freedom equally ofi'e.iive to his do gmatifin as
a Theologian , and to his pride as a King. His
situation, however, oli;ed him frequently to
conceal , or to difSecnible his sentiments; and as
lie often difgnfled his ifuje&ts, by indulging
the L'opifh faction niore thlani they approved, ihe
enr-le.avored to atone for this, by concessions
to tile Prefbytclill Clergy, ilore iberal than he
iimLfelf oould otherwise Ihave c.ofru to grant.:'')

In this p arlia:-!ent, i"oti:xiwll, and all his

adherents , were attainted. 3Bt he soon made
a new attempt to seize tih lin!' at Falkland;
and James, betrayed by forme of his courtiers.
") Cald, iv-. 0.!?. 3:)5. Spo:o\ v, 33S.

# A new conspiracy of the Popish Lords.

and feebly defended by others, who \vifhed wv,.;
to Bothwell, as the Chanclllor's raowxed encnie,
owed his iafety to the fidelity and vigilance ,i
Sir 'Robert Melvl , and to the irrefolutin cti
Iliotwiell's afibocat:es. :)

A iit\ coul -;i:'acy of die Pi' i[:. LEldls,

Scarcely xas this danger over, whlen liJ

nnt:ic.n was alarmed with the discovery of :a ie\.
ail.u ir;ole formidable conspiracy. George l(r,
the iLrd Newbottlc's brother, beingo feizc(l ai
he was ready to let fail for Spain, many fnii'i.
cions papers xwere found ill his cufiody, amnn
ninong these, several blanks fii ied ly tl ieEari
of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this e:t;'- i
ordinary precaution , they hoped to efeapc any
danger of discovery. B ut Ker's refulution ih:i:':-
ing when torture was threatened , e confc!(lI
that he was employed by -lie'e noblelmen: ,.
carry on a negotiation with the King of Sp:in;
that the blanks fti'bfcribed \vi-h tlicir n:anes
were to be tilled up by Cricitoe'l and Tye;
that they were inftrnf:edl to utl'er the fairiilfl!
service of the tlree Earls to tihat Ion',.c'li
and to solicit him to lard a boid of his t'i.in's
either in Galiovwny, or at the monuth of C

o ..ie

with which they undertook, in the firit pl:'c
to establish the Roman Catholc!k Reiijgie i
Scotland, and then to invade LEgland with ti

') Melv. 402,

# Zeal of the people, (1593.)

whlole forces of the kingdom. Sir David Gra-
ham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
he accused of being privy to the conlp)iracy,
were taken into'cullody, and confirmed all the
circnmftances of his confeltion. ;)

L:".al us th people, (1593.)

The nation having- been kept for some time

in continual terror and agitation by so many
ficceflive conspiracies , the discovery of this
new danger completed the panick. All ranks
of men, as if the enemy had already been at
tlieir gates, thought tiemfelves called upon to
sand forth in defence of their country. The
ilinifters of Edinburgh , without waiting for
any warrant from the King, who happened at
tiat time to be absent from the capital , and
aithout aliving received any legal comnmifion,

al'embled a considerable number of Peers and

Barons, in order to provide an instant remedy
against the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus,and committed him to the castle;
they examined Ker; and prepared a remon-
urance to be laid before the King, concerning
thle state of the nation; and the necelity of
prosecuting the coniflirators with becoming
vigour.
') P-rn~er, svi. 190.

# And proceedings of the King against them.

# Elizabeth solicits him to treat them with rigour.

And proceedings of the ling agaiult tlhen.

James, though jealous of every encroach.

ment on his prerogative, and offended xxith
fubjefs, who, instead of petitioning, fecncd
to prescribe to him, found it necessary, duriig
the violence of the ferment, not only to adcui
their plan, but even to declare that no confide.
ration should ever induce him to pardon thlfe
who had been guilty of so odious a trcafl:n.
lie summoned the Earls of luntly and Errol to
surrender themselves to juflice. Graham of
Fintry, whom his peers pronounced to be guilty
of treason, he commanded to be publickly behtad-
ed; (Jan.8.1593.) and marching into the North
at the head of an army, the two Earls, together
with Angus, who had escaped out of prison,
retired to the mountains. -le placed garrii,'ns
in the castles which belonged to them; .co.
pelled their vassals, and the Barons in tl:e ad-
jacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing
professions of their loyalty towards lim, and
of their firm adherence to the Protestant faith;
and, the better to secure the tranquillity of tint
part of the kingdom, confituted the Earls of
Athol and Marshal his Lieutenants there. ")

Elizabeth solicits him to treat them with rigour.

Having finished this expedition, James re-
turned (March. I8.) to Edinburgh, where he

~') Sl~ts. ~301, Cultd.~ iv{
291'.

found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambaf-
fador from the court of England. Elizabeth,
alarmed at the dilcovery of a conspiracy which
she confidered as no less formidable to her oswn
kingdom than to Scotland , reproached James
with his former remifinefs, and urged him, as
lie regarded the preservation of the Protestant
religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, to
piinifh this repeated treason zwith rigour; and
if he could not apprehend the persons, at least
to confiscate the estates , of such audacious
rebels. She weakened however the force of
thlefe requefs s, by interceding at the fame time
in behalf of Both vell, whom, according to her
usual policy in nourishing a facrious spirit among
the Scottifli nobles, she had taken under her
prote&tion. James absolutely refused to lifter
to any intercession in favour of one, who hlad
fooften, and Xv ith to much oltr:Uie. inftilted
both his governl ent and his perfifn. >''ith re-
gard to the nppil'i conspirators, lie declared lis
resolution tn prosecute tlhem withi vigour; but
that _he might be the better able to do so, he
demanded a fn:ill r lnm of money from Eliza-
beth , which flhe, diftruiiful ' pcrhaps of the
manner in which he night apply it: , shewed
0o inclination to grant. The zea!, lhowever, and
importunity of his own subjects obliged him to
call a parliament, in order to pals an at of
attainder againfr the three Earls. But before it
met, Ker made his escape out of prison, and,

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. II. R

# Bothwell surprises the King.

on pretence that legal evidence of their guit
could not be produced, nothing was conclude!
against them. The King himself wns nniverfal!,
fufpe&ed of having contrived this artifice, on
purpol'e to elude the requefis of the Queen of

ngland , and to disappoint the wishes of lis
owvn peoplc. And therefore, in order to (;tiiti
the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly againlf his
condust-, he gave way to tile passing of an ai,
which ordained those who obflinately contemn-
ed the censures of the Church to be declared
outlaws. ")

Bothwell surprises the King.

While the terror excited by the Popish con-

fpiracy poflelffed the nation, the court had been
divided by two rival factions, which contended
for the chief diretaion of affairs. At the head
of one, was the Chancellor, in whom the King
reposed entire confidence. For that very reason,
perhaps, he had fallen early under the Queen's
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of
Athol, Lord Ochiltree , and all the name of
Stewart espoused her quarrel, and widened
the breach. And James, fond no less of do-
mefick tranquillity, than of publick peace,
advised his favourite to retire, for some time, in
hopes that the Queen's resentment would l'ub-
fide. But as he stood in need, in the present

") Cald, iv, 343, Sl'ot['. 393. Parl. I., Jac . V[. c. 164-

junaure, of the assistance of an able Mlinilter,
lie had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him from recovering iis former power,
the Stewarts had recourse to an expedient no
less illegal than desperate. Having combined
with Bothwell, who was of the fame furnanie,
they brought him back secretly into Scotland;
(July 24.) and seizing tle gates of the palace,
introduced him into the royal apartment with
a numerous train of armed followers. James,
though deserted by all his courtiers, and inca-
pable of rcfiftance, discovered nmore indignation
than fear, and reproaching them for their
treachery, called on the Earl to lliiih his trea-
sons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and inplored
pardon. The 'Iing was not in a condition to
refuse his demands. And a few days after he
ligned a capituixtion with this successful traitor,
to whom he was really a prisoner, whliereby he
bound himself to grant him a remililon for all
pait offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time to dif-
miss the Chancellor, thle maser of Gla.niis, Lord
Home, and Sir George Home, from his coun-
cils and presence. Bothwell, on his part, con-
sented to remove from court, though lie left
there as many of his aflbciatc:; as he thought
fulficicnt to prevent the return of the adverse
faftion.

R a

# He recovers his liberty. (Sept. 7.)

# Suspected of favouring the Popish Lords.

Hle recovers Iris liberty. (Sept. 7.)

But it was now no easy matter to keep the

King under tle fame kind of bondage, to which
he had been often fubjead during his minority.
He discovered so much inmpaltience to shake off
his fetters, that tlofe iwho irnpofed, durfc not
continue, the restraint. Thley permitted himn
to call a Convention of the nobles at Stirlin;g,
and to repair thither himsel'. All Bot\h-eli's
enemies, and all who were desirous of gaining
the King's favour by appearing to be so, obeyed
the fuminons. They pronounced the insult
offered to the King's person and authority to
be high treason , and declared him absolved
from any obligation to observe conditions extort-
ed by force, and which violated so efllnriallv
his royal prerogative. James, however, iiill
prolfered him a pardon, provided he would file
for it as an aft of mercy, and promise to retire
out of the kingdom. These conditions B1othwell
rejeted with disdain , and betaking himself
once more to arms, attempted to surprise the
King; but linding him on his guard fled to the
borders. *)

SufleEled of favouring the Popirli Lords.

The King's ardour against Bothwell, com-

pared wvith his flow and evasive proceediniii
against the Popish Lords, occasioned a general

*) Cald. iv, 3n6. Spott\'. 39;.

# His lenity towards them.

disgust among his finFjeta; and was imputed
either to an exceilv'e attachmelnt to the persons
of those confuirato;-s, or to a secret partiality
towards their opiiliols, both Vlhich gave rife to
no unreasonable fears. The Clergy, as the imme-
diate guardians of thie Protetant Religiol ,
thought themselves bound, in such a junftnre,
to take extraordinary fleps for its preservation.
And the provincial fyn'od of Fife happening to
meet at that time (Sept. 25. ) a motion was
made to excommunicate all concerned in the
late conspiracy, as obliinate and irrecliiinable
Papists, And tliough none of the conspirators
resided within thec blounds oF the fynod, or were
fubje& to its jurifdiitiion fucli was thle zeal of
the members, thati, overlookingt this irrSi>ilarity.
they pronounced againfi theni the sentence of
exconuilunication , to whlich the aaf of last
parliament added ne\v terrors. And left this
should be imputed to a few mena, and accounted
the at: of a small part of the church. deputies
were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrencc.

Itis leniity towards them.

An event happened, a few weeks after,

which increased the people's suspicions of the
King. As he was marching on an expedition
against the borderers, the three Earls coming
fiuddenly into his preSence, (O&t. 17.) oTered
to fitbmit themselves to a legal trial; and James,

vwithout committing them to custody, appointed
a day for that purpose. The conspirators
prepared to appear with a formidable train of
their friends and vassals. But, in the mean
time, the Clergy, together with many Peers
and Barons, assembling at Edinburgh , renion..
lfrated againlt the King's extreme indulgcnce
with great boldness, and demanded of him, ac.
cording to the regular courCe of juflice, to
commit to sure custody, persons charged with
the highell acts of treason, who could not be
brought to a legal trial, until they were ab-
solved from the censures of the Church; and to
call a Convention of estates, to deliberate con-
cerning the method of proceeding against them.
At the fame time they offered to accompany
him in arms to the place of trial, left such audaci-
ous and powerful criminals should overawe
jullice, and dictate to the judges to whom
they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely offended both with the irregularity
of their proceedings, and the presumption of
their demands, found it expedient to put ol'
the day of trial, and to call a Convention of
el} ites, in order to quiet the fears and jealou-
fles ',f the people. By being humoured in
this point, their lfufpicions began gradually to
ab.ate, and the Chancellor managed the Con-
vention 1'o artf',!L!y, that he himlelf, together
vith a fe\ other members, was impowered
(Nov. -6. 1593.) to pronounce a final fen-

tence upon the conspirators. After much de-
liberation, they ordained, that the three Earls,
and their af'ociatcs, should' be exempted from
all fu'tlher inquiry or profecntion, on account of
their correfpol: e:-ec with Sp;ain; tha', before the
lirft day of February, they should either fubmnit
to the Church, and publickly renounce the er-
rors of Popery, or remove out of the kingdom;
that, before the firfl of January, they should
declare which of these alternatives they would
embrace; that they shou!d lind fairety for their
peaceable demeanor for the future; and that if
they failed to signify their choice in due time,
they should lose the benefit of this aft of abo-
lition, and remain expos'ud to ail the pains of
law. :')

By this lenity towards the conspirators,

james incurred Innch reproach , anld gained no
advantage. Devoted to the Popish fuperitition,
fibmiffive to all the di)tates of their priefis,
and buoyed up with hopes and promises of
foreign aid, the three Earls refuSed to accept
of the conditions, and continued their treason-
able correspondence with the court of Spain.
A Convention of estates pronounced them (Jan.
18. 1594. ) to have forfeited the benefit
,of the articles which were ollered; and the
King required them, by proclamation, to fur-
render thernflves to jultice. The presence oF
:) Cald. ir. 330. SpotW. 397.

# A new attempt of Bothwell's.

the English ambassador contributed, perhaps,
to the vigour of these proceedings. Elizabeth,
ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing
his relucance to punish the Popish Lords to a
secret approbation of their designs, had sent to
Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the
danger to which he exposed himself, by this
false moderation; and to require him to exerci'e
that rigour, which their crimes, as well as
the posture of affairs, rendered necessary. And
though the steps now taken by the King silenced
all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, for-
getful of his charaeter as an ambaflador, enter.
ed into private negotiations with such of the
Scottish nobles as disapproved the King's mea-
fares, and held alnoft an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the usual
artifice of malecontents, pretended much soli-
citude for reforming the disorders of the com-
monwealth; and covered his own ambition with
the Cpecious veil of zeal againtl those Counsel-
lors who reltrained the King from pursuing the
avowed enemies of the Prnteftant faith. Zouche
encouraged him, in the name of his Milfrefs,
to take arms against his Sovereign.

A new attempt of Bothweli's.

Meanwhile, the King and the Clergy were

filled with mutual difrru!t of each other. They
were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his
affections leaned too much towards the Popifhl

faótion; he fufpeded them, without good reason,
of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even
of supplying him with moiney for that !)prpote.
Little iriftition , indeed , was wanting to
rouse such a turbulent spirit as l3otlhwell'sz
to any daring enterprise. Fle appeared suddenly
within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of 4o0
liorfe. The pretences, by which he endeavour-
ed to justify this infurrcttion, were extremely
popular, zeal for religion, enmity to Popery,
concern for the King's honour, and for the
liberties of the nation. James was totally
unprovided for his own defence ; he had no
infantry, and was accompanied only with a
few horsemen of Lord Home's train. In tlis
extremity, he implored the aid of the citizens of
Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to
at with zeal, he promised to proceed against
the Popish Lords with the utmost rigour of
law. Animated by their Ministers, they ran
cheerfully to their arms, and advanced, with the
King at their head, again f Bothwell; but he,
niotwithftanding his success in putting to flight
Lord Home, who had rashly charged himwith
a far inferior number of cavalry, retired to
Dalkeith without daring to attack the King. His
followers abandoned him soon after, and dif-
couraged by so many fuccefiive disappointments,
could never afterwards be brought to venture
into the field. He betook himself to his usual
lurking-places in the North of England; but

# Fresh dangers from the Popish Lords.

Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's re.
monllrances, obliged him to quit that retreat.:)

Fre¢h daiigcis fronl> tlic u1olifti Lordcs.

No sooner was the King dclivered frnn

one danger, than le was called to attend to
another. The Popifl Lords, in confcqucnccof
their negotiations with Spain, received, in tlim
spring, (April 3.) a supply of money frmn
Philip. \What bold deligns this might infp'ir.,
it was no easy matter to conjeicure. From
men under the dominion of Ligotry, and whom
indulgence could not reclaim, the most dcflc-
rate aftions were to be dreaded. The afeiiim,'
of the Church immediatcly took the alarm; re..
monftrated against them -tith more bitler:nef
than ever; and unanimously ratified tic sei;-
tence of exconmnunication , proioiuncedl :v the
fynod of Fife. James himfe! f, provoked by tne:'
obstinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his
long forbearance would not only be gencrally
displeasing to his own subje&s, but give rife to
unfavourable suspicions among the English,
exerted himself with unusual vigour. He called
(June . ) a parliament; laid before it all the
circumflances and aggravations of the conspiracy;
and though there were but few members pre-
sent, and several of these conne&ed with the
confiirators by blood or friendlfip, he prc-
"') KiioirH' v,~ * '*"*^ . '; i' . ; . ";''i.

# Battle of Glenlivat.

vailed on them, by his influence and importn-
nity, to prunounce the mofl rigorous fentcnce
the law can inlfift. They were declared to be
guilty of high treason, and lteir ellates and iho-
nours forfeited. At the fame tinme, fratutes;,
more feverc than ever, were enacced against-
the profelfors of the Popish Religion.

B::ttlc orc GClI'livat.

How to put this sentence in execution, was

a matter of great difficulty. Three powerful
Barons, cantoned in a part of the country al-
most inaccessible, surrounded with numerous
vamfals, and supported by aid from a foreign
Prince, were more than an overmatch for a
Scottish Monarch. No intreaty could prevail
on Elizabeth to advance thle money, nectcfary
for defraying the expences of an expedition
against them. To attack them in person, with
his own forces alone, might expose him both
to disgrace and to danger. IIe had recourse to
the only expedient which remained in such :,
situation, for aiding the impotence of Sovereign
authority; he delegated his authority to the
Earl of Argyll and Lord Sorbes, the leaders of
two clans at enmity with the conspirators; and
gave them a commission to invade their lands,
and to seize the castles which belonged to them.
Bothwell, notwithitanding all his high preten-
lions of zeal for the Protestant Religion, having
1nowv entered into a close confederacy w.ith them,

# The Popish Lords driven out of the kingdom.

the danger became every day more urging. Ar-
gyll, solicited by the Ki<ng, and rou'ted by the
Clergy, took the field :t the head of 7Coo nle.
Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat, witi
an army far inferior in number, but coinp )oed
chiefly of gentle-men of the low coulntries,
mounted on horfebnack, and who brouglht along
with them a train of field-pieces. They en.
countered (Oft. 3.) each other with all tlie
fury, which hereditary enmicy and ancient ri-.
valfhip add to undicfiplined courage. But the
Hijghlanders, dilconcerted by the firRf dilfchargc
of the cannon, to which they were little ac-
-customed, and unable to reflii the imprefioni
of cavalry, were fouu put to flight. And Ar-
gyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was
carried by his friends out of the lield, w\tecping
\with indignation at their disgrace , ani callin
on them to stand, and to vindicate the liiionior
of their name. *)

Tle Popifih Iordi, driven out of tlie itn, door

On the first intelligence of this defeat, Ja-

mes, though obliged to pawn his jewels in or-
der to raise money, *) assembled a fnialboldy
of troops, and marched towards the North. 1-1c
was joined by the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys,For-
beses, and other clans at enmity with Huntly

") Ca'd. iv, 4o5.
") Rinli, M .;. ,1 6

# The Roman Catholicks incensed against James.

and Errol, who having loll: several oftheir prin-
cipal followers at Glenlivat, and others refulling
to bear arms against the King in person, were
obliged to retire to the mountains. James waft-
ed their lands; put garrisons in some of their
calles; burnt others; and left the Duke of-
Lennox as his Lieutenant in tliat part of the
ikingdom, with a body of men ftiliicient to re-
strain them from gathering to any head there,
or from infelling the low country. Reduced at
last to extreme distress by the rigour of the sea-
son, and the desertion of their followers, they
obtained the King's permiflion to go beyond seas,
and gave security that they flould neither re-
turn without his licence, nor engage in any
new intrigues agaiift the Protestant Religion,
or the peace of the kingdom. ::)

The Roman Catlolicks inceufeil aint Jamles.

By their exile, tranquillity was reeftablifli-

d in the North of Scotland; and the firrnnefs
and vigour, which James had difplaved in his
last proceedings against them, regained him, in
a great degree, tlie confidence of his Protestant
ifijets. I3nt he funk, in the fame proportion,
and for the fame rea'on, in the efteecm of the
Roman Catholicks. They had asserted his mo-
ther's right to the Crown of England with so
ninch warmth, that they could not, with any

1) Spotrw, 404. C2ld. 373, &C,

decency, reje:t his. And the indulgence, yith
which he alfleed to treat the profelfors ofti,;:
religion, inspired them with such hopes, t):;,
they viewed his accefiion to the throne as nl
undesirable event. But the rigour withl which
the King pursued the conspirators, and the le-
vere statutes againi±t Popery to which he hIad
given his consent, convinced them that tl:fe
hopes were vifiunlary; and they began to iook)
about in quest of some new fucceflor, xvi!ole
riglhts they night oppose to his. The Engli'll
Papists turned their eyes towards the El rl of '
El'ex, xvhofe generous mind, though firnly .i
established in the l:roteftant faith, abhorred the
severities inilited in that age on account ofrce
]igious opinions. Those of tle fame feel:, ho '
were in cxile, formed a bolder fclenle, and one
more suitable to their lituation. They advan'-d
the claim of the Infanta of Spain ; and l'; al'ls
the Jesuit published a book, in whllich, by false
quotations frrm hislory, by fabnlous ,gencalioges,
and absurd arguments, intermingled withl bitter
invetives against the King of Scots, he ende:t-
voured to prove the Infanta's title to the Eng-
lifh Crown to be preferable to his. And Philip,
though involved already in a war both with
France and England, and scarce able to defend
the remains of the Burgundian Provinces ag,:'i!:t
the Dutch commonwealth, easily grasped at this
airy projet. The dread of a Spanish I'lrete.i Cr
to the Crownl, and the opposition whici: ¶ic

# Bothwell forced to fly into Spain.

papills began to form against the King's fuccef-
sion, contributed not a little to remove the
prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare
the way for that event.

Botliw- ell forced to fly into Spain,

Bothmwell, whose name has been so often

mentioned as the diflurber of the King's tran-
quillity and of the peace of the kingdom, was
now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by
the Queen of England, on account of his con-
federacy with the Popish Lords; excommuni-
cated by the Church for the fame reason ;and
deserted, in his difirefs, by his own followers;
he was obliged to fly for safety to France, and
thence to Spain and Italy, where, after re-
nouncing the Protestant faith, he led many years
an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extremely ready to sacrifice thcftrongefl
resentment to the flightcft acknowledgments,
could never be softened by his fiubmil'fon , nor
be induced to lilten to any intercession in his
behalf. *)

This year tile King loft Chancellor Mlait-

land, an able \Alini.ler, on whom he had long
devolved the whole weight of publick affairs.
As James loved him while alive, he wrote, in
.honour of his memory, a copy ofverfes, which,
) Winw. Meni, i, Spotfsv. 4Io.

# A change in the administration.

when compared with the corrpofitions of that
age, ate far from being inelegant. :)

A change in the admiuiifrratiot.

Soon after his death, a considerable change

was made in the adininiiiration. At that time,
the annual charges of government far exceeded
tile King's revenues. The Queen was fond of
ex)enfive amuferents. James himself was a
stranger to caco.t:om. It became neceffary,for
all thece rea'ons, to levy the publick revenues
xwith greater order and rigour, and to husband
them with more care. This important truift was
committed to eight gentlemen of the law, '*)
wv-lio, from their number, were calledO&avians.
Tile powxers vefied in them were ample, and
altioft unlimited. The King bound hinifel
neither to add to their number, not to fnpply
any vacancy that might happen, wvithout tleir
consent: And knowing the facility of his own
temper, agreed that no alienation of his revenue,
no grant of a pension, or orderon the treaflry,
should be held valid, unlclf; it were ratified by
the subscription of live of the conirniffioners;

all

') Spots[ . 411.
*') Alexander Seaton President of the Session, Waltel S'ew-

ait CoGltnelnd.ltr of Blantyre Lotd Privy Seal , tavid
Carnegey, Jolln Lindsay, James Elphiti ;;lto , 'homnl.s Ha-
milton, John Skene Clerk Resister, and l'eter YoUlL Elc-
talofyllar.

.11 their afts and decisions were declared to be
of equal force with the sentence of judges in
civil courts; and in consequence of them, and
vithout any other warrant, any person might
be arrested, or their goods seized. Such ex-
tensive jurifdiAtion, together with the absolute
disposal of the publick money, drew the whole
executive part of the government into their
hands. United among theimfelves, they gra-
dually undermined the reft of the King's Vli-
nifters, and seized on every lucrative or honour-
able office. The ancient servants of the Crown
repined at being obliged to quit their flations to
new men. The favourites and young courtiers
murmured at feeing the King's liberality sinted
by their pre'criptions. And the Clergy exclaim-
ed against some of them as known apostates to
Popery, and fifpested others of secretly favour-
ing it. They retained their pow-er, however,
notwithflanding this general combination againit
them; and they owed it entirely to the order
and ceconomy which they introduced into the
adminifiration of the finances, by which the ne-
ceffary expences of government were more easily
defrayed than in any other period of the King's
reign. *)

'*) Spotfw. 413. 435.
Hill. of Scotl. Vol. II. S

# Violence of the nation against the Popish Lords.

Violence of the niation aga:illlt the 'Popiili Lords.

The rumour of vast preparations whic,:

Philip was said to be carrying on at this timc,
filled bothl England and Scotland with the dread
of a new invasion. James ito;k proper 1neailrle
for the defence of his kingdom. But thei cdid
not satisfy the zeal of the Clergy, wholc !it-
picions of the King's sincerity began to re-ivc;
and as lie had permitted the v'iv'-s of t!e bai
nifhed P'eers to levy the rents of their e.intes,
and to live in their houses, they charged iinm
with rendering the atb of forfeiture inefi'ti-u:l,
by supporting the avowed enemies of the lPro-
teftant faith. The aJfetmbly of the Clitirch
took ( March 2:. ) under consideration the ii.ttc
of the kingdom, and having appointed a day
of publick fafling, they solemnly renewed the
Covenant, by which the nation was bound to
adhere to the Protestant faith, and to defi'ei 1i
against all aA;grelsors. A committee, conlilii;-
of the molt eminent Clergymcn, and of imny!
13arons and gentleimen of diiiincion, waited on
the King, and laid before him a plan for the
iecurity of the kingdom, and the prefervail;
of religion. They urged him to appropriate
the estates of the banished Lords as a fund ;sr
the maintenance of soldiers; to take the ifri&,:i'
precautions for preventing the return of fili:c
turbulent ifbjeC&s into the country; and to pu:hiuc
all who were suspected of being their adheriir-'
'witi the uiullot rigour.

# The King's remissness with regard to them.

Thie King's remifiTnlfs with regard to thiem,

Nothing could be more repugnant to the

King's fchemies, or more dilHgreeable to his in-
clination, than theie propotitions. Averse,
through his nhole life, to any course liwhere
he expelted oppoftion or danger ; and soud of
.ttaining his ends with the clia;rater of mo(le-
ration, and by the arts of policy, he observed
lithl concern rlie prejudices agahinft him w ichi
were growin g among the inai I Catho!icl;s, antd
relolved to make foine atonetneni: for that part
(l' his colltdt(t \vhich Ihnd drav,'n un hiin thilir
iidignlatiorn. Elizabeth was ino\r well advanced
in years; her life had lately been in da:{;;-er
ii any Popish co(-npetiitor fhlould arise to dil'fute
iiis right of fuccef!ion, a flacion so powerful as
:iat of the haniflhed Lords inigliht be extremely
')rm idi:.ble; ai;d any divilion anmlong hIis own
iubjeC-ts nigiht prove fatal at a ji3ndlure which
would req(lire tihcir united and most vigorous
eFnorts. n'[flead, therefore, of the additional
severities which the Aliembly proposed, Janmes
[iad tlioughts of mitigating the puuifhmecnt which
tihey already ftutiered. And as they were fur-
rounded, dur'ing theirrefidence in foreign parts,
by Philip's emifllaries; as refcntne.nt Inight dif-
pose them to liften more aXiourabl'y than ever
to their filggeftionts; as def-air might drive
them to Itill more atrocious. c:tio;ns; herefolv-
ed to recall them, under ccirtain conditions,

S "

# The rash proceedings of the Clergy and people.

into their native country. Encouraged by there
sentiments of the King in their favour, of whliich
they did not want intelligence, and wearied
already of the dependant and anxious life of
exiles, they ventured to return secretly into
Scotland. Soon after, they presented a petition
to the King, begging his permiflion to reside
at their own houses, and offering to give fecu-
rity for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour,
James called a Convention of efiates to delibe-
rate on a matter of such importance, and by their
advice he granted the petition.

'she rafl proceedings of the Clergy and people.

So soon as they were informed of this, tile

members of a committee, appointed by the lali
aflembly, met at Edinburgh, and with all the
precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such re-
solutions as they thought neceflary for the fa-
fety of the kingdom. They wrote circularlet-
ters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they
warned them of the approaching danger; they
exhorted them to stir up their people to the
defence of their jufi rights; they commanded
them to publish, in all their pulpits, the at of
excommunicating the Popish Lords; and en-
joined them to lay all those wllo were fulpelted
of favouring Popery under the fame censure by
a summary sentence, and without obfervingthe
unfal formalities of trial. And as the danger
seemed too preiiing to wait for the flated meetings

of the judicatories of the Church, they made
choice of the most eminent clergymen in dif-
ferent corners of the kingdom, appointed them
to reside confiantly at Edinburgh, and to meet
every day with the Ministers of that city, under
the name of the Standing Council of the Church,
and vested in this body the supreme authority,
by enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Ro-
man form, to talke care that the Church should
receive no detriment.

These proceedings, no less unconifitutional

than unprecedented, were manifest encroach-
ments on the royal prerogative, and bold steps
towards open rebellion. The King's conduEt,
however, justified in some degree fiuch excesses.
His lenity towards the Papills, so repugnant to
the principles of that age; his pardoning the
conspirators, notwithstanding repeated rromifes
to the contrary; the refpet he paid to Lady
Huntly, who was attached to the Romish re-
ligion no less than herhufband; hiscommitting
the care of his daughter, the Princess Eliza-
beth, to Lady Levingfton, who was infe&ed
with the fame superstition; the contempt with
which he talked, on all occasions, both of the
character of Ministers, and of their function;
were circumflances which might have filled
minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with
some suspicions; and might have precipitated
into rash councils those who were far removed
from intemperate zeal. But, however powver-

ful the motives might be which influenced iht
Clergy, or however laudable the end they had
in view, they conduted their measures with
no address, and even with little prudence. Ja-
ines dircovered a firong inclination to avoid a
rupture with the Church, and jealous as he was
of his prerogative, would willingly have made
many conceflions for the fake of peace. By his
command, omen of the Privy Counsellors had an
interview with the more moderate among the
Clergy, and inquired whether Huntly and his
associates might not, upon making proper acknow-
ledgmtients, be again received into the boson of
the Church, and be exempted from anyfurther
punifilment on accoun: of their past apoflacy
and treasons. They replied, that though the
gate of mercy flood always open for those who
repented and returned, yet as there noblemen
had been guilty of idolatry, a crime deserving
death both by the law of God and of man,the
civil magifirate could not legally grant them a
pardon; and even though the Church fhonld
absolve them, it was his duty to inlliftpunifh-
ment upon them. This inflexibility in those
who were reckoned the most compliant ofthe
ordier. filled the King with indignation, which
the itn:)rudence and obRinacy of a private Cler-
gyman heightened into rage.

# Seditious doctrine taught by Black.

# The Clergy esponse his defence.

Sedltious doatrine taught by Black.

Mr. David Black, 'Iinifler at St. Andrew's,

difconriin' in one of his ferinons, according to
cuiionl, concerning rthe slate of the nation, as-
firm;ed tiha t the Ki:, had permnitted the Popish
Lords to retur' l i;!o Scotland, and 1b that
action had difcvc. rcd the treachery ors his own
heart; that all Ki;n-s were theDevil's children;
that Satan lladl nu\ the guidance or the court;
that the Queen of'i lglaun was an atheist; that
the judges were i!il'creants and bribers ; the
nobility godlers and degenerate; the Privy
CotDnlellors cormorants, and men of not religion;
and in his prayer for the Q.ueen, he nsed thcfe
words, we mufl pray for her for fa.hitn- (ake,
but we have no cause, she will never do us
good.

The Clerrgy !llcs'fe lis dlcfelle.

James coimmnnded himl (Nov . .) to be

finmmoned before the Pr'Ivy Council to answ\er
for ftuh seditious expre(lions; and the Clergy,
instead of abandoning himn to the punifhlment
which such a petulant anti criminal attack on
his superiors deserved, were so imlprudent as to
elpoufe his caafe, as if it had been the com-
mon one of the \vlole order. The controversy
concerning the immini-ities of the pulpit, and
the rights of the Clergy to tefftiy again't vices
of every kind, which had been agitated in

1584, was now revived. It was pretended
that, with regard to their sacred fun&tion, Ali-
nifters were subjed to the Church alone; that
it belonged only to their eccleliaftical superiors
to judge of the truth or falsehood of do&rines
delivered in the pulpit; that if, upon any pre.
tence whatever, the King usurped this jurif.
diftion, the Church would, from that moment,
fink under servitude to the civil tnagillratt;
that, instead of reproving vice with that honeli
boldness which had often been of advantage to
individuals, and salutary to the kingaom, the
Clergy would learn to flatter the passions of
the Prince, and to connive at the vices of others;
that the King's eagerness to punish the indif-
cretion of a Protestant Miniffer, while he was
so ready to pardon the crimes of Popish con-
fpirators, called on them to stand on their guard,
and that now was the time to contend for their
privileges, and to prevent any encroachment
on those rights, of which the Church had been
in poffefiion ever since the Reformation. In.
fluenced by these confideratious, the Counciiof
the Church enjoined Black to decline the jurif
di&ion of the Privy Council. And he, proud
of such an opportunity to display his zeal, pre-
sented a paper to that purpose, and with the
utm,)'f firmness refused to plead, or to anfsver
the questions which were put to him. In or-
der to add greater weight to these proceedings,
the Council of the Church transmitted the de-

clinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the
kingdom, and commanded every Mliniiter to
subscribe it in teflimony of his approbation.

James defended his rights with no less vi-

gour than they were attacked. SenCible of the
contempt under which his authority muf: fall,
if the Clergy should be permitted publickly,
and with impunity, to calumniate his llinifters,
and even to ceafure himnelf; and knowing, by
former examples, what unequal reparation for
such offences he might expeEt from the judica-
tories of the Church, he urged on the inquiry
into Black's condu&, and issued a proclamation,
commanding the Members of the Council of the
Church to leave Edinburg l, and to return to
their own parishes. Black, instead of submit-
ting, renewed hisdeclinature; and theCouncil,
in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that
as they met by the authority of the Church,
obedience to it was a duty still more sacred than
that which they owed to the King himfelr. The
Privy Council, notwithstanding Black's refusing-
to plead, proceeded in the trial; and, after a.
solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the
crimes of which he had been accused; but re-
ferred it to the King to appoint what punish-
ment he should susser.

Meanwhile, many endeavours were used

to bring matters to accommodation. Almofl
every day produced some new scheme of re-
concilement; but through the King's fickleness.

# A tumlt in Edinburgh.

the obstinacy of the Clergy, or the intrigues or
the courtiers, .they all proved inefifecual. Both
parties appealed to the people, aid by reci..
procal and exaggerated accusations, endeavour..
ed to render each other odious. Tnfolcnce,fe.
dition, treason, were the crimes with wh'ich
James charged the Clergy ; while they made
the pulpirs resound with complaints of his ex..
ceffive lenity towards Papists, and of the nolefs
excessive rigour with which he oppreteld the
cftablifhed Church. Exasperated by their bold
invectives, he, at last, sentenced Black to re-
tire beyond the river Spey, and to reside there
during his pleafire; and once more comman(]ilig
the members of tle f£ianding Conncil. to depart
from Edinburgh, he required all the Miniltels
in the kingdom to fib'fcribe a bond, obliging
thenfelves to submit, in the fame mannrr s
other futbje&is, to t'le jiliriif:ti:i, of the ci.'
courts in matters of a civil iinatt:'ue

A tinL ilt hi ';;ilin-n'..

This decisive measure excited all the violent

paflions which possess difippointed fations; and
deeds no less violent immediately followed.
These must imputed in part to the artifices of
some courtiers, who expesed to reap advantage
from the calamities of their country, or who
hoped to lessen the authority of the Ohtavians,
by engaging them in hostilities with the church.
On one hand, they informed the King that Gthe

citizens of Edinbirgh were under arms every
night, and had planted a strong guard round the
loures of their ministers. James, in order to
put a stop to this imaginary insult on his govern-
ment, issued a proclamation , conl mandiln g
twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave
the town wvithin fix hours. On the otherhand.
they wrote to the Ml inillers, adviling them to
look to their own farety, as 1-l tntly had been.
secretly admitted to an interview v with the King.
and had been the authlr ot' the C 'vere procla-
mation againfl tile citizens of ],dibnurgh. ::" )
They doubted no more of the truth of this in-
telligence, than the King had done oflthat which
he received, and fell as blindly into the snare.
The letter caine to their hands julfi as one of
their number was going to mount the pulpit.
( Decemb. 17.) They resolved that he fiiould
acquaint the people of their danger: and he
painted it with all the itrong colours which
mnen naturally eniploy in describing, any dread-
ful and infIant calamity. \Vhen the sermon
was over, he deired the nobles and gentlecen
to assemble in the Little Church. The whole

) Tlhotih matters were bildilfariolfly

nsgrarnted Iy perf:ns.

who, wiith ed both parties to piirfLit violrlit iie:it, res; i.i-
ther of tiheie reports w\ere altogether defitute of foiundi.
tion. As their Ministers ;vere fplpofled to be il danger.
some of tile more zealous citizens iiha determiiied to def'eld
them, by force of arms. Birch. lein. ii. 25. lit!y
hadli beeu privately in Edinburgh, wshere lie hlad ani itter-
view, if not with the Kingl, at leaift with flome of is li i-
(if, ers, Bil, i, Ibid. A3o,

# The King in danger.

multitude, terrified at what they had heard,
crowded thither; they promised and vowed tr !
stand by the Church; they drew up a petition
to the King, craving the redress of those grie-
vances, of xhich the Clergy complained, and :
beseeching him to deliver them from all future
apprehenlions of danger, by removing such of
his CounCellors as were known to be etemies
of the Protestant Religion. Two Peers, txvo
Gentlemen, two Burgetfes, and two Mini!ters,
were appointed to present it.

Tiie King in danger.

The King happened to be in the great hall

of the Tolbooth, where the court offeffion was
fitting. The manner in which the petition was
delivered, as well as its contents, offended
him. He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners
insisted with warmth; and a promiscuous mu!-
titude prelling into the room, James retired
abruptly into another apartment, and command-
ed the gates to be flint behind him. The de-
puties returned to the multitude, who were
frill aflemblc-d, and to whom a minifterlladbeen
reading, in their absence, the story of Haman.
When they reported that the King had refused
to liften to their petitions, the Church was filled
in a moment with noise, threatenings, exe-
crations, and all the outrage and confusion of a
popular tumult. Some called for their arnts,
some to bring out the wicked Haman; others

# He leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against the citizens.

cried: The sword of the Lord and of Gideon;
and rushing out with the must furious impetuo-
fity, surrounded the Tolboolh, tlreatenilg the
King himself, and demanding lorne of his Coun-
fellors whom they named, that they might tear
them in pieces. The magiftratcs of the city,-
partly by authority, partly by force, endea-
voured to quell the tumult; the King attempted
to soothe tie malecontents, by proniifing to re-
ceive their petitions, when presented in a re-
gular manner; the Minifiers, fenlible of their
own rashness in kindling such a llame, fecondl-
ed both; and tie rage of the populace, subiid-
ing as suddenly as it had risen, they all difperf-
ed, and the King returned to the palace; happy
in having escaped from an infurreEtion, which,
though the iniatantneous and unconcerted efl'eC
of popular fury, had exposed his life to immi-
nent danger, and was confidered by him as an
Iunpardonable affront to his authority. ';)

lie leaves Edilbilrghl and irno ceeds \vitl I'verity againfl

tilt citiZt ls.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the

malecontents al'eimbled, in order to prepare
their petition. Tile plniflhment of the Popish
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors who
were fufpefted of favouring their persons or
opinions ; the repeal of all the late aets of
') Spotfw.417; 8&c, Cald, v,3;5l, &-c," Birei:. Meml. ii. 235.

council, flbtverrive of the authority of the
Church ; together with an aft approving the
p:roceedings of the Itanding couicil ; were thi
ciief of their deiilandis. iBut the King's in.
dignlation was ltill so high, that the deputies.
cliol'n for this pit'pofle, duirll not venture tl;'.
night to prel'ent renuelis which could not fail
of Ikiindling his rae anew. Bifore ncstmrorlil
,Jalles, wvitlh all his attendants, withdrew ti
.in!itihgov; the felTion , and oilier courts oi
juflice, were required to leave a city where itk
vwas no longer consistent either with iheir safe,
or their dignity, to remain; and the noblniei;
and barons were cotnmanded to return to their
own hloLufes, and not to reaflemble without tle-
I1in 's pernii'lioni. The vigour , with which
the Kilng aci-ed, ifrucli a danip upon the spirits
of his adversaries. The citizens, fenlible how
much1 they would susser by his abflence, aid
Xti;e removal (f tile courts ofjuftice, repnited
already of tieir e;.l)iinr. The -,linilters alone
reAl'ived to mait'tii:-i tile co!niel'. They en-
deavoured to prevent the ni,bl;:s rorm diiperfi;
tney inilamned the people by violent ilveeives
.again!f the King; thley laboured to procure fuib-
scriptions to an afluciation for their mutual de-
fence ancd conscious what lustre and poswer tihe
juin.-ion of some of the greater nobles would
add to their cause, the i\linillers of ldinbur:hl
wrote to Lord 1-hamiiton , tlat the tpeoi i',
moved by the word of God , an, provoked i-y

# The King humbles the power of the Church.

the injuries offered to the Church , had taken
arms; that many of the nobles had determined
to protecl the Protellant R eligion , which owed
its eflahlifihment to the piety and valour ofttheir
ancestors; that they wanted only a leader to
unite them, and to inspire th1em \with igour ;
that his zeal for the good cau fe, no lets than
lis noble birth , entitled iim to that honour:
They conjured him , therefore, not to dif-
appoint their h1opes and \'if:ies, nor to refule
the fuifl'ring Church that aid which file so muci
needed. Lord -Hamilton, in iead of complying
with their delire, carried tle letter direCtly to
the King, whom this nc e inflit irritated to
such a degree, that he colinillinded the magif.-
trates of Edinburgh ifilianrly to seize their lsi-
nifters, as nanifelt i:cceliiaries , and encou-
ragers of rebellion. The agiftrates, in order
to rcain thle King's favour, were preparing to
obey: and the Mliniiiers, who fi\v no other
hope of safety, fled towards Eng`land. :')

The King liutlrlbles the pio\\ cr ol' ti.e C!urch,

Tilis unsuccessful infuLreci.ion , instead of

overturning, ef'i.blilfhed the King's auithority.
Those concerned in it were confounded and
dispersed. And the reft of his fuojects, in order
to avoid filfpicion, or to gain his favour, con-
tended who fliould be molt forward to execute
1) Spatisi. ., C';ki~i, v. i?,6.

# A bridges the privileges of the citizens of Edinburgh.

his vengeance. A Convention -of eflates being
called, (Jan. 3. 1597.) pronounced the late
infurreaion to be high treason; ordained every
Minister to fublcribe a declaration of his sub-
mission to the King's jurifdition, in all matters
civil and criminal; impowered niagiftrates to
commit, instantly, to priion any Alinifter, who,
in his sermons , fhiold utter any indecent re-
fleEtions on the King's conduct; prohibited any
Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet without the
King's licence; commanded that no person should
be eleted a rnagiflrate of Edinburgh, for the
future, without the King's approbation; and
tlat, in the mean time, theprefent magistrates
fiould either discover and inflic condign pu-
nil'hient on the authors of the late tumult, or
the city itfell should be fubjefted to all the pe.
nalties of that treasonable aftion. "-)

Abriclv es thlt pyi ,ilees Iof tlhe citizens of Edliburg;.

Armed with the authority of these decrees,

.lames relolved to crus'h entirely the mutinous
spirit of his subjects. As the Clergy had,
hitherto, derived their chief credit and strength
from the favour and zeal of the citizens of
Edinburgh , his lirll care was to humble them,
Though the rnagiftrates submitted to him in tht
most abjeEt terms; though they vindicated theml

selves
') Cald, v. 14,?

selves , and their fellow-citizens, from the
nmot distant intention of violating his royal
person or authority; though, after the ftrifteft
scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on
them the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had
been discovered; though many of the nobles,
and such of the clergy as lill retained any
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf;
neither acknowledgments, nor intercefions,
were of the least avail. :') The King continued
inexorable , the city was declared (Feb. 8.)
to have forfeited its privileges as a corpo-
ration, and to be liable to all the penalties
of treason. The capital of the kingdom, de-
prived of magiilrates, deserted by its ministers,
abandoned by the courts of justice , and
proscribed by the King, remained in desolation
and despair. The courtiers even treathen-
ed to rare the city to the foundation, and to
erect a pillar where it flood, as an everlasting
monument of the King's vengeance, and of the
guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in compliance
with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour,
and moved by continual solicitations of the
nobles, James absolved ( March. r i.) the ci-
tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fame
time he firipped them of their most important
privileges; they were neither allowed to elect

') Cald. v. 149.

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. IL T
i

# New regulations with regard to the Church.

their own Magistrates, nor their own Ministers;
many new burdens were imposed on them; and
a great fum of money was exaded by way of
peace-offering. *)

Nuc regulations 'vih regard to the Church.

James was, meanwhile, equally afiiduous,

and no less successful , in circunifcribing the
jurifdiaion of the Church. Experience had dilf
covered that to attempt this, by a&s of parlia-
ment, and sentences of privy council , was
both ineffecual and odious. He had recourse
now to an expedient more artful, and better
calculated for obtaining his end. The Eccle-
fiaftical judicatories were conpofed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were ex-
tremely indigent , and unprovided of legal
flipend; the ministers in the neighbourhood .l
Edinburgh , notwithltanding the parity eftlb-
lifhed by the Presbyterian government, had al-
fumed a leading in the Church,. which filled
their brethren with envy ; every numerous body
of men is susceptible of sudden and strong im-
pressions, and liable to be influenced, corrupt-
ed, or overawed. Induced by these confider-
ations, James thought it poiiible to gain tih
Clergy , whom he had in vain attempted to filb-
due. Proper agents were let to work all over
the kingdom; pronmifes, flattery, and thrc.lt

*) Spoit.f. 434. 444.

,were employed; the usurpations of the brethren
near the capital were aggravated; the jealousy
of their power, vhich was growing in the
distant provinces, was augmentted; and two
different General Affenblies were held, in both
-which, notwithstanding the zeal and boldness
wherewith a few leading Clergymen defended
the privileges of the Church , a majority declar-
ed in favour of tlofle meaiures which were
agreeable to the King. Many pracices, which
had continued Ii.nce the Reformation , were
condemned; many points of discipline, which
had hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncon-
troverted, were given up ; the licence, with
which ministers discoursed of political maitters,
was restrained; the freedom with which they
inveighed against particular persons, censured;
sentences of summary excommunication declar-
ed unlawful; the convoking a General Afembly,
without the King's permilffon, prohibited; and
the right of nominating ninifters to the prin -
cipal towns, veiled in the Crown. Thus, the
Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which
it would have been dangerous to invade, and
voluntarily submitted to a yoke more intolerable
than any James would have ventured to impose
by force; while those who con tinned to oppose
iis measures , inflead of their former popular
topick of the King's violent encroachments on
i
a jurifdli&ion which did nut belong to him, were

| Ta

# The Popish Lords pardoned.

obliged to turn their outcries against the cor-
ruptions of their own order. *)

The Popish Lords pardoned,

' By the authority of there assemblies, the
Popish Earls were allowed to make a publick
recantation of their errors; were absolved from
the sentence of excommunication; andreceived
into the boibm of the Church. But, not many
years after, they relapsed into their former
errors, were again reconciled to the church of
Rome , and by their apoftacy justified, in some
degree, the fears and scruples of the Clergy
With regard to their absolution.

The Minitters of Edinburgh owed to the

interceflion of there assemblies the liberty of re-
turning to their charges in the city. But this
liberty was clogged in such a manner as greatly
abridged their power. The city was divided
into diffinft parishes; the number of Miniflers
doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King
could rely were fixed in the new parishes; and
these circumstances, added to the authority of
the late decrees of the Church, contributed to
confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclesiastical
affairs, which James pof'efled during the re-
mainder of his reign.

The King was so intent on new modelling
the Church, that the other tranfations of thi

') Spotwv. 433. Cald, v. v iS. 3so .

# Ecclesiasticks restored to a seat in parliament.

period scarce deserve to be remembered. The
O&Eavians, envied by the other courtiers, and
splitting into faftions among themselves, resign-
ed their commission ; and the administration of
the revenue returning into its former channel,
both the King and the nation were deprived
of the benefit of their regular and frugal oeco-
nomy.

Ecclefiatlicks restored to a sent in parliament.

Towards the end of the year, (Dec. rg.

I597.) a parliament was held in order toreftore
Huntly, and his afrociates, to their estates and
honours, by repealing the a& of forfeiture passed
against them. The authority of this supreme
court was likewise employed to introduce a
farther innovation into the Church; but, con-
formable to the fyfrem which the King had now
adopted, the motion for this purpose took its
rife from the Clergy themselves. As the at of
general annexation, and that establishing the
Presbyterian government, had reduced the few
Bishops , who still survived, to poverty and
contempt; as those who poleffed the Abbeys
and Priories, were mere laymen, and many of
them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ec-
clefiaftical order remained to vote in parliament,
and by means of that, the influence of the
Crown was considerably diminished there, and
a proper balance to the power and number of
the nobles was wanting. But the prejudices

the nation had conceived againftl the namne and
characer of Bishops were so violent, thatJamres
was obliged, with the utinoft care, to avoid
the appearance of a design to revive that order.
He prevailed therefore on the commission ap-
pointed by last Assembly to complain to the par-
liament, that the Church was the only body in
the kingdom destitute of its representatives int
that supreme court, where it so nearly concern-
ed every order to have some, who were bound
to defend its rights; and to crave that a corn..
petent number of the Clergy should be admitted,
according to ancient custom, to a feat there.
In compliance with their request, an aft was
passed, by which those Ministers, on whom the
King should confer the vacant Bifhopricks and
Abbeys, were intitled to a vote in parliament;
and that the Clergy might conceive no jealousy
on any encroachment on their privileges, it
was remitted to the General Assembly, to de-
termine what spiritual jurisdiCtion or authority
in the government of the Church these perfoun
should possess. *)

The King, however, found it no easy mat-

ter to obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesias-
tical judicatories, in which the aft of parlia-
ment met with a fierce opposition. Though the
Clergy perceived how much lustre this new
privilege would relect upon their order; though

*) Spotfw. 450. Parl. slth Jac, Vi, c. =35.

they were not insensible of the great accession
of personal power and dignity, which many of
them would acquire, by being admitted into the
supreme council of the nation, their abhorrence
of episcopacy was extreme; and to that they
sacrificed every consideration of interest or am-
bition. All the King's professions of regard for
the present confitation of the Church did not
convince them of his sincerity; all the devices
that could be invented for refraining and cir-
cumfcribing the jurisdiction of those who were
to be raised to this new honour, did not dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own expe-
rience had taught them, with what infi.uating
progress the hierarchy advances, and though
admitted at first with moderate authority, and
under specious pretences, how\ rapidly it ex-
tends its dominion. ,, Varnish over this scheme,
said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
colours you please; deck the intruder with the
utnmoft art; under all this disguise, I fee the
horns of his mitre. " The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his brethren, and in-
duced them to reject power and honours, with
as much zeal as ever those of their order court-
ed them. Many , however , were allured by
the hopes of preferment; the King himself and
his Ministers employed the fame arts, which
they had tried so successfully last year; and
after long debates, and much opposition, the
General Assembly declared (March. 7. 7598.)

# James endeavours with success to gain a party in England.

that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a
feat in parliament; that it would be highly be.
neficial to the Church, to have its reprefenta.
tives in that supreme court; and that fifty-one
persons, a number nearly equal to that of the
Ecclefiafticks, who were anciently called to
parliament, should be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their
eleetion, together with the powers to be vested
in them, were left undecided for the present,
and furnished matter of future deliberation. ')

James endeavours with success to gain a party in

England.

As the profpe& of succeeding to the Crown

of England drew nearer, (1599. ) James mul-
tiplied precautions in order to render it certain.
As he was allied to many of the Princes of
Germany by his marriage, he sent ambaftadors
extraordinary to their several courts, in order
to explain the juitnefs of his title to theEnglifCi
throne, and to desire their assistance, if any
competitorfhould arise to dispute his undoubted
rights. There Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could
afford him was distant and feeble. At the fame
time , Edward Bruce , abbot of Kinlofs , his
ambassador at the English court, solicited Eli-
zabeth, with the utmost warmth, to recognize

:') Spotfw. 43o. Cald. v. 27S.

his title by some publick deed, and to deliver
her own fubjcas from the calamities which are
occasioned by an uncertain or dilputed fucceli on.
But age had strengthened all the paflions which
had hitherto induced Elizabeth to keep this
great question obscure and undecided; and a
general and evasive anfwve was all that James
could obtain. As no imprerfion could be made
on the Queen, the ambassador was commanded
to found the disposition of her fubjeas , and to
try what progress he could make in gaining
them. Bruce pofleffed all the talents of secrecy,
judgment, and address, requiite for conduiiing
a negotiation no less delicate than important.
A Minister of this character was intitled to the
confidence of the English. Many of the highest
rank unbosomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated aftirances of
their resolution to assert his master's right, in
opposition to every pretender. :) And as several
pamphlets were dispersed, at this time, in Eng-
iand, containing objections to his title, James
employed iome learned men in his kingdom to
answer there cavillers, and to explain the ad-
vantages which would result to both kingdoms by
the union of the Crowns. These books were
eagerly read , and contributed not a little to
reconcile the English to that event. A book pub-
ifhed this year by the King himself. produced an

# Elizabeth accuses him of corresponding with the Pope.

ef(Tect ill more favourable. It was intitfed Ba-
Silicon Doron, and contained precepts concern.
ing the art of government, addrefled to Prince
Henry his son. Not\vithftanding the great al-
terations and refinements in national taste since
that time, we mnft allow this to be no con-
temptible performance, and not to be inferior to
the works of most cotemporary writers, eitherin
purity of style or juntnefs of composition. Even
the vain parade of erudition with which it
abounds, and which now disgusts us, raised the
admiration of that age; and as it was filled
with those general rules which speculative au-
thors deliver for rendering a nation happy, and
of which' James could discourse with great
plaufihility, though often incapable of putting
them in practice, tile English conceived an high
opinion of his abilities, and expected an increase
of national honlour and prosperity , under a
Prince so profoundly skilled in politicks, and
who gave such a specimen both of his wisdom
and of his love to his people. '*)

Elizabeth accures hih of corresponding xitll the Pope.

The Queen of England's sentiments con-

cerning James, were very different from these
of her fubjets. His excessive indulgence to-
wxards the Popish Lords; the facility with which
he pardoned their repeated treasons; his reftor-

") CL1niri. ?pots1v. 457.

ing Beaton, the Popifli Archbishop of Glafgor,
who had fled out of Scotland at the time of the
Reformation, to the poffiflion of the tempora-
lities of that benefice; the appointing him his
Ambaflador at the court of ['rancc; the applause
he bestowed, in the Balilicon Doron, on tliofe
who adhered to the Queen his mother, Eliza-
beth confidered as so many indications of amind
alienated from the Proteflant religion; and sus-
peRted that he would soon revolt from the pro-
feflion of it. These faupicions seemed to be fully
conlirmed, by a discovery which came from.
the Mafrer of Gray, who resided at that time
in Italy, and who, rather than fulTer his in-
triguing spirit to be idle, demenned hinfelf so
far as to aft as a spy for the English court. He
conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a letter,
written by James to Pope Clement VII). in
which the King, after many expreflions of re-
gard for that poiitili, and of gratitude for his
favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the RIoman Catlholicks with indulgence; and, in
order to render the intercourse between the
court of Rome and Scotland more frequent and
familiar, he solicited the Pope to promote
Drummond, Bishop of Vailon, a Scotfnan, to
the dignity of a Cardinal. ::) Elizabeth , who
had received by another channel, ') some im-

" ) Cald. 333.

perfet intelligence of this correspondence, was
filled with just surprise, and immediately dif-
patched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more
fully into the truth of the matter, and to re-
proach James for an aftion so unbecoming a
Protestant Prince. He was no less aftoniflied
at the accusation, and with a confidence, which
nothing but the consciousness of innocence could
inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere ca-
lumny, and the letter itself to be forged by his
enemies, on purpose to bring his sincerity in
Religion to be fufpeted. Elphingfton the Se-
cretary of State denied the matter with equal
solemnity. It came to be known by a very
singular accident, which happened some years
after, that the information which Elizabeth had
received was well founded, though at the fame
time the King's declarations of his own inno-
cence were perfectly confitent with truth. Car-
dinal Bellarmine, in a reply which he published
to a controversial treatise, of which the King
was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had
once entertained of the Roman Catholick re-
ligion, and as a proof of this, quoted his letter
to Clement VIII. It was impossible, any longer,
to believe this to be a fiction; and it was a
matter too delicate to be passed over without
strict inquiry, James immediately examined
Elphingfton, and his confession unravelled the
whole mystery. He acknowledged that he had

shuffled in this letter among otherpapers, which
he laid before the King to be signed, who sus-
pe&ing no such deceit, subscribed it together
with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, how-
ever to this action, but zeal for his Alljefly's
service; and , by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholicks with hopes of indulgence under the
King's government, he imagined that he was
paving the way for his more easy accefflon to
the English throne. The Privy Council of Eng-
land enlertained very different sentiments of
the Secretary's conduet. In their opinion, not
only the King's reputation had been exposed to
reproach, but his life to danger, by this rash
impoflure, they even imputed the gunpowder
treason to the rage and disappointment of the
Papists, upon finding that the hopes which this
letter infpiired were fruitrated. The Secretary
was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried
for high treason. His peers found him guilty,
but, by the Queen's interceflion, he obtained
a pardon. ')

According to the account of other historians,

James himfelt was no stanger to this correspond-
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them,
Elphingfton being intimidated by the threats
of the English council, and deceived by the
artifices of the Earl of Dunbar, concealed some
') Srotrw, 456. c07. Jhnft. 448,

# James at great pains to gain the Roman Catholicks.

circumfitnces in his narrative of this tranfairion,
and fallified others; and at the expence of his
own fame, and with the danger of his life,
endeavoured to draw a veil over this part (f
his master's condurit. :).

J:llnes at reilt I):ill- to gainl tile 1,ulllall Catholiclks.

13ut -whether \-we impute the writing of this

letter to the Secretary's olsicious zeal, or to
the King's command , it is certain, that, about
this time, James was at the utinoft pains to
gain the friendship of the Ronan Catholicl
princes, as a necessary precaution towards
facilitating his acceflion to the English throne.
Lord Home, who was himself a Papist , was
entrufied with a secret cominiffion to the
'lope; *:;*) the Archbishop of Glasgow was an ative
infirnment with those of his own religion. :::;)
The Pope expressed such favourable sentiments
1)oth of the King, and of his right to the
Crowx of England , thatjames thought himfell
bound, some years after, to acknowledge the
obligation in a publick manner. ::*'"-) Sir James
Lindsay made great progrels in gaining the
English Papists to acknowledge his Majeety's

'*) Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. I47.

t*) ¥\.inW'. Mee,. vol. ii. 57.

'') Cald. vol.vi. 147.
' I'I) I.id. vol. v, 604.

# His regulations with regard to the Church.

title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth received
obscure hints from difl'rent quarters. The
more imperfectly flie };new, the more vio-
lently she suspected the King's deligns; and
the natural jealoury of her temper increasing
with age , she ob'erved his conduct with'
greater solicitude than ever.

I-lis re,:;ltliills itl regard to tle Church.

The questions with regard to the election

and power of the representatives of the Church,
were finally decided this year, (March S.I60oo.)
by the General Affcmbly, which met at Montrose.
That place was chofcn as mofl convenient for
the ministers of the north, among whom the
K]ing's influence chiefly lay. And although
great numbers resorted from the northern pro-
vinces, and the King employed his whole in-
tereit, and the authority of his own presence,
to gain a majority, the following regulations
were with diliiculty agreed on. That the
General Afl'embly shall recommend fix persons
to every vacant benefice, which gave a title
to a feat in parliament, out of whom the King
should nominate one; that the person so elected,
after obtaining his feat in parliament, fiall
neither propose, nor content to any thing there,
that may af'c&t the interest of the church,
without fpccial inftrut:ions to that purpose;
that he shall be anfwverable for his conduct to
every General Assembly ; and submit to its
censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy

and excommunication; that he shall discharge
the duties of a Pastor, in a particular congre.
gation; that he shall not usurp any eccleliaftical
jurifdiaion, superior to that of his other bre.
thren; that if the Church inflict on him the cent
sure of deprivation, he shall thereby forfeit hi.
featin Parliament; that he shall annually resign
his commiiffon to the General Aflembly, whicl
may be restored to him, or not, as the As-
fembly , with the King's approbation, shall
judge most expedient for the good of the
Church. *) Nothing could be more repugnant
to the idea of episcopal government, than there
regulations. It was notin consequence of rights
derived from their office, but of powers con-
ferred by a coimiftioin, that the ecclesiastical
persons were to be admitted to a feat in Par-
liament; they were the representatives, not
the superiors of the clergy. Destitute of all fpi-
ritual autlority, even their civil jurifdiEtion was
temporary. James, however, flattered himself
that they would soon be able to shake off these
fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges
which belonged to the episcopal order. The
clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he con-
tended for, and they opposed, the nomination
of these commifiioners, not so much on account
of the powers then vested in them, as of those

to
'* los,.453. 457. Ca21 v0' v 363.

# Gowrie's conspiracy.

to which it was believed they would soon
attain. :::)

Coorie's ccnllpiracyv

During this summer the kingdom enjoyed

an iinufual tranquillity. The clergy, after many
fcruggles, were brought under great fuiljeCrion;
the Popish earls were reflored to their eflates
and honours , y the authority of Parliament,
and with the con feat of the church the reft ot
the nobles were at peace among thernfelves,
and obedient to the royal authority ; when, in
the midii of this security, the !King's life was
exposed to tile uta;ofi dangce:, by a conspiracy
altogether unexpected , and altnoft inexplicable.
The authors of it were John ]uutiven, Earl of
Cowrie, and his brother Alexander, the sons
of that IEarl who was behcaded in the xvea
r,844. I' ature had adorned both these young
nen , efpccially the elder brother, with many
accomnpl1i l'ien ts, to which education had added
its most elegant improvements. Mlore learned,
than is usual among persons of their rank ; more
religious, than is common at their age of life;
generous, brave, popular; their countrymen,
far from thinking them capable of any atrocious
crime, conceived the molt sanguine hopes of
their early virtues, Notwithlfanding all these

:) Spotfw. 454.
HijR. of Scotl. Vol.II, Tl.

noble qualities, foine unknown motive engaged
them in a conspiracy, which, if ve adhere to
the account commonly received, mufR be tranf-
ritted to posterity, as one of the most wicked,
as well as one of the worfc concerted, of which
history makes any mention.

On the fifth of Augufl , as the King, who

resided during the hunting season in his Palace
of Falkland, was going out to his sport early
in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alex-
ander Ruthven , who, with an air of great
importance, told the King, that the evening
before he had met an unknown man, of a
suspicious aspect, walking alone in a by-pathl,
near his brother's house at Perth; and on search-
ing him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled
wvith a vast quantity of foreign gold; that he
had immediately seized both him and his
treasure, and, without communicating the
matter to any person, had kept him confined
and bound in a solitary house; and that he
thought it his duty to impart such a singular
event, firfc of all to his Majesty. James im-
mediately fufpeeted this unknown person to be
a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin,
in order to excite new cotmmotions in the
kingdom; and resolved to inpower the Mla-
giftrates ofPerth to call the person before them,
and inquire into all the circumstances of the
story. Ruthven violently opposed this refo-
lution, and with many arguments urged the

'iing to ride directly to Perth, and to exanine
the matter with his own eyes. Meanwhile
the chace began; and James, notwithflanding
I!is pallion for that amusement, could not help
ruminating on the strangeness of the tale, anj
on Rutliven's imllportunlity. At lait, he called
him, and promiied , when tihe iport was over,
io set out for Perth. The chace, however,
continued long ; and Rnthven, who all the
while kept close by the King, was ii-ll calling
on hni to make haste. At the death of the
buclc he would not allow James to itay till a
frefhl horse was brought him; and observing the
Duke of Lennox and the Earl of MPlar preparing
to accompany the King, he intreated him to
countermand them. This James refused; and
tholugh P uthven's impatience and anxiety, as
well as the apparent perturbation in his whole
behaviour, rail'ed some suspicions in iis mind;
yet his own curiosity, ant Ruthven's folicita-
tions, prevailed on him to set out for Perth.
WVhen within a mile of the town, Rnthven
rode forward to inform his brother of the King's
arrival, though he had already difliatched two
messengers for that purpose. At a little distance
from the town , the Earl, attended by several
of the citizens, met the King, who had only
tqienty persons in his train. No preparations
were nmade for the King's entertainment; the
Elarl appeared pensive and embarrafled, and
was at no pains to atone, by his courtesy or

U2

liofpitality, for the bad iare ,vith iwhich I.e
treated his giufts. When the King's relpaf
was over, his attendants were led to dine in
another roomn, and he being left almost alone,
Rutthven ',viifpc;cd him, that now was thii
timc t:) go to the chiamber- where the unknown
person was kept. J.ames cormmanded himi to
bring S'ir Tholinas irfkiine along with thni;
but, infcead of tlha:, Ruthven ordered hini. ic
to followx: And conduiting the Kingi up a ifair-
cafe, and hCien cthrough fevcral apartmlents, ii;
doors of whvic'i lie locked behind him, led hili,
at lal iiltt a ftnall itady, in \which there iiot,d
a m.an clad in ariiioir, \ithh a i'vord and dagger
by his fiide. The King, \v-ho c:xpe&ed to have
found one dit'ar.ied and bei ndl, f'arted at the
light, and inquired if this was the pcrfoin; btit
'*:ilihvun i'tatchin'ii the dagger ifrom the girle
o' the man in anrmouir, tand holdinig it to tle
King's brea'i : ,, leemernb!Lic, 'uid he, lhowr
,, uillnjtfly m f:tiliie ftif"'er'cd L)b your command;

you arc a iv mly ril'ifener; i';lbTiit to mny dil-
,, por:[il ich'iOU reli :'ince, or utci'y ; or till:;

d,, dagger fI:ill in iinitly avc-eot i

- is blood.

.Iames expoltiluatcd \Vith Rtuthven, increated,
and Flattered himi. The ima wlhomn lie 'ount
in thie lt.dy stood, all the \vxile, trcmblini,
and dil'mayed , \vitilolt courage either to a;id
the King, or to fccond his aggrefior. ?ilvei
protefled, that if tle King raied no outcry,
his life 'fhoiild be faie; and, moved by fo!io-

unknown reason, retired in order to call his
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care
of the King, whom the bound by oath not to
make any noise during his ab'enice.

While theKing was in this d:oii'crius fitna-

tion, This attendants growi:'; .7t!ie',e to know
whither he 'had retirc !, one of G2w'\v!e'.S attcenJ-
ants entered the roolTl i nllily, and rold tileicT
that the Klinh ; h:ld jilt roue aT way towards alk-
land. A1ll of tlhem ruhed out iil;o i!-e firect;
and the Barl , in the t !i.::u iiurcvr called for
their horlses. 3But b'y tilis ti'ne ,is brotlclr had
returned' to the . !ini;', ;:nd vwcarian,, thSat no\r
there was no rem-edy, he behov'cd to die, of-
sered to bind is iindis. 1Tinrn;edl ns .lames
was, lie scorned to submit to th:1: in(ii'nity;
and closing with the afif lia n, a .iere tr Iruggle
ensued. The man in armour flood, as for-
merly, amazed and motionless; and the King
dragginpo Ruitlven toxvwards a xvindowfx , which
during his ab!e'nce he had perfuadied the person
with wholi he was left to open, cried , with
a wild and arfrighted voice, ,, Treason 1
Treason! Help ! 1 am murdered! " His attend-
aints heard, and knew the voice; and saw , at
the window, a hand which grasped the King's
neck with violence. They flew with precipi-
tation to his al!iltance. Lennox and Rar, with
the greater number, ran up the principal stair-
care, where they found all the doors shut,
which they battered with the utmost fury, en-

deavouring to burR thern open. But Sir Johin
Ramsey, entering by a back-flair, whicl led
to the appartment where the King was, found
the door open; and rushing upon Ruthvei,
who was still struggling with the King, firuck
him twice with his dagger, and thruit him
towards the stair - cafe , where Sir Thomas
Erskine and Sir Hugh Herries met, and killed
him; he crying with his last breath, ,, Alas!
I am not to blame for this ation." During
this scuffle, the man who had been concealed
in the study escaped unobserved. Together
with Ramsey, Erskine, and Herries one Wil.
son, a footman, entered the roomn where the
King was, and before they had tiine to shut
the door, Gowrie rifled in with a draswn
sword in each hand, followed by seven of his
attendants well armed, and with a loud voice
threatened theni all with inltant death. They
immediately thruff the King into the little Rtudy,
and shutting the door upon hinm, encounterc;'
the Earl. Notwithstanding the inequality of
numbers, Sir John Ranifey pierced Gowrie
through the heart , and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having
received several wounds, immediately fled.
Three of the King's defenders were likewise
hurt in the conlli&t. A dreadful noise continued
still at the opposite door, where many persons
laboured in vain to force a pafiage; and the
King being affired that they were Lennox,

Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpectedly found safe, with transports of
congratulation; and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants around him, ofrered
solemn thanks to God for fach a wonderful defi-
verance. The danger, however, was not yet
over. The inhabitants of the town, whose
Provost Gowrie was, and by whom he was
extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded
the houre, threatening revenge, with many
insolent and opprobrious speeches against the
King. James endeavoured to pacify the enrag-
ed multitude, by speaking to them from the
window; he admitted their nmagiftrates into
the house ; related to them the whole circum-
stances of the fast; and, their fury subsiding
by degrees , they dispersed. On searching the
Earl's pockets, for papers, that might discover
his designs and accomplices, nothing was found
but a small parchment bag, full of magical
charafters and words of enchantment; and if
we may believe the account of the conspiracy
published by the King, ,, while these were
,, about him, the wound of which he died,
,, bled not; but as soon as they were taken
,, away, the blood gushed out in great abun-
,, dance." After all the dangerous adventures
of this busy day, the King returned in the
evening to Falkland, having committed the

# The motive of the conspirators not easily explained.

dead bodies of the two brothers to the cusody
of the Magiifrates of Perth.

The mnotive of the collrpiratots niiot cafity explained.

Notwithstanding the minute detail wxvhl

the King gave of all the circumft.n3es of this
conspiracy againfe his life, the motives which
induced the two brothers to attempt an adion
so detestable, the end they had in view, and
the accomplices on whose aid they depended,
were altogether unknown. The words of
Ruthven to the King gave some grounds to think
that the desire of revenging their father's death
had instigated them to this attempt. Itit,
whatever injuries their father had funl'ercd, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them
to the King, whol e youth and fubjetion, at
that time, to the violence of a faafion, exempt-
ed him from being the objeF of relentment, on
account of actions which were not done by hij
command. James lhnd even endeavouied to
repair the wrongs which the father had fatlferel,
by benefits to his children; and Gowsrie himifel,
sensible of his favour, acknowledged it with
the warmest expreSTions of gratitude. Three
of the Earl's attendants being convicted of affifl-
ing him in this afiault on the Kings servants,
were executed at Perth; but they could give
no light into the motives which had prompted
their master to an action so repugnant to there
acknowledgments. Diligent search was made

# Sprot's discoveries concerning it.

for the person concealed in the fcudy, and fromt
him great -discoveries were expected. But
Andrew Henderson the Earl's steward, who,
upon a promise of pardon, confel'ed liimfelf to
be the man, was as much a ll-ranger to his
master's deiign as the relf; and though placed
in the fludyby Cowrie's comrnand, he did not
even know for what end that feation had been
alligned himi-. The whole tranfacion remained
as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two
brothers, it was concluded, had concerted the'i
scheme without either confident or accomplice,
with unexampled secrecy as well as wicked-
ness.

Sprot's dircoveries concerning it.

An accident, no leTs flrange than the other

circumlTtances of the ifory, and which happened
nine years after, discovered that this opinion,
however plausible, vas ill-founded; and that
the two brothers had not carried on their ma-
chinations all alone. One Sprot, a notary, hav-
ing whispered among several persons that he
knew some fecrcts relating to Gowric's con-
fpiracy, the privy council thought the matter
worthy of their attention, and ordered him to
be seized. His confellion was partly voluntary.
and partly forced from him by torture. Ac-
cording to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a
gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of diffo-
lute morals, was privy to all Gowrie's inten-

tions, and an accomplice in his crimes. Mr,
Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with him, in order to concert the plan of their
operations; the Earl had corresponded with
him to the fame purpose; and one Bour, Lo.
gans confident, was trusted with the secret,
and carried the letters between them. .Both
Logan and Bour were now dead. But Sprot
affirmed that he had read letters written both
by Gowrie and Logan, on that occasion; and,
in confirmation of his testimony, several of
Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to him-
self had prompted Sprot to fleal from among
Bour's papers , were produced. ";) These were
compared, by the privy council, with papers
of Logan's hand-writing, and the resemblance
was manifell. Persons of undoubted credit, and
') Logal's letters were fire in ntinber. One to Bour, another

to Gowrie, an: i three of thlen without anlv direction; nor
could Sprot dilcover tile ian.me of the perron to whoam tliev
v'ere written. .ogan giv:c him tile appellation of Rigi:
H-lonourable. It appears froin this, however, and from
other words in tlie letter, Cromi. 95. that there were fe-
veral p,:rfons privy to the conspiracy. The date of tile
iirft letter is J.uly IGth., Mr. Ruthven had comlnllliratedI
the matter to I.o;:an otily tive days before. Ibid. It appears
from the origianl futlinions of lorfaulture again f Logain'
heirs, that B3or, tliooiuh lie had letters addressed to himi
w itii reg:lrd to ia conrlpiracy equally dangerous and ihlor-
tanit, was so illiterate that he could not read. ,, Jacohlil
Bour, literarumn prorfns ignarus , di i Georgii opera in le-
gendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum missis, vel pertinentiils,
utebatnur." This is altogether 1trange; and jiothing but
tie capricious character of Logan can account for his clihf-
ing such a conlident.

w\ell qualified to judge of the matter, c:;x.ninc
them, and f\vore to their authenticity. Death
tlfelf did not exemlpt Logan from prosecution,
his bones were dug up and tried forl'High Trea-
son, and by a sentence, equally odious and il-
legal, ') his lands were forfeited, and lins

") By tle Romaon Inw, persons pguilty ns the crime of Iligh

Trealoin night be tried even a': r death. This pranlico
wais ai dopted by tile Scots, ¥,it.'llt :ltly linlit:tinol Il';ai.
154",. c. 69. ltit the ntliilmited exercise of this p', vcr
wVa!s (tion conceived to be dnnlrerous , anld the C(ro\ x \\ Was
laid unaer prntper refftiai<ii, ,y

i, t aa A. D. J1 52.

. 'licid

has never been prilled. Tle \ 'ords of it are:, Andl
becnaul; the said lords , (i. e. die Lords of Articles) think
the lfaid ant ( viz. iln 15 ) toc gtevleral, nnd prejtinicial to
the l llarois in the tca lil, :tert';r'e It:atites aud ordainsi
chill the ltid ac i'llall have no p'are il timle coliihi', hbl
againlir the iheirs of themi tima niortriouifly comunit or shall
cominmit lefe mnjeny againlt the King's person, a;:aill, r tile
realill for vteritil: tile anme, nialld :nill e thenll rhat flihll
hpllpei to letrny the liiea's anri l allcn:irly , and beiiin
notourly k 1oit iln their time; alldi tle heits of thele per-
fc;is to be culled and judgerd witiiii five y.-ar arf-er tie
deceale of tile f:id peltfois cilllilirtters of tie slid c.ilnes;
uid tile laid titlie bljil)', y al': , the said heits never to be
pi'tlIt'-ld flri the flnt-. ' Tile fentente againfl- L.o,aal
violated this l(itute illn to partictilarts. SHe \ ws not no-
tolirly kiino\\;i ltit lllig Ihis life to be al aarcoiuplice ill the
criime ft,'r ;licl lie nas tried; and his heir was called ilt
qtueliiont more tliliu live ye:.rs after Iis deahl. It is reimark~-
able that this f.ltute fetenls t iot to have beell ottlellded to
in the parliamenit whiclh l'orfeied Logai . Another rilngilar
circtniitnllce deserves notice. Art i it a inaxini of juiiice
tllat lno perfolln ca be tiled in aIt'eLce; and as lalwy:s ar:
tia s's t.elaciotis of their forIus, and often ablturd i:l tleir
devices fco preft-e:viilg thelm, they contrived that, in auny
procels againll ai dead person, his corplfe or bones Chall be
prefetited at the bar. Examples of tlis occturfrequentlyl inl
tihe Scottiii Isirrory. After the battle of Corrichie , tl:e ead
Iboly of tle I anr of Htmtly was pielfeited in pilrli:lnelet,
b l ti;c Ir
s .lt ICtL of f'rfallttltre \asit protllullce-d ag lil ilitn .

pofferity declared infamous. Sprot was con,-
demned to be han-ed for mn;fprifion of trcal'on.
He adhered to his conifcI'io, to the iaft. alit
having promised , on tlie fcat;-old, to give th,
spectators a fir'n in coniiirnl:ltn of the truth ,i
what he had deefeCd , he thrice clapped I .:,
1hi i.is .aser he ,aa-; thrown aoi tile ladder by
the execuiton'er. ::)

But tho .,u it bi thi.; iine :po.. e.>:i.' . ti r..,ovr.
ed that Gourie rdil. not aci: \'illi(;Lt afio)Ci;tej,

For the fame rzafcn tiei bodies or G\owrie and hiWi Iiryno
were pitrel'rv. e , in orni-r that they Ii'_,iht be i:'c u,:t-

,1;'

parlinrllntll . } _.o[ 1's biies , in conijli.aiI t: .i:.lh ,i,. ;'.i...
vule, were cldu lip. lackeln . Clinl. La , v iook i. 'lit, '.

). e2.
°) ii Ipppears that ArcllhiCilop Spotsvwood was rrt'feiit: nt til

e.xe 'lli,)1i o[ 'i

lriTo , C iotli. 1 1,- . :;id l et

y e

l s.i-p : ; te .il.:

,!Ii,-'' t! o 11,j;i tii i .i it hi'C tV.'.l'S.o ''hti nlal llt'

o ill \ lii

ihl; ' " t;!}, oi l llln ita. tt i-l ill';a-lt , ,,

t'!it lel

a 1

' :i : n;t 1 i L tl'i

ta.utitos thle ilc'isi ':i : 'ri:lt.h:t- \\ai i ct.e lt li ! ¢1 i

C e-ern!, Stiot

hndo nlttiierel :d t lri.ll: iit ,! tI am li eiilclf ol his cr iiierH.

tholillh volrlst:l'i v ;i.i cmiI; a

pe , c;lil' I. ;,rlil prul.eilit .

Tilt ii la d:p [ il'd ,

:
i .. Itc 'eiltd nlU lI, a v1ti'ry si': rioi

a:ld it i P.r(; il .\

;'lll r

nio . llol] i. Ii;ll'. 'x\i l iiL aill, Im r it !:i!:

ll -

dlid 11e fll ;\V> t'lu le t:l', 1101 Cotllil ;t:17 . . .hi',' TIlll tl ill.clli1

(iO\viiC \\ir> \-'CI ;il- ll til: tltaill O I('cre:Iy

, \\., )-tii

hi:ve cttlliltllicated tlie mII)ttel tO 'iCl ; a illat as s lzLrtill
'';hS io\il to bt. p. :o.P. S1f\t,\l:ood couldh not be h1o1-
racne t of tihe ,

lk:n i aty v

ith \'iicil l o I,); ii had beell tr ii,

ipred ce the proo' pirotdue.it Lo.

t ; a;llenlcicy hi

s lete!:ri-

Ile hilllfelf wxas iirll>a

hly

|l ' ; sl'

t l p.n ialnei att cthe tri. .

IThle larl of Dutiinar, oi' \u'hoin h t in; 'ty!\ l')tt[a s

h Lwlh .ic1

high:tl rcfle.'t , was th'. perl'n \w\io di;'c.;id the prncu:'.

at:tilfl] Logaill. Suchl a pltrili:t(to'y aeit;,:,

ttatioII agailnI t ilt'

truth of Sprot's evidence, notwiciilkaiil, all tihol'rc circil
Ilances, is furpillng.' Sir Tihomas; Hamilton, tlie King's advlo-
cate at tilat time andil afterwards Earl of ltadin:,;tv, r-e-
presents the proof produced at Logait'., trial as extrcnliiy
convinciillt; and ill ll origilal Iec0:r Lo hlis to the F;i:q4

little additional! light is throxvn, by this disco-
very, on the motives and intention of his con-
tiLt,. It appears ainoit iiicrcdible that t.wo
young men of such tiiiinruiisl@hed virtue, ihould
revolt all at once, from their duty, and attempt
a crime so atrocious, as the murder of their
Sovereign. it appears fiill m1ore i;mprobable,
that tiey frouild h:le concerted theic under-
t: kinig vi;h i; litdte forecilight and prudeince. If
liey initended tol t th: cie. fhlould ihave remiailn-
cd coincealtC. tlhe' could not i!iave chosen ainore
:hi;nropel't' ) CLe icr e xecuLting IL thall their ovw'i
ho ic. If thI y ini:ei ded tliat Ilendrerfon Ihtihoil
have lUietk thel bl!ov , they' could not h;ave
;itchiied on at ina -.;r CCai'. ittC of the courage
t::t!.;L :ili liL i;is d2 .i L

hC h a a.iiun ;l nor

cciu;:,l ti'l! ' e'' pc,2. that

'. ,

i i.ili[I 1ecd and un-

;'.cquainted wit'h tLeiC' ;tirsch, vo CLi venitLrie
(in '',,c'h ;', d :i'.ic.vte aci:,. I; Lnl-i: veil meant

to( iit x''

il .'ltllh Iri on hi;- d
ii .l' why did

it '- :. i. ;ti r [ltu.?, (j:it i':, .! . r,:ui:' :.i'.l.) fti er nine l .
:i;xt i .i. th.. i, x

t icil tc.. -iii

h iad Ibeen co di:i:i-,d
lic t!' ::: '(Jt-:;i (1i :

,, ' .'il-l th' prob:iniiu (, ti.

f 'til..l':r'i' \';ils refeirld

to tslt: Iui-' :. ,1i 1' .\ ltt ltS V OLt.-;, :;llc. ' i' .:.:l'i tl!:..')rltlly , ;al

ill t<;!t:* t'it::,

t;l i i'lid

fillt;ll:l'l; t) i:' i': stl y.'l p tiioed,

.c tt iUt'y L i.t .

t- i ''.. t.i.c lalis ;'i n o, ill- hclrt.; , i, t ie llit

!'' '.1t; 111't ;".:lily ',;*1-i' n . i 1 i

t* \c. s o:l t orn I' d ri'cde O'

'ilC ).:!l !:.q i . cL.,i'.

co ;,,:' , i; l ith t th :tc .': ;"eue / Lhevy do -l:til

i 1. t tlci r

il ;trv t. tiL le oilfc '.il IliD\'V fui iti-ulij'i.;i, tIhat

they bt:i)iov ,i to c.i. ! t ihem traitoris h'io flliollld any ioli-
et rcl'fui'e to .i clat ta ile al''ureid reoluiton of the 'i-itl of
titat cul,-fit, ;:

he withdraw the dagger, after it was pointed
at his breast? HI-ow could he leave the KiJg,
after such a plain declaration of his intention
\Vas it not prepofrerous to commit him to the
keeping of such a timid and s;;ic allociate, as
HFenderfon ? For what purpose did he wafre
time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man,
whom he might easily have dispatched with Ii,
fwvord? Had Providence permitted them to em-
brue their hands in the blood ofthllirSovercig;i,
what advantage could have accrued to them bv
his death ? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his
children ? :') Inevitable and inflant vengeance,
together with perpetual infamy, were the only
consequences they could expeict to follow such
a crime.

") It has been asserted , that, ii cl(,IIt'.lqucnc O' the I i',iA's

deatli, rie E.rl or Goo\rie 1:i;litt htavN lretellried t,, tle
Crowel o' ci' l;ind, las thie son of Dorotheal Stex' irt d:uilghrtt
of Lorid illi hvte Iy Ml.r,-arc u.s E t;lni:ld, \ilt), If t

r I;'

livorce tfroli tile Ea.rl o .-\A;l ItS, tool. i tiht i nohb!te:,l fr
iher third tinft:ttid. l ill' c;tr Hifi. (,' hi:s ow 'n Tin:', 1 l
this allertilon is ill-fol nldtd. it lpple:ar \ , fla tjl ini(1, iltC
evidence, th.it l.ord Mletlvei iiad oInly tone child lty 1, ii-et
M!l:garet, \'hl i dlied ill its illfaincy, and .i I)o toh-a 1

iitlt\v'eln X:s ilot tlie tiaulig ter ti ) QLueetC l'i:;.t;arLt, 1

i' ;

aliet Ste:x\'r:t, Loldi d letlivei's fecoild Xvil, l i di ,!: -''
of John arl of Athiol. Crail'. Peer. 329l. Anld t oi'..
CGowiric iad iailly been defiended from the biloto i,i.a
of Eqih:tlind, the

; atthat

t ime lhad a fonl and :tl ittetidr:

:a11i belides tienil, LIady AinbtLlla St:e\wart, dliui:tcr
Charles IEarl of LCeunox, had a prIc eral.,i tille tu ti : Crolvi
of Eiala':IId.

On the other hand, it is impossible to be-

lieve that the King had formed any design againfl
the life of the two brothers. They had not in-
curred his indignation, by any crime; and were,
in no degree, the objec&s of his jealousy or
hatred; ';:) nor was he of a fipirii to fan-
guinary, or so noted for rafil and despera;te va-
lour, as to have attempted to murder them in
their own Ihoutfe, where they were surrounded
with many domefricks, he only with a flelder

:) Sir Ilenry Neville, in a letter to Sir 1lalpih W'inwood, im-

putes the death of the t\ o brothers to 'a canfe ilot Illell-
tioned by any o' cur hi!iorir.ns. ,, Out of Scotland wce
hear tliat tilire is no ciod lnjrctnllelr, but rather anlopca
diflidence be'-x xt tile si.l: anlld his ' i'c, anld l!any are
of opinion ctht itic dcil covc:y of sorti:e alT'iin l)bet. een
her iiil t:;e Earl orl Go\; ie's brother (w ho was killed with
himl) was the truilt: c:,il:e iuan motive of that tr;tlgey. *
\Vinw,. 'l,-i. vol. i, 27-i. hcthler the follo\i il;", pal-
f..ges ill 'ii;n iill;hi'.' let r be any col:lirillitioll of thsit ifr-
1iin.ii, is 1'ibrtit.tcl to tile re.:ad r. I li;,:. lette: Sept. ^2.
j 6(2, he rlellti.:ils the retiurti of Go) ric's l \:- .,mI: r.i-
brothiic into Scotlaiid, nid addt : ,,T he colnling in oftlieie
two, and the Qu.leen nr' Scots dealing 'ithl theln . and
f'nldiing a nway and t ariil'hiiig Mlrs. Beatrix ( their lifter)
Viii li:cli iulis)r:iatiOll as Sir 'I'Th.liils ls iine has !i\'eo,
hatih bred gre;at 1'ifpricion ill t!h luing of Scots that t:iey
COlIn Inlt ill blit IpllOll florti dantig)rou is plot. " Itl allotl:C
letter, l!iluatry I. 1603. ,, lhe day of \ii:ig Illy lali',
Mlrs. licatrix Rl|tiIVll Wils brouilciit by the Laid y l'aifley,
alnd Mrs. of A!Il;l'S, ls one o f

ll their L I OlcO

ilt i llc ilito tihe

court ill tle ev:lniig, and i.lo\ d ill a chalimber prepared
for her by thle Qiueen's dire&ion, wlhere the Queen had
llli1ch timei and conferenca e wiithl iir. Of this the ; inrg go
notice, alnd flie\waed his dislike thereof to the Queell,
gently reproving her for it, and cerxanriliing quietly of the
Queen's fervanlts of tie famle , and uo other matters there-
unto belonging, with fulh discretion aditl secrecy as re-
quires such a mari:r,

# A conjecture concerning the intention of the conspirators.

and unarmed train; where they could call to
their assistance the inhabitants of a city, at tlie
devotion of their fanily, while he was at a
difrance from all aid; and least of all would he
liave chosen for his af`ociates, in such an en-
terprife, the Earl of Mllar, and the Duke of
Lennox, the former connected in close friend-
ship with the house of Cowrie, and the latter
married to one of the Earl's fillers.

A conjeaure concernilng the inteution of the conflrirators.

Whichsoever of these opposite fyfiems nve

embrace; whether we impute the intention of
murder to Go\vrie, or to the King; infiuperable
difliculties ariie, ani wve are involved in dnrk-
ness, iyllery, and contradia(icns. Perhaps
the fourcc of the whlole coiilpiracv olught to be
searched for deeper, and by deriving i fromn a
more remote cause, we may difcovcr it to b,:
less criminal..

To keep the King of Scots in coniliial de-

pendance, was one great objet of Ellz'beth's
policy. In order to this, she fometiri-l boti;-
ed him; and fometirnes bribed his lMiniiiers and
favourites; and when she failed of attaniing hcr
end by these means, file encouraged the Clergy
to render any administration she diflruifed un-
popular, by decrying it, or frirred up fonie
faction of the nobles to oppose, and to overturl
it. They, unacquainted with thle arts of u:i-
derntiuing a l'liniftry by intrigues, had recou
.

t ;

to the ruder pratice of rendering themselves
malrers of the King's person, that they might
thereby obtain the diretions of his councils.
Thole nobles, who seized the King at the Raid
of Ruthven, were inflitated, and supported by
her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, es-
joyed her protetilon, and found a retreat in her
dominions. The connexions which James hrad
been forming of late with the Roman Catholick
princes. his secret negotiations in England with
her subjects, and the maxims by which he go-
verned his own kingdom, all contributed to ex-
cite her jeiloufy. She dreaded some great re-
volution in Scotland to be approaching, and ic
was her interest to prevent it. The Earl of
Gowrie was one of the mrno powerful of the
Scottifll nobles, and descended from ancefiors
warmly attached to the English interest. He
had adopted the fame lyflein, and believed the
welfare of his country to be inseparably con-
neEted with tile fubfilteuce of the alliance
between the two kingdoms. During his ref-
dence at Paris, he had contracted an intimate
friendship with Sir Henry Neville the Queen's
ambafiador there, and was recommended by him
to his court, as a person of whom great use
might be made. *) Elizabeth received him,' as
he pal'ed through England, with difRinguifhed

H) \Yinf . i. 156.

iftL. ofScotl. Vol. I. X

marks of refpea and favour. From all theFr
circumstances, a suspicion may arise, that tlhe
plan of the conspiracy againit the King was
formed at that time, in concertwith her. Such
a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scot-
land, it appears not to be deifitute of founda-
tion. An English ship was observed hovering,
for some time, in the mouth of the firth of
lforth. The Earl's two younger brothers fled
into England, after the ill success of the con-
ipiracy, and were protected by Ellizabeth. And
James himrfelf, though he prudently concealed
it, took great umbrage at her behaviour. None,
however, of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland
tended to hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his
schemes. His life was the surest safe-guard of
her own, and restrained the Popish pretenders
to her Crown, and their abettors, from def-
yerate attempts, to which their impatience and
bigotry might, otherwise, have urged them on.
To have encouraged Gowrie tu murder his So-
vereigr , would, on her part, have been an as
of the utmost imprudence. Nor does this seem
to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, firtr of all, endeavoured to decoy
the King to Perth, without any attendants.
'When these proved more numerous than was e:i-
pe&cd, the Earl employed a itratagem in order
to separate them from the King, by pretending

that he had rode away towards Falkland, and
by calling hastily for their horses, that they
inigiht follow him. Butn fltting Janmes u, mean-
vwhile, in a distant corner of the house, and by
attenmpting to bind his ihands, theirdefign seems
to .have been rather to seize, than to alilalintate
liin. And though Gowvrie had not colleted
his followecr., so as to have been able to detain
him long, a prilbner, in that part of the king-
dom, by open force, he mnight Ioon have been
conveyed aboard the lnglifih fiip, which wait-
ed perhaps to receive him, and hle might have
beeii landed at Falt-Caftle, a lhoufe of Logan's,
in which , according to many obscure hints in
his letters, some rendezvous of theconfpirators
was to be held. Amidfi tle surprise and terror,
into which the King mull have been thrown by
the violence ofY'ered to him. it was extremely
natural for him to conclude that his life wvas
oughrt. It was the interelf of all his folloxers
to confirm himn in this belief, and to magnify
is danger, in order to add to the importance
aud merit of their own services. And thus his
fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity
and wonder which the contemplation of any
great and tragical event, when not fully uuder-
itood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole
tranfaftion. On the other hand, the extrava-
gance and improbability of the circumffances,
which were added, detrafred from the credit of
those which really happened; and even fnriiifh-

X a

# Many disbelieve the account published by the King.

ed pretences for calling in question the truth of
the whole conspiracy.

lMany difbelve tle account pubil'lied by the King.

The account of what hnd happened atPerth

reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
council cormmanded the Ministers of that city in-
flantly to afemnble their people; and after re-
iating to them the circumstances of the confpi-
racy formed against the King's life, to return
publick thanks to God, for the protection which
he had so visibly afforded him. But as the sirs
accounts tranfiitted to Edinburgh, written in
a hurry, and while the circumrtances of the
conspiracy were but imperfe&.ly known, and the
passions which it excited strongly felt, werein-
diftin&, exaggerated, and contradictory, the
Alinifters laid hold of this; and though they of-
sered to give publick thanks to God for the
King's safety, they refused to enter into any
detail of particulars, or to utter from the chair
of truth, what appeared to be fiill dubious and
uncertain.

A few days after, the King returned to

Fidinburgh; and though Galloway, the Minister
of his own Chapel, made an harangue to the
people at the publick cross, in which he recited
all the circumstances of the conspiracy; though
james himself, in their hearing, confirmed his
account; though he commanded a narrative of
the whole tranfaition to be publiflhed ; the Mi-

nifters of that city, as well as many of their
brethren, flill continued incredulous and un-
convinced. Their high efleem ofGowrie, their
jealousy of every part of the King's condu&t,
added to some false and many improbable cir-
cumftances in the narrative, not only led theml
to fufpeE the whole, but gave their sus'picions
an air of credibility. But at length, the King-,
partly by arguments, partly by threats, pre-
vailed on all of them , except MIr. Robert
Bruce, to own that they were convinced of
the truth of the conspiracy. lie could be
brought no further than to declare, that
he reverenced the KIing's account of the
tranfaftion, but could not fay that he hinifelf
was persuaded of the truth of it. The scruples
or obstinacy of a tingle man would have been.
little regarded, but as the fame spirit of incre-
dulity began to spread among the people, the
example of one, in so high reputation for inte-
grity and abilities, was extremely dangerous.
The King was lt the utmost pains to convince
and to gain Bruce, but finding it impossible to
remove his doubts,, he deprived him of his be-
nefice, and after repeated delays, and many at-
tempts towards a reconcilement, baniflhed him
the kingdom. *)
*) Spotiw. 4(ói. , c. Cald. v. 3q9. &'.*

# Proceedings of parliament against the conspirators.

Proceedings of parliamenit aiainllt tie conlliirators.

The proceedings of parliament .-vere noi

retarded by any tfrnples of this fort. The
dead bodies of the two brothers were produced
there, according to law; an indiftment for
High Treason was preferred againlt therm;
writnefles were examined; and, by an unani-
mous fentenece, their eflntes and honours were
forfeited; the punil'lnnent due to Traitors was
inflic&ed on their dead bodies; and, as if the
punishment hitherto in use did not express sus-
ficient deteflation of their crimes, the par-
liament enaCied that the surname of Ruthvcn
fhuld be abolished; and in order to preserve
the niemory of tlle King's miraculous escape,
and to declare the sense which the nation had
of the divine goodness, to all future ages, ap-
pointed the fifth of August to be observed,
annually, as a day of publick thanksgiving. :::)

A) A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, tho
ling publifled a difcouirfe of their vile and in.latlial
colfpiracy against his life. In the year 173, rGeorge
Earl of Cromertie publifihed an " Hilloric.:l accotinit ns the
,, conspiracy ty the Earl of Gowiie, anid R<hbert rIa,'n
,, of Refalrig , agnilft Kingi Jaens Vl." 11e s'eems 1loe
to have seen the accoulnt whicli the Kili'I hilifIelf hlad
given of that matter and borrows the \liole Iiloroical
part from Spotfivool , .and other iuthols: but he has
extrased from the publick records the depolitions or, the
'witiienles produiced by the ling's Council, in irldei t(o
niake good the charge againir the two brothers, ;lid
Logan their afiociate. From these two treatifrs or
knoowledge of all the miaterial circirlmtarnces rs tile
conspiracy is derived. The evidence whichl they co!it:lln,

# Essex's conspiracy against Elizabeth.

Essex's conspiracy againfi Elizabetll,

Though CGnwric's conf'pirncy occasioned a
fSdden and a great alarm , it was followed by

one would ctpc.il to be nuthentick and derilivc. * An
accounit of a fla , flill reccnt , pullifhedi ly roy'al
autlloity , and the origtinal dospoliliios of' peifon:;
examined ill piefence of tlhe highelt culirtn ll lie nation,
ougiht to collvey a degree of evidlnce fC-ldonll AL'iill;d

Ii historical rcli:ti'ills , and Lt exclude tall remaiiliig

tloubt and iiiieelrt:intlr. ]lltt as every tiihl! \.'ili' le^ar.l
to this tranlfaaion is dark :ad laprblen cal , the linll,'-
accotlnt alld tile dcpoiitionls of til: t Oiticli'cs nllO (;:d/
vary, btlt cct lrndift each oither in I' :lli. cirtiiiIll.ilcCL,
tlhat: ntlcih ronIl is 1lUl left for teficiatiilli and lifliorical
Icepticilti. The r-tchinoly of HII

l inil ii the fill '

and lofit illeicant, it lin inl li i.'al partii.;'irs thc Iine ,'-
account land Ilis iar' contradiat('r. [. Acctsldi' 1i1 i. t
Kili,'s acconiit , i hile Il. Pliii:vit \vas lo ldti:, thl:
I das! er at hi.s breall ' ,, th l e

[ i-il.w iln rt lltid) 1fl oi

quaking ind trDeil H;'," Dife. r .;:~ ll.: I(ndt ;)tl fl. s
that lie

h li ltiill ;'\ rI- l l d thl d:l' r out of lr, util

. 'tl.

Ilands. l )il'c. 53. Cr( . 511, l Inl ' ;

rc li!:x ;' tifc bol alc

to his i e ', tcil t il e hald t;;.t *i \ tv ;ctc i l.'Il tlil lI ii.;
fronl t heilg lia ta D c.

I)ilr . 5.t Cr.

( : 1.

,ll. 11. 1l I :

retiurned, and tt il that lleruggle bbtv.eni l tht ile hi,;
anlid hiltl lie openlled it. Disc. S3, 54. Croil. 51, 52.
111. Its we may bclieve the \i(:ng, the fellow inll te
Iliudy fitood , dtrilng the ftrulgglc belnil til; King's back,
ilia.tive anid trenilbling all tile timle. Dilc. 27. Blti
llenlderfon afi tils ,t that lie ftlltcheid ax\lt , tie Clareter
with whlicih ir. inltliveni attenmpted ti hinid the Kinig;
thit lie pulled bick luthven's hand ,'i lhile lie was
elldieavilltril:g to ftip the King's illotlrh , aIl:i thaet t-
opeined the xi niliow. Dilfc. 54. Ci't:u. 52. I. IV y the
King's accointt , ir. -lutlivel left Ililn in the iudy , aind
'ent away in tider to Ineet t\l ti r lis bloliite , alld tile
Earl came iiup the li.iirs for the fultit: 3irip:)!:.

Ditc. 23.
ilertlrfon depofCes thiat when Mlr. tirtt',en left ti: lkis:;,

no consequences of importance; and having
been concerted by the two brothers, either
vwithout any aflociates, or with such as were
unknown, and chose to remain so, the danger

, he believes that he did not pars from the door."
Croni. 5. It is apparent both froin the lfiuation f the

ioitte , and from l orhr circriniftalces , that rthele Corelli

not poflibly have been anyv interview berv'eril tihe br,)thltei
at tl is tiile. Ditc. 23"

Henlerfoln \\ as twice examined, fril at Falkland

befoi the p rivy council in Auguill, anrll . at

i lililllurt h

before the pzarlinillei in Novelmber. N t to lleirioll
fomle lIller variatin,ls betw eeln thlee depolitiolis , e fliall
point out tv.,o hich tre remarkable. In his I;l;
deposition M.r. Helr terfon relates the moll nltate:i
circiillninYace of the whiule in tihere words: , Mr. liltli ven
,, pulled out the deprlocnt's dlgger , and held tlie f;lle
,, to his Maljeiy's breall, fayiltg: renlenilier you "tf il
, father's inurler; you fliall ilow die for it, and lhliltii4'
,, to his HIighnielfs's ihart, .itb the dagger, tie delpi..riii
,, threw tle fame oilt of Mr. Ruthven's hlands, alid 1'\ole
,, ttiat as God flial judge his foul , tlht if Mr. Rtlitven
,, had rerained the dapgger in Iis hand, the space a 111an
,, may go fix Ila tps , lie ouiihl Ihave ltriclen the King tl
,, tie hilts uitli it." ilfc. .

5. But at his second

exalminlaticll lie varied 1'r1oll this in t\ o mlaterial irctinl-
stances. Firlt, the words which he at tlat time put in
Mr. Ruthven's month \while lhe held tlie dagger at the
Kiug's breait are: '" ir, you rlult be my prisoner;
,, renmember on miy father's deathi." Secondly, vlien he
threatened hinm \itrl death , it Ywas oiil to deter hin
from makinlG ally noise: " 1old your tongue, or by
Christ you fliall die." ` . In his fiil delofitio , tlie
'words of Mr. Rutliven , ,lleu hle leturnedr to the chamber
where he had left the Hing, are: " Tirere is no
,, reniedy, by God you mist die. " Iut ill his fecondl
deporitionl: ,, By God there is no remedy, and ol'ered
,, to bind his Majefy's hands. " Crom, 51. The umaterial
'Words ,,you must die" are omitted. The first deepofition
seems plainly to intimate that it was Rutlivenl's intention

was over, as soon as difcovcred. But not long
after, a conspiracy broke out in England againit
Elizabeth, which , though the iirlc danger was
instantly dispelled, produced tragical efTe]ts,
that rendered de close of that Queen's reign
dismal and unhappy. As James was deeply
interefred in that event, it merits our parti-
cular notice.

The court of England was, at this time,

divided between two powerful faafions, which
contended for the fipreme direction of affairs.
The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux,
Earl of Effex ; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of

to murder the King. The second would lend us to
conclude that lie had no other design thanl to detain hiin
as a irisoller.

There are likewise some remarkable contradiflions il

he tefilionies of the other witnell'es. J. II the difcoiirlt
pitbliflied by autllority , it is i!liinuated that tile tuilli t of
rhe itiliabitants wais raised a!!i;ilfit the Iling, and that it
requiired fume art to pncify tirlihc. Dilc. 32. The LDuke
,.tf l.etmx conlfirnis this in his dcpofitiot. Croln. 44.
.An Aft of privy -co iicil fiuinnoniing the flangifr.tes of
l'erili to anf soer for tiat riot its Iill extant. And ye.c
Andire- Roy, one of the baillies of the tnwi:n , dcpofe,
that lie hlillelf rnifed the people, and that they tc ok
aiu's in order to afiit the Kitlg. Cromn. 6b. 2. llendlerfon
deposes ,thlt he ga.ve anl evasive anlifwer to Mr. John
i\loncrief, \. lh enquiired wher e lie had been that morn-
Ing, becanfe the E1arl Ihad cominanided hiin not to let any
inan know that lie ihad been at Falkland, i'c. 5il. 4 l on-
crier deposes to the fame piirpofe. Croin. 64. And yet
George Hay, afterwards l.ord Kinioul , alnd Chancellor of
Scotland, and Peter -lay, depose , that the Earl, iln their
presence, aflcd Henderifon: *,, ¥WVhomli e flulind \vit the
King at Falkland ? " Crom. 70, 71. Whieli (tleirioR
leems to prove that he did not aim at keepilng thac
journey a secret.

Lord Treafurcri}urlegh1, was at the head of the
other. The former was the mofl acoomplifhed and
the mo fl popular ofall the Englifl nobles; brave,
generous, afrable; though impetuous, yet willing
to liftcn to the counsels of those whoml he
loved; an avowed, but not an implacable eneimy;
a Friend no leIc conRtant than warm; incal)able
of disg'uising his own fentimnets, or of mifre-
presenting tlofe of others; better fitted for a
camp than for a court; and of a genius thnt
qualified hirn for the firlF place in the adiniiil-
tration , with a spirit which scorned the second
as belovw his merit. He was soon diflin-giifhled
hy the Queen, who, with a profLfiuon uncoln-
mon to her, conferred on him, even in Li:
earliest youth , the hiihefi honours. Nor

,tii

this dinlinifh the efleem and alfe'c-ion of 1:i'
countrymcn ; but, by a rare felicity, ile vw:-;
at once the favourite of his Sovercign, and thin
darling of the people, Cecil, on the otlihe
hand, educated in a court, and trained unde:
a father deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty.
insinuating, iiidiifrious; and thougth pofleffec
of talents which fitted him for the highelf of-
sices, he did not rely upon his merit alone for
attaining them, but availed hinifelf of every
advantage , which his own address, or the
niftakes of others, af'orded him. Twvo fich
men were formed to be rivals and enemies.
EfTex defpired the arts of Cecil as low and base.
To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared to

# His correspondence with the Scottish King.

be presumption and folly. All the military men,
except Raleigh, favou'ed Eli'e-:. xMolr of the
courtiers adhered to Cecil, h;o(;2 manners more
nearly resembled their own.

His coirerpiolcsice ¥v. tlh ~1~( ,3ri2, Ihiing.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle

between tlefe fatlions becanme nore violent.
Eflex, in order to strengthen hinmfelf, had early
conrted the friendflhip of the lMinu of Scots, for
whose right of fucceiion he v.as a zealous ad-
vocate, and held a clofc correfipondence bothl
with him and with iis principal llinil ers.
Cecil, devoted to the Queen alone, rose daily
to new lionours by the ani! duity of his services,
and tlhe patience wvitiii vhichi lie expe&cd the
reward of them, while the Earl's high fpiriu
and impetunoflty fomTietiries e:p)ofecl liimt to checks
from a Millrefs. whlo, thou-ghl partial in her
affection toward him, could not easily bear
contradiction, and conferred a.ivours often unwil-
lingly, and always slowly. LHis own foliciia-
tions, however, seconded maliciously by hiis
enemies, iwlo wifhled to remove him at a dif-
tance friom court, advanced him to the coin-
mand of the army employed in Ireland agninr
Tyronne, and to the offce of Lord Lieurenant
of that kingdom, with a com-mission alinoft un-
limited. His success in that expedition did not
equal eitler his own promil'es, or the expeea-
tions of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevifl from

her difapointnment, and exafpcrated against Es-
sex by the artifices of his enemies, wrote him
a harsh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and,
in the firl! transports of his resentment, he pro-
posed to carry over a part of his army into
England, and, by driving his enemies from
the Queen's presence, to reinstate hiimfelf in
favour, and in power. But upon more matl:re
thoughts, he abandoned this raiCh design. and
fetritg fail with a few officers, devoted to his
person, landed in England, and pofled directly
to court. Elizabeth received him rwithoult any
symptom either of afleclion or of displeasure.
By proper conmpliances and acknowledgmcnts,
he might have regained his former afcendaio
over the Queen. But he thought hinfelf too
deeply injured to fubinit to these. I-lizabeth,
on the other hand, determined to subdue his
haughty temper; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, fihe contined
him to tlie Lord Keeper's house, and appointed
commissioners to try him, both for his conduii
during his government of Ireland, and for leav-
ing that kingdom without her permission. By
their sentence, he was suspended from all his
offices, except that of Master of tlhe horse, and
continued a prifoncr during the Queen's plea-
Iure. Satisfied with having mortified his pride
thus far, Elizabeth did not fulfer the sentence
to be recorded, and soon after allowed him to

# James's cautious conduct.

# The wild attempts of Essex.

retire to his own honfe. Dtring; there tranfac-
tions, whicli occupied fcveral mnonthls, Ell'ex
fluEtuated betweeu the allegiance he owed to
his Sovereign, and the delire of revenge; and
sometimes leaned to the one, and fomretimes to
tile other. In one of the intervals when the
latter prevailed, he sent a messenger into Scot-
land to encourage the iing to alifert his own
right to the fuccel'lion by force of arms, and
to promise that, besides the aiiftance of the
Earl and all his friends in England,Lord Mountjoy,
now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join
him with 5000 men from that kingdom.

aiiic.ss calutiotl coindua.

But James did not chufe to hazard the ls-

ing a kingdom , which was jiflt ready to fall
into his hands, Ly a premature attempt to i'eize
it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise,
and Efi'ex adopted more dutiful schemes; all
thoulghts of ambition appearing to be totally
effaced out of his mind.

The wvild attempts or Eflex.

This moderation, which was merely the

esTe& of difgufr and disappointment, was not
of long continuance. And the Queen, having
not only refused to renew a lucrative gr:nt
which she had formerly beftowed,but to admit him
into her presence, that new injury drove a temper,
naturally impatient, and now much fretted, to

abfolutc derpair. His friends, instead of footih.
ing his rage, or reflraining his impetttofliv,
added to both by their imprudent and interefited
zeal. After many anxious consultations, lie
determined to attempt to redress his \vronu!s
by violence. And conlcious how unpopular
such an cnterpril'e would be, if it appeared to
proceed from motives of private revenge alone,
lie cndlcvoired to give it the semblance of
publick. utility, by mingling the King of Scot-
land's interetl with his own. le wrote to
James, that the fa:tion which now predominat-
ed in the Englifli court had resolved to lupport
the pretlnfiols of the Infanra of Spain to thle
crown; that the places of the greatest impor..
tance in the kitngdom were put into the hands
of lhis avoted enemie: s; and tlat unless he Cent
amnba!ltidors, xvitilEuh l delay, to infif r on tlhe
imrnediate declaration of his right of fucceilion,
their mearures wNere To well concerted, that ail
his hopes would be del'perate. James, whio
knew dil'agr.ebler fuclh a proposal would be to
the Queen of 1ngland , was not willing rashly
to expose him'elf to her displeasure. But Effex,
blinlded by relentmlent, and impatient for re-
venge, abandoned himself to these passions,
and a:ted lile a mann guided by frenzy or def-
pair. W\itl two or three hundred followers
incompletely armed, be attempted to al'ault a
throne the best eltablifhed in Europe. Sallying
at their head out of his own house, he called

# His death.

on tle citizens of I.ondon, if licvy either valued
lis life, or vifiied to preiervc i.te kingdonm
from tile dominion of the Spaniards, to tale
arms, and to follow his flandard. I I adv:,anced
towards the palace with an inteniion tót drive
Cecil and his fa&ion out of the (Quen's pre-
fence, and to obtain a declaration of the Scot-
tifh King's right of fuccefiion. ') But, though
almost adored by the citizens, not a man would
join him in this wild enterprile. Dispirited by
their indifference , deserted by fume of his own.
attendants, and almorft surrounded by the troops,
which marched under different leaders into the
city, he retreated to his own house; and \xvil-
out any bold c fort, suitable to his preFi'et con-
dition, or wvorthy of his former reputation for
courage, lie rirrendered to his enemies.

His deati.

As loon as James heard of Ef'ex's ill fucces,

lie appointed the Earl of Mar, and the Abbot
of [Kinlofs , to repair as his Ambaftadors to the
Court of England. The former of there was
the person by whiofe means Effex had carried
on his correspondence \with the King. He was
a paflionate admirer of the Earl's character, and(
disposed to attempt every thing that could con-
tribute to his safety. Bruce, tulined in a cl,)fe
friendship with Mar, was ready to second him

1) Birch, Me!n, ii, f-77,

with equal zeal. Nor was'the purpose of ti;e
embafry lets friendly to Efl', than the choice
of his Ambaff.ldors; they were commanded to
solicit, in the xwarmeft manner, for the Earl's
life, and if they found that the King, by avoxwing
'his friends, could either promote their designs,
or contribute to their safety, they were iin-
powered to lay aside all difgnife, and to pro-
mise that he would put himself at their head,
and claim what was due to him by force of
arms. *:) But before the AmbafTadors could
reach London, Effex had suffered the punifil-
ment he merited by his treason. Perhaps the
fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his
pardon, hartened his death. Elizabeth con-
tinued, for fume time, irresolute concerning
his fate, and could not bring herself to consign
into the hands of the executioner, a man, wvih
had once possessed her favour so entirely, witii-
out a painful struggle between her refentnmeni
againlt his lace miicondct , and her ancient
afl'eion towards him. The dist-ress to which
he was now reduced.tended naturally to soften
the former, while it revived the latter with
new tenderness ; and the interceffilon of one
faithful friend, who had interest with the Quecn,
might perhaps have saved his life, and have
procured him a remission, which, of herself,

The
) Johnft. aS9. 'Birch, Alem, ii, 510o

# James continues his intrigues in England.

the was ashamed to grant. But this generous
nobleman had at that time no such friend. And
Elizabeth, solicited inceflantly by her Ministers,
and offended with the haughtiness of Effex,
who, as she imagined, scorned to file for par-
don, at last commanded the sentence to be put
in execution. No sooner was the blow firuck,
than Che repented of her own rashness, and
bewailed his death with the deepell forrov.
James always confidered hlim as one who had
fallen a martyr to his service, and after his
accession to the English throne, restored his
son to his honours, as well as all his aflbciates
in tle conspiracy, and distinguished them with
his favour. :;)

Jaines continues his intrigues in England.

The Scottish AmnbaC'adors, finding that they

had arrived too late to execute the clhiefbufinefs
committed to their char-ge, not only concealed
that part of their inftriuions with the utmoli:
care; but congratulated the Queen, in their
.\laster's name, on her happy escape froam such
an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, thoughl
no stranger to the King's correspondence with
Eflex, or to that nobleman's intentions of
afl'rting James's right to the Crown, was not
willing that these flhould be known to thepeople,

') Camid. SporCiV, 4:64
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. II. Y

and, for that reason, received the congratu-
lations of the Scottiflh Anba'l'adors with all
possible marks of credit and good will; and in
order to sooth James, and to preserve the ap-
pearances of union between the two courts,
increased the subSidy which she paid him an-
nually. The Ambassadors resided for some time
in England, and were employed, with great
success, in renewing and extending the in-
trigues, which Bruce had formerly entered into
-kith the Englifl nobles. As Elizabeth ad-
vaaced in years, the Englil'h turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were
eager to prevent each other in courting the
favour of their future Monarch. Assurances of
attachment , profeflions of regard , and pro-
mises of fulpport, were offered to James fronm
every corner of the kingdom. Cecil himself,
perceiving what hopes Effex bhad founded on
the friendship of the Scottish King, and wl;at
advantages he might have derived from it, tnought
it prudent to fland no longer at a distance front
a Prince, who might so soon become his maller.
But being sensible at the fame time how dan-
gerous such an intercourse might prove, under
a Mistress naturally jealous, and whose jealousy
grew flronger with old age; though he entered.
into a correspondence with him , he carried it
on witl all the secrecy and caution necessary in
his situation, and peculiar to his chara&er.
And James having gained the man whose oppo-

# Attempts to civilize the Highlanders. 1602.

fition and inflluence e

he ad hitherto chiefly

dreaded, wxaited, in perse sec ur

sec ty, till th it

event should happen , which would open his
way to the throne of England. It was, with
ibme difficulty, that he reftraimned, within proper
bounds, his adherents in that kingdomn, who,
labouring to dit-inguifh themnie!ves by !hat of-
ficious zeal, with which a Prince, 'w.ho his a
near proflpet o 'mouniting the throne, is always
served, urged lhii to allow a motion to be
made in parliament for declaring his right of
facceffion to the Croxwn. Jfanies prudently di'-
couraged that detign ; btii it was nvith no 1'm all
fatisf':aion tih;lt le observed the ascendant lie
was acquiring in a court, xwhore di&a-res he
had been so long obliged to obey; and wh.iicl
had either precribed or thwarted every lrep he
had taken d-:ring the whole courl'e of Ilig
reign. :)

Attctllpls to civilize the I!igll^iiders. 16o2.

Notw\ithlitanditng the violent firuggles of

the political factions which divided the court,
and the frequent revoiutions whlich had happen-
ed there, since the King firlt took the reins
of government into his own hands, Scotland
had enjoyed uniuifal tranquillity, being nndif-
turbed by any foreign enemy, and free froir

') SpotfW. .167. 471. Birch. Memi. ii. 514,

Ya

any intestine commotion of long continuance.
During this period James endeavoured to civi-
lize the Highlands and the Isles, a part- of his
dominions almost totally negleed by former
Monarchs, though the reformation of it was an
objeEt highly worthy of their care. The long
peace with England had alforded an opp6rtu-
nity of subduing the licentious spirit of the
borderers, and of refiraining their depredations,
often no less ruinous to their countrymen, than
to their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low
Country began, gradually to forget the use of
arms, and to become attentive to the arts of
peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceness, averse from labour, and
inured to rapine, infested their more indaftrious
neighbours, by their continual incurfons. Ja-
mes, being felicitous not only to repress their
inroads, but to render them useful subje&s, ':
hiad at different times enaEted many wilfe laws
extremely conducive to these ends. All land-
lords, or chiefs of Clans, were enjoined to
permit no persons to refde in their estates, whoic
could not find sufficient surety for their good
behaviour; they were required to male a lifi:
of all suspicious persons under their jurifdiftion,
to bind tlemrfelves to deliver them to jultice,
and to indemnify those who should fufTer by
their robberies; and, in order to ascertain the

*) Bas)!. Dor, i39.

faithful performance of there articles, the chiefs
themselves swere obliged to give hoilages to the
King, or to put pledges in his hands. Three
towns, which might serve as a retreat for the
industrious, and a nursery for arts and com-
merce, were appointed to be built in different
parts of the Highlands; one in Cantire, another
in Lochabar, and a third in the Isle of Lewis;
and in order to draw the inhabitants thither,
all the privileges of Royal Boroughs were to
be conferred upon them. Finding it, how-
ever, to be no easy matter to inspire the in-
habitants of there countries with the love of
industry, a resolution was tahen to plant among
them colonies of people from the more in-
duftrious counties. The lir-t experiment was
made in the Jfle of Lewis; and a:; it was ad-
vantageoufly situated for the tifl;ing trade, a
source from which Scotland ought naturally to
derive great wealth, the colony transported
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants
of which were well skilled in that branch of
commerce. But before they had remained
there long enough to manifefi the good effe&s
of this institution, the islanders, enraged at
feeing their country occupied by thole intruders,
took arms, and surprising them in the night-
time, murdered tome of them, and compelled
the reft to abandon the settlement. TheKing's
attention being soon after turned to other ob-
jets, we hear no more of this salutary projeft.

# Elizabeth's last illness and death.

Though James did not pursue the delign wit-h
that lheady application and perseverance, with-
out which it is imrpoffible to change the man-
rers of a whole people, he had the glory,
lowpever, nor only of having first conceived the
thoughts, bur of having first pointed out the
pr..per rrethod of introducing the civil arts of
life into thar part of the Illand. *')

Elizabherh's laIl i!lihes .nd death.

After havirp long enjoyed a good fate oi

health, the efle&c of a found conilitution, and
the reward of uncommon regularity and tem-
perance, Elizal-eth began this wintcr to feel
her vigour decreale, and to be sensible of the
infirmities of old age. HIaving removed on a
very florrnyday (Jan.3 I.l 6o3.)from Weflminfrer
to Richmond,whither flhe was impatient to retire,
her complaints increased. She had no formed
fever ;her pulse was good; but she eat little,
and could not sleep. Her distemper feemred
to proceed from a deep melancholy, which ap-
peared both in her countenance and behaviour.
She delighted in solitude, she fat confraittly in
the dark; and was often drowned in tears.

No sooner wxvas the Queen's indilpofition

known, than persons of all ranks, and of all
different fees and parties, redoubled tleirap-
plications to the King of Scots, and vied with

') Parl. I587. I594. 1597. SpotfW. 46&S.

each other, in professions of attachment to his
person, and in protnifes of fiimiffion to his
government. Even fume of her own servants,
weary of the length of her reign , fond of no-
velty, impatient to get rid of the burthen of
gratitude for pal} benefits, and expeiling to fhaie
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to de-
fert her. And crowds of people hurried to-
wards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the favour
of the fucceflor, or afraid of being too late in
paying homlage to him.

Meanwhile, the Queen's disease increased,

and her melancholy appeared to be fettled and
incurable. Various conjectures were formed
concerning the causes of a disorder, from which
flie fee med to be exempted by the natural cheer-
fulness of her temper. Some imputed it to her
being forced, contrary to inclination, to pardon
tle Earl of Tyronne, xwhofe rebellion had for
many years created her so much trouble. Others
imagined that it . arose from observing the
ingratitude of her courtiers , and the levity of
her people, who beheld her health declining
with moit indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the accellion of the Scottish King,
with an impatience which they could not con-
ceal. The most common opinion, at that time,
and perhaps the most probable, was that it
flowed from grief for the Earl of Effex. She
retained an extraordinary regard for the memory
of that unfortunate noblemaan; ad though she

often complained of his obstinacy, seldom men-
tioned his name without tears. :') An accident
happened soon after her retiring to Richmond,
which revived her anfreion with new tenderness,
and embittered her sorrows. The Countess of
Nottingham, beingon her death-bed, desired to
fee the Queen, in order to reveal something to
ber, without difcovcring which, she could not
die in peace. When the Qsteen came into her
chamber, flie told her, that while' EiTex lay un-
der 'entence of death, he was desirous of im-
ploring pardon in the manner which the Queen
herself had prescribed, by returning a ring,
which during the height of his favour she had
given him, with a pronife that if, in any fu-
ture distress, he sent thatback to herasatoken,
it should .intitle him to her protection; that La-
dy Scroop was the perfonhe intended to employ
in order to present it; that, by a mistake, it
was put into her hands instead of Lady Scroop's;
and that she having communicated the matter
to her husband, one of Essex's molt implacable
enemies, he had forbid her either to carry the
ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Earl.
The Counters, having thus disclosed her secret,
begged the Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth,
who now saw both the malice of the Earl's ene-
mies, and how unjustly she had fufpeted him
of inflexible obstinacy, replied: ,, God mayfor-

) Birch, Mlem. ii, 50o5,

,, give you, but I never can; "and left the room
in great emotion. :) From that moment, her
spirit funk entirely; she could scarce taftefood ;
she refused all the medicines prescribed by her
physicians; declaring that fhl wvifhed to die,
and would live no longer. No intreaty could
prevail on her to go to bed; she fat on cu-
fhions, during ten days and nights, pensive and
silent, holding her finger almost continually in
hier mouth, with ler eyes open, and fixed on
the ground. The only thing to which she
seemed to give any attention, were the a6ts of

') This anecdote concerning Eli.abeth \ was filft pullifhed by

Ol'borne, Mem. of Eliz, p. C3; is conlirnicd by the teli.
Inony of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and lv the traditionil
evide ce of Lady Elizabeth Spelman publifilod by Dlr. Birch,
Ncgoc, 1o6, Caniden mentions the Queen's grief for Es-
sex's death as one of the cautfel of her melancholy. Some
orriginal papers remain wliicil prove that this was conl-
monly believed at the time. Birch. Memn. ii. 506. Es'ex,
hcwever, had been beheaded tw\ years before her death,
allel there feemls to have been no other reason, but that
whicli we have afigned, w\iy her sorrow should revive
with so niullh violence at so great a distance of time. As
hie death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about
a fortliglht before the Queen's death, the coincidence of
tliefe events, together witi the other evidence mentioned,
adds so much probability to the flory related by Olborne,
as will entitle it to a place in history, The only objectioll
to the account \we have given of Elizabeth's :ttachinillit to
Efllex, arises from her great age. At the age of 6S, the
ainorous pallions are conmnonly abundantly cool , and the
violence of all the paifions, except one, is imuch abated.
iBut tle force of this objceion is entirely removed by all
Autlior who has illuillrated many panlages il the El:iiil'h
Hiliory, and adorned more. Cataloguo of lKoyal and t:olble
Authors, Article Elfex,

# Her character.

devotion, perforined in her apartment, by the
Arclibil'hop of Canterbury; and in these she
joined with great appearance of fervour. Wafted,
at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long
abstinence, she expired, without a struggle, on
Thursday the 24th day of March, in the 7oth
year of her age, and in the 45th of her reign.::)

Hler charaater.

Foreigners often accuse the English of in-

diherence and dicrefpect towards their Princes.
But wvithout realon; no people are more grate-
ful than they to tlofe Monarchs who merit
their gratitude. The names ofEdward IIJ. alnd
!-Jerry \J. are mrenitioiied by the English of this
age, with the fame warmth, as they were by
ihofe who shared itl the blellings and splendour
of their reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is
-fili adored in England. And the hifiorians of
that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her
people; her sagacity in difccrning their true
interest; her steadiness in purfiing it; her wis-
dom in the choice of her Minifiers; the glory
she acquired by arms; the tranquillity she fe-
cured to her subje&s; and the increase of fame,
of riches, and of commerce, which were the
fruits of all these; justly rank her among the
molt illustrious Princes. Even the defeefs in

') Camd. Birch,. hlen, ii. 506. Birch. Negoc. 2o6. Strype,

iv. 373.

her chara&-er, they observe, were not ofa kind
pernicious to her people. THer excellive fruga-
lity wxas not accompanied wvith the lIve of hoard-
ing; and though it prevented fame great un-
dertakings, and rendered the success of others
incomplete, it introduced crconomyinto lierad-
minifiration, and exempted the nation from
many burdens, which a Monarch, more profu'e
or more enterprising, must have imposed. Her
slow\ness in rewarding her servants sometimes
discouraged ureful merit; but it prevented the
undeferving from acquiring power and wealth:
to which they had no titie. Her extremejea-
lousy of those Princes, who pretended to dif-
pute her right to the Crown, led her to take
such precautions, as tended no less to the pub-
lick safety, than to her own; and tocourtthe
afFections of her people, as the firmefl support
of her throne. Such is the piEture tlheEnglifh
draw of this great Queen.

Whoever undertakes to write the Iliftory

of Scotland finds himself obliged, frequently.
to view her in a very different, and in a less
amiable light. Her authority in that killdon'.'
during the greater part of her reign, was little
inferior to that which she poflhffed in her owVn
But this authority, acquired at first by a service
of great importance to the nation, she exercilfed
in a manner extremely pernicious to its hap-
piness. By her indilftry in fomenting the rage
of the two contending factionsj by supplying

# James proclaimed King of England.

the one which partial aid; by feeding the other
with false hopes; by balancing their power so
artfully, that each of them was able to distress,
and neither of them to subdue the other; she
rendered Scotland long the feat ofdifcord, coi-
fusion, and bloodshed: And her craft and in-
trigues, eflecting what the valour of her ancefl-ors
could not accomplish, reduced that kingdom to
a fRate of dependance on England. The maxims
of policy, often little consonant to those ofmo-
rality, may, perhaps, justify this conduct. But
no apology can be otfered for her behaviour to
Queen Mary; a scene of dissimulation without
neceTiity; and of severity beyond example. In
almost all her other actions, Elizabeth is the
object of our highest admiration; in this we
muff allow that she not only laid aside the ma-
gnanimity which became a Queen, but the
feelings natural to a woman.

James proclaimed King of Enguland.

Though Elizabeth would never pertit the

quesfion concerning the right of succession to
the Crown to be determined in parliament;nor
declare her own sentiments concerning a point
which she wished to remain an impenetrable
mystery; she had, however, formed no design
of excluding the Scottish King from an inherit-
ance to which his title was undoubted. A
short time before ler death, she broke the si-
lence, which she had so long preserved on that

ithbjeft, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral,
,,That her throne was the throne of Kings;
that Che would have no mean person to afeend.
it, and that her Couniu the lKing ofScotsfhould
be her successor. " This she confirned on her
death-bed. And as soon as she breathed her
last, the lords of the Privy Council proclaimed
James King of England. All the intrigues
carried on by foreigners, in favour of the In-
fanta, all the cabals formed within the kingdom,
to support the titles of Lady Arabella and the
Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment;
the nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient
hostilities with Scotland, and their averfionfor
the dominion of firangers, testified their satis-
fation with louder acclamations than were uflua
at the accefiton of their native princes. Amidst
this tumult of joy, a motion made by a few pa-
triots, who proposed to prescribe some' condi-
tions to the successor, and to exa&t from him the
redress of some grievances, before they called
him to the throne, was fearce heard; and Ce-
cil, by flifling it, added to his flock of merit
with his new master. Sir Charles Percy, bro-
ther of the Earl of Northomberland, and Thomas
Somerset, the Earl of Worcester's son, were
dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to the King,
signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors
then in London ; informing him of the Queen's
death, of his accession to the throne, of their
care to recognize his title, and of the universal

applaure with :which the publick proclamation
of it had been attended. They made the ut-
molk hbflte to deliver this welcome nmeitge;bat
were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Ca-
rey, Lord iHn!nfdane'syo ungeil son. wlio letting
out a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived
at Edinburgh on Saturday night.jiit as the King
had gone to bed. He vwas in)mnediiitely ad-
rnitted into the royal apartment, and kneeling by
the King's bed, acquainted hinm xvitthe deatl
of Elizabeth , fainted him king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a to.en
of the truth of the intelligence which he 1rough't,
presented him a ring, which his fifler LadIy
Scroop had taken from the Queen's finger after
her death. James heard him with a decent com-
pofure. But as Carey was only a privateimef-
fengcr, the information he brought was not
made publick, and the King kept his apartment:
till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then
his titles were solemnly proclaimed; and his
own fubjeEts exprefled no less joy, than the
English, at this increase of his dignity. As
his presence was absolutely neceflary in Eng-
land, where the people were extremely im-
patient to (ee their new Sovereign, he prepar-
ed to set out for that kingdom without delay.
He appointed his Queeu to follow him within
a few weeks. He committed the government
of Scotland to his Privy Council. He intrusted
the care of his children to different noblemen.

# Takes possession of the throne.

On the Sunday before his departure, he re-
paired to the Church of St. Giles, and after
hearing a sermon, in which the Preacher dif-
played the greatness of the divine oodneefs in.
railing him to the throne of such a powerful
kingdom without oppolition or bloodflied, anti
exhorted him to express hlis gratirude, by pro--
moting, to the utmosl, the happiness and proC-
perity of his subje&s ; the King rose up, and
addressing himself to the people, made many
profefilons of unalterable affection towards them ;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; alTired
them that his Scottish fubjefts, notxvithftaiading
his absence, should feel that lie was their Iln-
tive Prince, no less than when he refidedamin;:a
them; and might still trust that his ears fhouti(t
be always open to their petitions, which he
would anfv,'er wvith the alacrity and love of a.
parent. 1-iis words were often interrupted by
the tears of the whole audience; who, thoughl
they exulted at the King's prosperity, were,
melted into sorrow by these tender declara-
tions. *)

Takes pof'ienio of the throne.

On the fifth of April he began his journey.

with a splendid, but not a numerous train, and
next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he
came, immense multitudes were assembled to

') Spotrf. 476.

welcome himn, and the principal persons in the
different counties through which he pafied, dif-
played all their wealth and magnificence in en-
tertainments prepared for him at their hoafes.
Slizabeth had reigned so long in England,that
most of her subjeCts remembered no other court
but hers; and their notions of the manners and
decorums faitable to a prince were formed upon
what they had observed there. It was natural
to apply this standard to the behaviour and ac-
tions of their new Monarch, and to compare
him, at firif fight, with the Queen, on whose
throne he was to be placed. James, whose
manners were extremely different from hers,
suffered by the comparison. He had not that
flowing aliability, by which Elizabeth captivat-
ed the hearts of her people; and, though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence
could not bear the fatigue of rendering himself
agreeable to a mixed multitude. He was no
less a ifranger to that dignity with which Eli-
zabeth tempered her familiarity. And, inflead
of that well-judged frugality with which she
conferred titles of honour, he betlowed them
with an undifiinguifhed profusion, that render-
ed them no longer marks of dittinEtion, or re-
wards of merit. But these were the refletions
of the few alone; the multitude continued their
acclamations; and, amidst these, James entered
London on the 7th of May, and took peaceable
?offefiion of the throne of England.

Con-

# Conclusion.

# A view of the Revolutions in the constitution of Scotland since the accession of James VI.

Conclusion.

Thus were united two kingdoms, divided.

from the earliest accounts of time, but destined,
by their situation, to form one great monarchy.
And by this junction of its whole native force,
Great Britain hath risen to an eminence and au-
thority in Europe, which England and Scotland,
could never have attained.

A view of the Revolntions in the connitution of Scotland

fimice the accefion or James VI.

The Scots had so long confidered their Mo-

narchs as next heirs to the English throne, that
they had full leisure to reflef on all the con-
sequences of their being advanced to that dignity.
But, dazzled with the glory of giving a So-
vereign to their powerful enemy, relying on the
partiality of their native Prince, and in full ex-
peatation of sharing liberally in the wealth and
honours he would now be able to bestow, they
attended little to the most obvious consequences
of that great event, and rejoiced at his aocefiron
to the throne of England, as if it had been no
less beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
to the King. They soon had reason, however,
to adopt very different sentiments; and from
that period we may date a total alteration in
the political constitution of Scotland.

The feudal Aristocracy, which had been
subverted in molt nations of Europe by the

Hilt. of Scotl. Vol. 1T. Z

policy of their Princes, or had been undermined
by the progress of commerce, still subsisted with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contri-
Buted gradually to augment the power of the
Scottish nobles ; and even the Reformation,
which in every other country where it prevailed.
added to the authority of the Monarch, had in-
creased their wealth and influence. A King
poflleled of a finall revenue, with a prerogative
extremely limited, and unsupported by a fiand-
ing army, could not exercise much authority
over such potent fubjeats. He was obliged to
govern by expedients; and the laws derived
their force not from his power to execute them,
but from the voluntary fubmiflion of the nobles.
lBat though this produced a species of govern-
mnent feeble and irregular beyond example;
though Scotland, under the name, and with
all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was
really fubjeft to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy; and even in this wild
form a conflitution, there were principles,
wvhich tended to their security and advantage.
The King, checked and overawed by the nobles.
idnrft venture upon no as of arbitrary power.
The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims
and pretensions were many, though his power
was finall , were afraid of irritating their de-
pendants by unreasonable exactions, and tenm-
pered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, witI
a mildness and equality to which it is naturlally

a stranger. And while the military genius of
the feudal government remained in vigour, the
vassals both of the Crown and of the Barons
were not only free from oppreflion, but courted
by their fuperiors,whofe power and importance
were founded on their attachment and love.

But, by his accellion to the throne of Eng-

land, James acquired such an immense accefilon
of wealth, of power, and of splendour, that
the nobles, atonifhed and intimidated, thought
it vain to 'truggle for privileges which they
-were now unable to defend. Nor was it from
fear alone that they Submitted to the yoke; Ja-
mes, partial to his countrymen, and willing
that they should partake in his good fortune,
loaded them with riches and honours; and the
hope of his favour concurred with the dread of
his power, in taming their fierce and indepen-
dent spirits. The will of the Prince became the
supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles itrove,
with emulation, who should most implicitly
obey commands, which they had formerly been
accutiomed to contemn. Satisfied with having
fubjeaed the nobles to the Crown, the King'
left them in full pofieffion of their ancient jurif-
dietion over their own vassals. The extenlfve
rights, vested in a feudal Chief, became in their
hands dreadful instruments of oppreffon , and
the military ideas, on which these rights were
founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,

Z

nothing remained to corre& or to mitigate the
rigour with which they were exercised. The
nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the expence
of frequent attendance upon the 1,inglifh court,
and by attempts to imitate the manners and
luxury of their more wealthy neighbours,
multiplied exaEtions upon the people, who
durst scarce utter complaints which they knew
would never reach the ear of their Sovereign,
nor move him to grant them any redress. And,
from the union of the Crowns to the revolution
in i688, Scotland was placed in a political
situation, of all others the most iingular, and
the most unhappy; fubjeated at once to the ab-
solute will of a Monarch, and to the oppressive
jurisdiction of an Aristocracy, it suffered all the
miseries peculiar to both these forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were defpotick; its nobles
were slaves and tyrants; and the people groaned.
under the rigorous domination of both.

During this period, the nobles, it is true,

made one effort to shake off the yoke, and to
regain their ancient independency. After the
death of James , the Scottish nation was no
longer viewed by :our Monarchs with any partial
affetion. Charles I. educated among the Eng-
lifh, discovered no peculiar attachment to the
kingdom of which he was a native. And the
nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be now in
hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince
with whom they had little connexion, and over

whose councils they had little influence, no
longer submitted with the fame implicit obe..
dience. Provoked by some encroachments of
the King on their order, and apprehcnfive of
others, the remains of their ancient spirit began
to appear. They complained and remonstrated.
And the people being, at the fame time , vio-
lently difgulted at the innovations in Religion,
the nobles fccretly heightened this disgust ; and
their artifices, together with the ill-condut of
the court, raised such a spirit, that the whole
nation took arms againfi their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had for-
merly been no example. Charles broughtagainft
them the forces of England, and notwithftand-
ing their own union, and the zeal of thepeople,
the nobles mult have funk in the struggle. But
the difaffe&ion, which was growing among his
English subjeCts, prevented the King from ading
with vigour. A civil war broke out in both
idngdoms. And after many battles and revo-
lutions, which are well known, the Scottifhl
nobles, who first began the war, were involved
in the fame ruin with the throne. At the Refto-
ration, Charles II. regained full possession of
the royal prerogative: .Scotland; and the nobles,
wvhofe estates were wafted, or their spirit broken,
by the calamities to -which they had been ex-
posed, were less able and lets willing than ever
to resist the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the dictates of

the Monarch were received in Scotland with
most abject submission. The poverty to which
many of the nobles were reduced, rendered
them meaner slaves, and more intolerable ty-
rants, than ever. The people, always neglefted,
were now odious, and loaded with every injury,
on account of their attachment to religious and
political principles , extremely repugnant to
those adopted by their Princes.

The Revolution introduced other maxims

into the government of Scotland. To increase
the authority of the Prince, or to secure the
privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almost
the sole ohje&t of our laws. The rights of the
people were scarce ever mentioned, were dif-
regarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward , to be paid to the welfare of the
people. By the claim of right, their liberties
were secured. And the number of their repre-
fentatives being increased, they gradually acquir-
ed new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more security and greater
power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry,
and of police. But the ariftocratical spirit.
which fill predominated , together with many
other accidents, retarded the improvement and
happiness of the nation.

Another great event completed what the

Revolution had begun. The political power of
the nobles, already broken by the union of the

two Crowns, was almost annihilated by the union
of the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as
formerly, of the supreme ass'embly of the nation,
instead of bearing the moit considerable sway
there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the
Brittifh parliament by their representatives only,
and form but an inconsiderable part of one of
those bodies in which the legislative authority
is vefied. They themselves are excluded abfo-
lutely from the house of Commons, and even
their eldest sons are not permitted to represent
their countrymen in that august affetmbly. Nor
have their feudal privileges remained, to com-
penfate for this extinction of their political
authority. As commerce advanced in its progress,
and government attained nearer to perfec:ion,
these were insensibly circumscribed, and at last,
by laws no iefs salutary to the publick, thal
fatal to the nobles, they have been almost to-
tally abolished. As the nobles were deprived
of power, the people acquired liberty. Ex-
empted from burdens, to which they were for-
merly subjet , screened from oppression, to
which they had been long exposed, and adopted
into a constitution, whose genius and laws were
more liberal than their own, they have extended
their commerce, refined their manners, made
improvements in the elegancies of life, and cul-
tivated the arts and sciences.

This survey of the political slate of Scotland,

in which events and their causes have been
mentioned rather than developed, enables us to

point out three eras, from each of which we
may date some great alteration in one or other
of the three different members of which the
supreme legislative assembly in our constitution
is composed. At the Accession , the Kings of
Scotland, once the most limited i became, in
an instant, the most absolute Princes in Europe,
and exercised a defpotick authority, with their
Parliaments were unable to controul, or their
nobles to resist. At the Union, the feudal arifto-
cracy, which had subsisted so many ages, and
wvith power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
the Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights
and pre-erninences, peculiar to their order, and
reduced thenmfelves to a condition, which is no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjeEts.
Since the Union, the Commons, anciently neg-
lected by their Kings , and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and, being
admitted to a participation of all the privileges
which theEnglifh had purchased at the expence
of so much blood, must now be esteemed a body
not less considerable in the one kingdom, than
they have long been in the other.

The church felt the effets of the absolute

power which the King acquired by his accession;
and its revolutions, too, are worthy of notice.
James, during the latter years of his admi-
uniftration in Scotland, revived the name and
office of Bishops. But they polefl'ed no eccle-
igftipal jurifdiktion or pre-eminence; their reve-

nues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce
difinguifhed by any thing but by their feat in
parliament, and by being the objeE of the clergy's
jealousy, and the'people's hatred. The King,
delighted with the fp!endour and authority
which the English Bishops enjoyed, and eager
to effef an union in ecclesiastical policy, which
he had, in vain, attempted in the civil govern-
ment, resolved to bring both Churches to an
exat conformity wvith each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From
themn, their brethren were coimmanded to receive
orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were
imposed. And though the Clergy less obfe-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposed these
innovations, James, long pratifed and well-
skilled in the arts of managing them , obtained
at length their compliance. But Charles I. a
superstitious Prince, unacquainted with the
genius of the Scots, imprudent and precipitant
in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom,
pressing too eagerly the reception of theEnglifh
liturgy, and indiscreetly attempting a resumption
of Church lands, kindled the flames of civil war;
and the people being left at liberty to indulge
their own wishes, the Episcopal church was
overturned, and the Presbyterian government
and discipline were re-eflablifhed with new
vigour. Together with monarchy, Episcopacy
was restored in Scotland. A form of govern-
ment, so odious to the people, required force

to uphold it; and though the whole rigour of
authority, and all the barbarity of persecution
were employed in its support, the aversion of
the nation was insurmountable, and it subsisted
with difficulty. At the Revolution, the incli-
nations of the people were thought worthy the
attention of the legislature, the Presbyterian
government was again established , and , being
ratified by the Union, is still maintained in the
kingdon.

Nor did the influence of the Accession ex-

tend to the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions
alone; the genius of the nation, its taste and
spirit, things of a nature still more delicate,
.were sensibly aflfcted by that event. When
learning revived in the fifteenth and sixteenth
-centuries, all the modern languages were in a
slate equally barbarous, devoid of elegance, of
vigour and even of perspicuity. No author
thought of writing in languages so ill adapted
to express and embellilfh his sentiments, or of
erefing a work for immortality, with such rude
and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to
any original effort of the human mind, but was
excited by admiration of the ancients, their
compositions were esteemed not only the fland-
ards of taste and of sentiment, but of style; and
even the languages in which they wrote were
thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated
to learning and the muates. Not only the man,

ner of the ancients was imitated, but their lan-
guage copied: and, extravagant as the attempt
may appear, to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accufiomed to think, and
which they could not speak, or even pronounce,
the success of it was astonishing. As they form-
ed their style upon the purest models; as they
were uninfeated with those barbarisms, which
the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the
affectation of courts, intercourse with strangers,
and a thousand other causes introduce into liv-
ing languages; many moderns have attained to
a degree of elegance in their Latin compositions,
which the Romans thenimelves scarce poffefled
beyond the limits of the Augustan age. While
this was almost the only species of composition,
and all authors, by using one common language,
could be brought to a nearer comparison , the
Scottish writers were not inferior to those of
any other nation. The happy genius of Bucha-
nan, equally formed to excel in prose and in
verse, more various, more original, and more
elegant, than that of almost any other modern
who writes in Latin, refle&ts, with regard
to this particular, the greatest luflre on his
country.

But the labour attending the fludy of a

dead tongue was irksome; the unequal return
for their industry which authors met with, who
could be read and admired only within the
narrow circle of the learned, was mortifying;

and men inflead of wafting half their lives in_
learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and to polish their own. The modern tongues
were found to be fafceptible of beauties and
graces, which, if not equal to those of the
ancient ones , were at least more attainable.
And the Italians having first set the example,
Latin was no longer used in the works oftafte;
it was confined to books of science; and the
politernations have banished it even from these.
The Scots, we may presume, would have no
cause to regret this change in the publick taste,
and would fill have been able to maintain some
equality with other nations, in their pursuit of
literary honour. The English and Scottish lan-
guages, derived from the fame sources, were.
at the end of the sixteenth century, in a tlate
inearly linilar, differing from one another some-
what in orthography, though not only the
xwords, but the idioms were much the fame.
The letters of several Scottish fltatefmen of that
age are not inferior in elegance , or in purity,
to those of the Eniglifh Ministers with whom
they corresponded. James himself was master
of a iryle far from contemptible; and, by his
example and encouragement, the Scottish lan-
guage might have kept pace with the English
in refinement. Scotland might have had a series
of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin
language, to boast of; and the improvements in
taste, in the arts, and in the sciences, which

'pread over the other poliflied nations of Eull
rope, would not have been unknown there.

But, at the very time when other nations

were beginning to drop the use of Latin in
works of taste, and to make trial of the ftrengtl
and compass of their own languages , Scotland
ceased to be a kingdom. The tranlports of joy,
which the Accession at firlt occafloned, -were
soon over: and the Scots, being at once de-
prived of all the obje'ts that refine or animate
a people, of the presence of their Prince, of
the concourse of nobles, of the splendour and
elegance of a court, an universal deje&ion of
spirit seems to have seized the nation. The Court
being withdrawn, no domeftick standard of
propriety and correEtnefs of speech remained:
the few compositions that Scotland produced
were tried by the English standard, and every
word or phrase that varied in the leait from
that, was condemned as barbarous; whereas,
if the two nations had continued diftin&t, eaclh
might have retained idioms and forms of fpeecli
peculiar to itself; and these, rendered fashion-
able by the example of a court , and supportec
by the authority of writers of reputation, would
have been confidcred in the fame light with the
varieties occasioned by the different diale&s in
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as
beauties; and, in many cafes, used promif-
cuoufly by the authors of both nations. But,
by the Accession, the English naturally became

the sole judges and lawgivers in language, and
rejeced as solecisms, every form of speech to
which their ear was not accustomed. Nor did
the Scots, while the intercourse between the
two nations was inconsiderable, ;) and ancient
prejudices were Uill so violent as to prevent
imitation, potfefs the means of refining their
owni tongue according to the purity of the Eng-
liflh Randard. On the contrary, new corruptions
flowed into it from every different source. The
Clergy of, Scotland, in that age, were more
eminent for piety than for learning; and though
there did not arise many authors among them,
yet being in possession of the privilege of dif-
coursing publickly to the people, and their ser-
rons being too long, and perhaps too frequent,
such hafly productions could not be elegant, and
many slovenly and incorreft modes of expreflion
may be traced back to that original. The plead-
nigs of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
') A remarkaile proof of the little intercourse between the

Englishs and Scuts before the union of the Crowns, is to
be found in tvwo curious papers, one publilhed by Haynes,
the other by Strype, In the year 1567, Elizabeth com-
mnanded the Birhop of London to take a survey of all the
tirangers within the cities of London and Wefhtinllter. By
this report , whiich ib very minute, it appears that the whole
lnumber of Scots at that time was 58. Haynes 455. A
survey of the fame kind was made by Sir Thomas RoW,
Lord Mayor, A.D. 156S. The number of Scots had theln
increaled to SS. Strype,iv. Supplement, No. . On the
acccflion of James, a considerable number of Scots efpe-
cially of the higher rank, resorted to Englaud ; but it wai
not till the Union that the intercourse between the tw,'
kingdoms became great,

sate, and that profeffiot having furnished more
authors, and the matters of which they treat
mingling daily in common discourse and bulinefs,
many of those vicious forms of speech, which
are denominated Scotticifms,have been by them
introduced into the language. Nor did either the
language or publick tafe receive any improve-
nent in parliament, where a more liberal and
more corret: eloquence might have been ex-
peted. All buflnefs was tranfacred there by the
Lords of Articles, and they were so servilely
devoted to the court, that few debates arose,
and none were conduted with the spirit and
vigour natural to a popular assembly.

Thus, during the whole seventeenth cen-

tury, the English were gradually refining their
language, and their taste; in Scotland the for-
mer was much debased, and the latter altmoft
entirely loft. In the beginning of that period,
both nations were emerging out of barbarity;
but the distance between them, which was then
inconsiderable, became, before the end of it,,
immense. Even after science had once dawned
upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking backl
into ignorance and obscurity; and, active and
intelligent as they naturally are, they conti-
nued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of
languor and ftupefation. Thir-, however, must
he imputed to the unhappiness of their political
situation, not to any defec of genius; for no

sooner wvas the one removed in any degree, than
the other began to display itself. The aft abo-
lifhing the power of the Lords of Articles, and
other salutary laws pasTed, at the Revolution,
having introduced freedom of debate into the
Scottish Parliament, eloquence with all the arts
that accompany or perfe&t it, became imme-
diate objects of attention; and the example of
Fletcher of Salton alone is sufficient to fhewv
that the Scots were still capable of generous
sentiments, and, notwithfaiitding some peculiar
idioms, were able to express themselves with
energy, and with elegance,

At length the Union having incorporated

the two nations, and rendered them one people,
the diftintions which had fabfifted for many
ages gradually wear away; peculiarities dif-
appear; the fame manners prevail in both parts
of the island; the fame authors are read and
admired; the fame entertainments are frequent-
ed by the elegant and polite; and the fame
tandard of tafle, and of purity in language, is
eRtablifhed. And the Scots, after being placed
during a whole century, in a Situation no less
fatal to the liberty than to the'tafte and genius
of the nation, were at once pat in poffefion of
privileges more valuable than those which their
anceflors had formerly enjoyed; and every
obftruntion that had retarded their pursuit, or
prevented theit acquisition of literary fame,
was totally removed.
