THE
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF TIlE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGII, HISTORIOGRAPI1ER

TO IllS MAJESTY IFOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF TIlE

ROYAL ACADEMY OF IISISORY AT MADRID.

THE NINTH EDITION,
In uwhich is included the Poftihnozis Volulme,

CONTAININd
THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE YEAR 1688;

AND OF NEW ENGLAND, TO THE YEAR I652.

IN FOUR VOI,UMES.

VOL. IV.

L 0 ArD :

Pril'td 1/y A. S/lulnrl, .1ri/ sr, sqreel,
For A. STRIAIIAN; T. CADI:.I. jun. and W. D1)viES, St llti d;

anld F.. BA I.I)IIIt, ll(ilIisgli.

1800.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
H IS TO R Y

OF
A MERI CA.

B OOK VIII.
A FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B o o i

in their discoveries and conquests during VIm.

more than half a century, I have conduced Vcvos-"
them to that period when their authority was policy and

trade of the

established over almof all the vast regions in the SI:a,,li
New World still subjee to their dominion. The
effect of their settlements upon the countries of
which they took pofficlion, the maxims which
they adopted in forming their new colonies, the
interior ftruEture and policy of these, together
with the influence of their progreflive improve-
ment upon the parent state, and upon the com-
mercial intcrcourfe of nations, arc the objects to
which we now turn our attention.

VOL. IV. B THE

B O O K THE firfI visible consequence of the eflablifh-

VI1. ments made by the Spaniards in America, was
Depopula- the diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a
noica tihe degree equally astonishing and deplorable. I
fiteffet have already, on different occasions, mentioned

the disastrous influence under which the connec-
tion of the Americans with the people of our
hemisphere commenced, both in the islands, and
in several parts of the continent, and have
touched upon various causes of their rapid con-
fumption. Wherever the inhabitants of Ame-
rica had resolution to take arms in defence of
their liberty and rights, many perifled in the
unequal contest, and were cut off by their fierce
invaders. But the greatest desolation followed
after the sword was sheathed, and the conquerors

caifes of were fettled in tranquillity. It was in the islands,
this in the
islands, and and in those provinces of the continent which
sonmc parts
Orthe con- firetch from the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines
t"i'nt. of Mexico, that the fatal efl'eas of the Spanish

dominion were firfl and most sensibly felt. All
these were occupied either by wandering tribes
of hunters, or by fiich as had made but finall
progress in cultivation and indultry. When
they were compelled by their new masters to
take up a fixed residence, and to apply to regular
labour; when tasks were imposed upon them
disproportioncd to their strength, and were

exaced

exacted with unrelenting severity, they possesseu o

0 0

not vigour either of mind or of body to sustain VII.
this unusual load of oppression. Dejection and
despair drove many to end their lives by violence.
Fatigue and famine destroyed more. In all those
extensive regions, the original race of inhabit-
ants wafted away ; in some it was totally extin-
guifled. In Mexico, where a powerful and
martial people diftinguithed their opposition to
the Spaniards by efforts of courage worthy of a
better fate, great numbers fell in the field ; and
there, as well as in Peru, fill greater numbers
perished under the hardflhips of attending the
Spanish armies in their various expeditions and
civil wars, worn out with the incelfant toil of
carrying their baggage, provisions, and military
stores.

BuT neither the rage nor cruelty of the In New

Spain and

Spaniards were so deftrud-ive to the people of pcru.
Mexico and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy
with which they eflablifled their new fettle-
ments. The former were temporary calamities,
fatal to individuals ; the latter was a permanent
evil, which, with gradual consumption, wafted
the nation. When the provinces of Mexico
and Peru were divided among the conquerors,
each was eager to obtain a diltri&t, from which
he might cxped an instantaneous recompence

u 2 for

B O K for all his services. Soldiers, accustomed to the

vIlI- carelefnefs and dissipation of a military life,

had neither industry to carry on any plan of
regular cultivation, nor patience to wait for its
flow but certain returns. Infltead of fettling in
the vallies occupied by the natives, where the
fertility of the foil would have amply rewarded
the diligence of the planter, they chose to fix
their stations in tome of the mountainous
regions, frequent both in New Spain and in
Peru.: To search for mines of gold and silver,
was the chief object of their acivity. The
profpecls which this opens, and the alluring
hopes which it continually prelents, correspond
wonderfully with the spirit of enterprize and
adventure that animated the firfi emigrants to
America in every part of their conduct. In
order to push forward those favourite projeEts,
so many hands were wanted, that the fcrvice of
the natives became indispensably requisite. They
were accordingly compelled to abandon their
ancient habitations in the plains, and driven in
crowds to the mountains. This sudden tran-
fition fiom the sultry climate of the vallies to
the chill penetrating air peculiar to high lands
in the torrid zone ; exorbitant labour, scanty or
nIll \wvolefolc nourifillent, and the deSpondency
occ:fioned by a liecics of oppretfion to which
they were nlot accu.lomed, and of which they

Iaw

saw no end, affected them nearly as much as B o o K
their less industrious countrymen in the islands. VIll.
They funk under the united pressure of those
calamities, and melted away with alinoft equal
rapidity. In consequence of this, together ,
with the introduction of the small-pox, a malady
unknown in America, and extremely fatal to the
nativesb, the number of people both in New
Spain and Peru was so much reduced, that in a
few years the accounts of their ancient popu-
lation appeared almost incredible c.

SUCH are the most considerable events and Not the re

fult of iny

causes which, by their combined operation, fyatem of
contributed to depopulate America. Without P'i"'
attending to these, many authors, astonished at
the suddenness of the desolation, have afcIibcd
this unexampled event to a system of policy no
less profound than atrocious. The Spaniards,
as they pretend, conscious of their own inability
to occupy the vast regions which they had
discovered, and foreseeing the impossibility of
maintaining their authority over a people infi-
nitely superior to theinfelves in number, in order
to preserve the poiteflion of America, resolved

a rotlqienimar a, i. 613.
) 1. l)i;a. . 12.

1 Hcrrera, decc. 2. llb. x. c. 4. Ullo;
I'.ntrclcnl. 206.

c T'orquin. 615. 642, 6+3. Sec NOTE I.

.i 3 IA

B o o K to exterminate the inhabitants, and by converting
lVIII. a great of the country into a desert, endea-

voured to lecure their own dominion over it d.
But nations seldom extend their views to objects
so remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for
the honour of humanity we may observe, that
no nation ever deliberately formed such an
execrable scheme. The Spanilh monarchs, far
from. acing upon any such sysem of deftrution,
were uniformly solicitous for the preservation of
their new fubjeats. With Isabella, zeal for
propagating the Chrilfian faith, together with
the desire of communicating the knowledge of
truth, and the consolations of religion, to people
destitute of spiritual light, were more than
ostensible motives for encouraging Columbus
to attempt his discoveries. Upon his success,
she endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpose,
and manifested the most tender concern to secure
not only religious instruction, but mild treat-
ment, to that inoffensive race of men subjected
to her crown c. Her successors adopted the fame
ideas; and, on many occasions, which I have
mentioned, their authority was interposed, in
the most vigorous exertions, to protect the
people of America from the oppreflion of their
Spaiiifl fubjets. Their regulations for this

'' Sec NOTE II. c Sec NOTE III.

purpose

purpose were numerous, and often repeated. Boo i
They were framed with wisdom, and dicated by VI1.
humanity. After their poffetfions in the New '"'"
World became so extensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in
retaining their dominion over them, the spirit
of their regulations was as mild as when their
settlements were confined to the islands alone.
Their solicitude to protec the Indians seems
rather to have augmented as their acquisitions
increased; and from ardour to accomplish this,
they enaaed, and endeavoured to enforce the
execution of laws, which excited a formidable
rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread
alarm and difaffeaion through all the reft. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be
controlled by the authority of laws. Rapacious
and daring adventurers, far removed from the
feat of government, little accustomed to the
reitraints of military discipline while in service,
and still less disposcd to refpet the feeble jurif-
dition of civil power in an infant colony,
despised or eluded every regulation that set
bounds to their exations and tyranny. The
parent itate, with persevering attention, issued
edicts to prevent the oppreflion of the Indians;
the colonilts, regardless of these, or trulting to
their distance for ilmpunity, continued to confider
and treat them as tlaves. The governors them.

1. lfelvcs,

B o K i selves, and other officers employed in the colo-
VIl. nies, several of whom were as indigent and

rapacious as the adventurers over whom they
presided, were too apt to adopt their contemp-
tuous ideas of the conquered people; and
initead of checking, encouraged or connived at
their excesses. The desolation of the New
World should not then be charged on the court
of Spain, or be confidered as the effe&t of any
fytfem of policy adopted there. It ought to be
imputed wholly to the indigent and often
unprincipled adventurers, whose fortune it was
to be the conquerors and first planters of
America, who, by measures no less incon-
fiderate than unjufR, counteracted the ediEts of
their sovereign, and have brought disgrace upon
their country.

nor the WITH still greater injuflice have many authors
religion. represented the intolerating spirit of the Roman

Catholic religion, as the caulk of cxterminating
the Americans, and have acculed the Spanish
ecclesiastics of animating their countrymen to
the slaughter of that innocent people, as idolators
and enemies of God. But tie first missionaries
who visited America, though weak and illiterate,
were pious men. They early efpouled the
defence of the natives, and vindicated their
charaer friom the aspersions of their con-

querors,

querors, who, describing them as incapable of B o o KI
being formed to the offices of civil life, or of vm1.
comprehending the doctrines of religions con- '-"~'
tended, that they were a subordinate race of
men, on whom the hand of nature had set the
mark of servitude. From the accounts which I
have given of the humane and persevering zeal
of the Spanish mifionaries, in proteting the
helpless flock committed to their charge, they
appear in a light which reflecEs lustre upon their
funetion. They were ministers of peace, who
endeavoured to wrefl the rod from the hands of
oppressors. To their powerful interposition the
Americans were indebted for every regulation
tending to mitigate the rigour of their fate.
The clergy in the Spanish settlements, regular as
well as secular, are still confidered by the Indians
as their natural guardians, to whom they have
recourse under the hardships and exactions to
which they are too often exposed

BUT, notwithflanding the rapid depopulation The num-

bcr of the

of America, a very considerable number of the ildst lill
native race still remains both in Mexico and r'"'i"""in
Peru, cfpecially in those parts which were not
exposed to the first fury of the Spanish arms, or
desolated by the first cfforts of their induitry,

Sec NO'l'E 1V.

futi1

B O 0 K fill more ruinous. In Guatimala, Chiapa,

vIII. Nicaragua, and the other delightful provinces

of the Mexican empire, which firetch along the
South Sea, the race of Indians is still numerous.
Their settlements in some places are so populous,
as to merit the name of cities . In the three
audiences into which New Spain is divided,
there are at least two millions of Indians; a
pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient population,
but such as still forms a body of people superior
in number to that of all the other inhabitants of
this extensive country h. In Peru several diftrids,
particularly in the kingdom of Quito, are occu-
pied almost entirely by Indians. In other pro-
vinces they are mingled with the Spaniards, and
in many of their settlements are almost the only
persons who pradife the mechanic arts, and fill
most of the inferior tfations in society. As the
inhabitants both of Mexico and Peru were
accustomed to a fixed residence, and to a certain
degree of regular indultry, less violence was
requisite in bringing them to lome conformity
with the European modes of civil life. But
wherever the Spaniards fettled among the
savage tribes of America, their attempts to
incorporate with them have been always fruit.
less, and often fatal to the natives. Impatient

Sec NOTE V. ' Sec NOTE VI.

of

of restraint, and disdaining labour as a mark of B o o 1
servility, they either abandoned their original vliII
feats, and fought for independence in mountains
.and forests inacceflible to their oppressors, or
perilhed when reduced to a state repugnant to
their ancient ideas and habits. In the diitrids
adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama, and to
Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more general
than even in those parts of Mexico and Peru,
of which the Spaniards have taken most full
possession.

BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the General

New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabit- poi"cy ofl
ants, were made at a period when that monarchy sji,anil iti
was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain
was become a powerful slate, equal to so great
an undertaking. Its monaichs, having extended
their prerogative far beyond the limits which
once circumscribed the regal power in every
kingdom of Europe, were hardly subjed to
controul, either in concerting or in executing
their measures. In every wide extended empire,
the form of government must be simple, and
the sovereign authority such, that its refolu-
tions may be taken with promptitude, and may
pervade the whole with fufficicnt force. Such
was the power of the Spaniflh monarchs, when

they

B o K they were called ro deliberate concerning the

vIII. mode of eflablifhing their dominion over the

most remote provinces which had ever been
fubjetted to any European Rate. In this deli-
beration, they felt themselves under no confti-
tutional restraint, and that, as independent
masters of their own resolves, they might
issue the edicts requisite for modelling the
government of the new colonies, by a mere aft
of prerogative.

Early inter- THIS early interposition of the Spanifl crown,
thitgl in order to regulate the policy and trade of its
authority, colonies, is a peculiarity which diftinguiflles

their progress from that of the colonies of any
other European nation. When the Portuguese,
the English, and French, took possession of the
regions in America which they now occupy,
the advantages which there promised to yield
were so remote and uncertain, that their colonies
were suffered to struggle through a hard infancy,
almost without guidance or protection from the
parent state. 3But gold and silver, the first
productions of the Spanifli fcttlements in the
New World, were more alluring, and imme-
diately attracted the attention of their monarchs.
Though they had contributed little to the dilfco
vcry, and almost nothing to the conquct of thle
Ncw World, they inltantly assumed the function

of

of its legislators; and having acquired a species B o o K
of dominion formerly unknown, they formed a v hI.
plan for exercising it, to which nothing similar
occurs in the hi!tory of human ai0Trs.

TFI. fundamental maxim of Spanifi jurifpru- All pocr

and proper-

dence, with reipect to America, is to confider tyve(tcdin
whhat has been acquired there as veiled in the t w.
crown, rather than in the state. By the bull of
Alexander VI. on which, as its great charter,
Spain founded its right, all the regions that had
been, or should be dilifovered, were bestowed as
a free gif upon Ferdinand and Ifabclla. They
and their fuccefibrs were uniformly held to be the
universal propriciors of the vail territories,
which the arms of their fubjeds conquered in
the New World. From them all grants of
land there flowed, and to them they finally
returned. The leaders who conducted the
various expeditions, the governors who presided
over the diflerent colonies, the officers ofjultice,
and the miniftcrs of religion, were all appointed
by their authority, and removable at their plea-
uire. lThe people who composed infant fettle-
nients were entitled to no privileges independent
of the sovereign, or that served as a barrier
agaiinll the power of the crown. It i:' true, that
when towns were built, and Iormed into bodies
corporate, the citizens were pcrmitted to elect

their

B o o K their own magistrates, who governed them by

VIII. laws which the community enaced. Even in

the most despotic states, this feeble spark of liberty
is not extinguished. But in the cities of Spanifl
America, this jurifdiEtion is merely municipal.
and is confined to the regulation of their own
interior commerce and police. In whatever
relates to public government, and the general
interest, the will of the sovereign is law. No
political power originates from the people. All
centres in the crown, and in the officers of its
nomination.

All the new WHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-
dominions
of Spain rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
two vjieto the plan of internal policy for their new domi-
reYS. nions, divided them into two immense govern-

ments, one subject to the viceroy of New Spain,
the other to the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdic.
tion of the former extended over all the provinces
belonging to Spain in the northern division of
the American continent. Under that of the
latter, was comprehended whatever she poffefted
in South America. This arrangement, which,
from the beginning, was attended with many
inconveniencies, became intolerable when the
remote provinces of each vice-royalty began to
improve in industry and population. The
people complained of their subjection to a fupe-

rior,

rior, whose place of residence was so distant, or B o o K
so inaccessible, as almost excluded them from VIII.
any intercourse with the feat of government. '~
The authority of the viceroy over diftrias so
far removed from his own eye and observation,
was unavoidably both feeble and ill directed.
As a remedy for those evils, a third viceroyalty
has been established in the present century, at
Santo Fc de Bogota, the capital of the new
kingdom of Granada, the jurisdiction of which
extends over the whole kingdom of Tierra
Firme, and the province ofr Qito'. Those Their
viceroys not only represent the person of their pocrs.
sovereign, but poirefs his regal prerogatives
within the precinEts of their own governments,
in their utmost extent. Like him, they exercise
supreme authority in every department of
government, civil, military, and criminal. They
have the sole right of nominating the persons
who hold many offices of the highest importance,
and the occasional privilege of supplying those
which, when they become vacant by death, are
in the royal gift, until the successor appointed
by the king shall arrive. The external pomp of
their government is suited to its real dignity and
power. Their courts are formed upon the
model of that at Madrid, with horse and foot

A Voy. de Ulloa, . 23, 255.

guards,

B o o IC guards, a household regularly eftabliflled, nume-

vI1. rous attendants, and ensigns of command,

displaying such magnificence, as hardly retains
the appearance of delegated authority k
Courts Of . BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in

person the functions of a supreme magistrate in
every part of their extensive jurisdiction, they
are aided in their government by officers and
tribunals similar to those in Spain. The conduct
of civil affairs in the vaiious provinces and
diftrits, into which the Spanish dominions in
America are divided, is committed to magistrates
of various orders and denominations; some
appointed by the king, others by the viceroy,
but all subjed to the command of the latter,
and amenable to his jurifdiaion. The admini-
Itration of justice is vested in tribunals, known
by the name of Audiences, and formed upon the
model of the court of Chancery in Spain. 'These
are eleven in number, and dispense juflice to as
many diflrids, into which the Spaniflh domi-
nions in America are divided'. The number of
judges in the court of Audience is various,
according to the extent and importance of their
juril'-lidion. The ftatiu is no leis honourable
than lucrative, and is commonly filled by persons

U Llloa, Voy. i. ,132. 6C . I ccc NOTE ViI.

of

of such abilities and merit as renders this tribunal B o o IK
extremely refpeEtable. Both civil and criminal VIII.
causes come under their cognizance, and for
each peculiar judges are set apart. Though it Theirjurif-
is only in the most despotic governments, that
the sovereign exercises in person the formidable
prerogative of administering justice to his sub-
je&ts, and in absolving, or condemning, consults
no law but what is deposited in his own breast;
though, in all the monarchies of Europe, judi-
cial authority is committed to magistrates, whose
decisions are regulated by known laws and
established forms, the Spanifl viceroys have
often attempted to intrude thenfelves into the
feat of justice, and with an ambition which their
distance from the controul of a superior rendered
bold, have aspired at a power which their master
does not venture to assume. In order to check
an usurpation which must have annihilated justice
and security in the Spanish colonies, by subjet-
ing the lives and property of all to the will of a
single man, the viceroys have been prohibited,
in the most explicit terms, by repeated laws,
from interfering in the judicial proceedings of
the courts of Audience, or from delivering an
opinion, or giving a voice with refpce to any
point litigated before them '". In some particular

m Rccop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35. 38. 44. lib. iii. tit. iii.
1.36, 37.

VOL. IV. c cafes,

B O O K cafes, in which any question of civil right is
VIII. involved, even the political regulations of the

viceroy may be brought under the review of
the court of Audience, which, in those instances,
may be deemed an intermediate power placed
between him and the people, as a constitutional
barrier to circumscribe his jurifdiEtion. But as
legal refiraints on a person who represents the
sovereign, and is clothed with his authority, are
little suited to the genius of Spanirn policy; the
hesitation and reserve with which it confers this
power on the courts of Audience are remark-
able. They may advise, they may remonstrate;
but, in the event of a direct collision between
their opinion and the will of the viceroy, what
he determines must be carried into execution,
and nothing remains for them, but to lay the
matter before the king and the council of the
Indies". But to be entitled to remonstrate,
and inform againfl a person, before whom all
others must be silent, and tamely submit to his
decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to the
courts of Audience. This is farther augmented
by another circumnlance. Upon the death of a
viceroy, without any provision of a successor by
the king, the uipreme power is vested in the

Sol,'zi. de jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 40, 41. Rccop.

lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 31.- lib. v. tit. ix.
1. r.

court

court of Audience resident in the capital of the B o o K
viceroyalty, and the senior judge, afflifed by his viiI.
brethren, exercises all the funtions of the '
viceroy while the office continues vacant°. In
matters which come under the cognizance of
the Audiences, in the course of their ordinary
jurifdidion, as courts of justice, their sentences
are final in every litigation concerning property
of less value than fix thousand pesos; but when
the subject in dispute exceeds that fum, their
decisions are fubjeQf to review, and may be
carried by appeal before the royal council of
the Indies .

IN this council, one of the most considerable Counc;lor

tie indies.

in the monarchy for dignity and power, is veiled
the supreme government of all the Spanish domi-
nions in America. It was first efablifled by
Ferdinand, in the year 51 i, and brought into
a more perfect form by Charles V. in the year
1524. Its jurifdi&ion extends to every depart- Its power,
ment, ecclesiastical, civil, military, and commer-
cial. All laws and ordinances relative to the
government and police of the colonies originate
there, and mufl be approved of by two thirds

' Rccop. lib. ii. lit. xv. 1. 57, &c.
p RIccop. libl. v. tit. xiii. 1. 1, &c.

C 2 of

B o o ic of the members, before they are issued in the
VIII. name of the king. All the offices, of which the

nomination is reserved to the crown, are con-
ferred in this council. To it each perfort
employed in America, from the viceroy down-
wards, is accountable. It reviews their con-
dud, rewards their services, and inflits the
puniSlhments due to their malversations q. Before
it is laid whatever intelligence, either public or
secret, is received flom America; and every
fctleme of improving tle administration, the
police, or the commerce of the colonies, is
submitted to its consideration. From the first
institution of the council of the Indies, it has
been the contfant object of the catholic mo-
narchs to maintain its authority, and to make
such additions from time to time, both to its
power and its splendor, as might render it for-
midable to all their subjects in the New WTorld.
Whatever degree of public order and virtue fill
remains in that country, where so many circum-
itances conliire to relax the former, and to
corrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a great
measure to the wile regulations and vigilant
infpeEtion of this relpetable tribunalr.

'I Rccop. lb. ii. tit. ii. 1. 1, 2, &c.
r Solcrz. dc Jure Ind. lib. iv. 1. 12.

As

As the king is supposed to be always present B o o K

in his council of the Indies, its meetings are vII.
held in the place where he resides. An- afade
other tribunal has been inflituted, in order to contrata-
regulate fuclh commercial althirs as required the
immediate and personal infpetion of those
appointed to superintend them. This is called
Cafi de la Coitratalcion, or the house of trade,
and was eftablifled in Seville, the port to which
commerce with the New World was confined,
as early as the year 5o01. It may be confidered Its IInc-
both as a board of trade, and as a court of judi-
cature. In the tormer capacity, it takes cogni-
zance of whatever relates to the intcrcourfe of
Spain with Amnrica, it regulates what comnmo-
dities fliould be exported thither, and has the
inspection of such as are received in return. It
decides concerning the.departure of the fleets
for the Welt Indies, the freight and burthen
of the flips, their equipment and defti-
nation. In the latter capacity, it judges with
refpec to every queflion, civil, commercial, or
criminal, arising in confequeince of tie tranf-
adtions of Spain with America; and in both thcfe
departmencts its decisions are exempted from the
review of any court but that of the council of
the Indies .

R cop. lib. ix. tit. I. Vcitia Noic tie 1; Contrata-
ti ], lib,. i. ,

c 3 SUL;It

n o o K Sucii is the great outline of that system of
vinI. government, which Spain has established in her

American colonies. To enumerate the various
subordinate boards and officers employed in the
administration of justice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
the country; to describe their different func-
tions, and to inquire into the mode and effeEt
of their operations; would prove a detail no
less intricate than minute and uninteresting.

Sirs obji,, THE first object of the Spanish monarchs was
to fecule all
cxclufiie to secure the productions of the colonies to the
trade.

parent slate, by an absolute prohibition of any
intercourse with foreign nations. They took
possession of America by right of conquest, and
conscious not only of the feebleness of their
infant settlements, but aware of the difficulty in
eflablifhing their dominion over regions so exten-
five, or in retaining so many reluctant nations
under the yoke, they drlcded the intrusion of
firangers; they even flunned their infpedtion,
and endeavoured to kccp them at a distance
from their coasts. This spirit of jealousy and
exclusion, which at firfi was natural, and per-
haps neccffary, augmented as their poffeflions
in America extended, and the value of them
came to be more fully undcrftood. in confe-
quence of it, a fyfltem of colonizing was intro-

duced,

duced, to which there had hitherto been nothing B o o K
similar among mankind. In the ancient world, VII.
it was not uncommon to fend forth colonies.
But they were of two kinds only. They were
either migrations, which served to disburden a
state of its superfluous fubjeds, when they mul-
tiplied too fall for the territory which they
occupied; or they were military detachments,
Rationed as garribnfs, in a conquered province.
The colonies of tome Greek republics, and the
swarms of northern barbarians which fettled in
different parts of Europe, were of the first
species. The Roman colonies were of the
second. In the former, the connecion with the
mother-country quickly ceased, and they became
independent states. In the latter, as the dif-
jundion was not complete, the dependence
continued. In their American settlements, the Regulations

for tiht

Spanith monarchs took what was peculiar to pulO.
each, and Itudied to unite them. By fending
colonies to regions so remote, by eRfabliffling
in each a form of iiterior policy and adlminiftra-
tion, under diftiliic governors, and with pecu-
liar laws, they disjoined them from the mother-
country. By retailing in their own hands the
rights of legifiLlio,, as well as that of iimpofing
taxes, together \\;ih the powcr of nominating
the pcrbins who tilld, every department of

(c 4 executive

B OO K executive government, civil or military, they

vmII. secured their dependence upon the parent slate.

Happily for Spain, the situation of her colonies
was such, as rendered it poflible to reduce this
new idea into practice. Almofl all the countries
which she had discovered and occupied, lay
within the tropics. The productions of that
large portion of the globe are different from
those of Europe, even in its moif southern
provinces. The qualities of the climate and of
the foil naturally turn the indufrry of such as
settle there into new channels. When the Spa-
niards first took poffeflion of their dominions in
America, the precious metals which they yielded
were the only object that attracted their atten-
tion. Even when their efforts began to take a
better direction, they employed themselves almost
wholly in rearing such peculiar productions of
the climate, as, from their rarity or value, were
of chief demand in the mother-country. Allured
by valt prolifpes of immediate wealth, they
difdlained to waste their illtuflry on what was
lets lucrative, but of superior moment. In order
to render it impossible to correct this error, and
to prevent them from making any efforts in
induflry which might interfere with those of the
the mother-country, the eftabliflhment of several
fi)ecies of maiiufadtures, and even the culture

of

of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the B o o
Spanith colonies ', under severe penalties u. They vMI.
muff trust entirely to tie mother-country for the
objeEts of primar.y necessity. Their clothes,
their furniture, their instruments of labour,
their luxuries, and even a considerable part of
the provisions which they consume, were im-
ported from Spain. During a great part of the
fixteeiith century, Spain, poilelling an extensive
commerce and flouriffling manufactures, could
supply with ease the growing demands of her
colonies, from her own stores. The produce of
their mines and plantations was given in exchange
for thele. But all that the colonies received,
as well as all that they gave, was conveyed in
Spanish bottoms. No vessel belonging to the
colonies was ever permitted to carry the commo-
dities of America to Europe. Even the com-
mercial intercourse of one colony with another
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
many jealous restrictions. All that America
yields flows into the ports of Spain; all that it
consumes mutl iffuc from themn. No foreigner
can enter its colonies without exprcfs permillion ;
no veftcl of any toreign nation is rcceived into
their harbours; and the pains of death, with

Sec NOTE VII1.
U B. Ullo;a l .I.,. dcsM \laullf. &c. p. 206.

conlifcation

B o o rI confiscation of moveables, are denounced against

VIII. every inhabitant who presumes to trade with

them v. Thus the colonies are kept in a state
of perpetual pupillage; and by the introduction
of this commllercial dependence, a refinement in
policy of which Spain set the first example to
the European nations, the supremacy of the
parent fiate hath been maintained over remote
colonies during two centuries and a half.

Slowpro- SucrL are the capital maxims to which the
puetpon a Spanifl monarchs teem to have attended in form-
from E- ing their new fettlenents in America. But
rope.

they could not plant with the fame rapidity that
they had destroyed; and from many concurring
causes, their progress has been extremely flow,
in filling up the immense void which their
devaftatiois had occasioned. As soon as the
rage for discovery and adventure began to abate,
the Spaniards opened their eyes to dangers and
dil-ref!es, which at first they dcid nor perceive,
or had deljfifed. The numerous hardships with
which the niielbc'rs of infaln colonies have to
struggle, the dif'ates of umwliolcilolc climates,
fatal to the conlitution of Europeanss; the
difficulty of bringing a country, covered with
iorclts, into cultlurei the want of hands nccel-

v Rccopil. lil. ix. tit. xxvii. 1. i. 4. 7, &c.

lfary

fary for labour in some provinces, and the flow p, o o K
reward of industry in all, unless where the vm.
accidental discovery of mines enriched a few
fortunate adventurers, were evils univerlaily
felt and magnified. Dilcou-ragcd by the view of
these, the spirit of migration was so much
damped, that sixty years after the dilfovery of
the New World, the number of Spaniards in all
its provinces is computed not to have exceeded
fifteen thouland ".

TIE mode in which property was distributed Discouraged

by lli( (tate

in the Spanifl colonies, and the regulations efta- uo plOprty,
blifihd with refpe& to the tranfiniffion of it,
whether by delent or by sale, were extremely
unfavourable to population. In order to pro-
mote a rapid increase of people in any new
settlement, property in land ought to be divided
into small ihares, and the alienation of it should
be rendered extremely c:!viY. But the rapa-
cioufnefs of the Spanifll conquerors of the Nwxv
World paid no regard to this filndailntal
maxim of policy; and, as they

, lXlolcn: d power,

which cnaliled themn to ,gr.iy tlie tlofl ;!ra-
vagalnce of their \vilhcs, miany f'/ei.d d(illri's
of great extulet, aild 1held thml as L'cllon/'lilitls.
By degrees they obtlinicd the l)rivil?';c of con-

x See NOTE IX. Y Dr. Smith's Inqiry, ii. 16(.

verting

B o o K verting a part of these into Mayorafgos, a species
VIII, of fief, introduced into the Spanifl fyflem of

feudal jurifprudencez, which can neither be
divided nor alienated. Thus a great portion of
landed property, under this rigid form of entail,
is-withheld from circulation, and descends from
father to son unimproved, and of little value
either to the proprietor or to the community.
In the account which I have given of the reduc-
tion of Peru, various examples occur of enor-
mous traas of country occupied by some of
the conquerors a. The excesses in other pro-
vinces were similar, for as the value of the lands
which the Spaniards acquired was originally
estimated according to the number of Indians
which lived upon them, America was in
general so thinly peopled, that only diftriets of
great extent could afford such a number of
labourers as might be employed in the mines
with any prospect of confidcrable gain. The
pernicious cflfets of those radical errors in the
dillribution and nature of lproperty in the Spanifll
Iettlements, iare felt through every department of
indufrry, and may be confidered as one great
cause of a progrels in population io much flower
than that which has taken place in better conlli-
tuted colonies `.

z Rccop. lib. iv. Lit. iii. 1. 2.+. a Bouk \i.
'' Sec NOTE X.

To

To this we may tadd, that the support of the B o o K

enormous and cxpecfive fabric of their eccle- vilI.
fiaftical ec.ablifhlicr.t, has been a burden on the ald thlnaT
Spaniflh colonies, which has greatly retarded tu'reof tcir

ecclrliaihi-

the progrels of population and induilry. The calpilicy.
payment of tithes is a heavy tax on industry; and
if the exadion of them be not regulated and cir-
cunifcribed by the wiilom of the civil magistrate,
it becomes intolerable and ruiiios. But, instead
of any reilraint on the claims of ecciefiaftics,
the inconsiderate zeal of the bpanifh legislators
admitted tlem into America in their full extent,
and at once inmpoled on their infant colonies a
burden which is in no flight degree oppressive to
society, even in its moit improved slate. As
early as the year 15o1, the payment of tithes in
the colonies was enjoinled, and the mode of it
regulated by law. Every article of primary
neceflity, towards which the attention of new
feltlers muit naturally be turned, is fiubjected to
that grievous exation l'. Nor were the demands
of the clergy confined to articles of simple and
eaiy culture. Its more artificial and operote
productions, such as sugar, indigo, and cochi-
neal, were loon declared to be tithlble' ; and
thus the indullry of the planter was taxed in

c Rccop. ll. i. tit. xiv. 1. 2.

Rlccop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 3 alid +.

every

B o K every stage of its progress, fiomn its rudeit eiay

viII. to its higheR improvement. To the weight of
'" this legal imposition, the bigotry of the American

Spaniards has made many voluntary additions.
From their fond delight in the external pomp
and parade of religion, and from superstitious
reverence for ecclesiastics of every denomination,
they have bestowed profule donatives on churches
and monasteries, and have unprofitably wafted
a large proportion of that wealth, which might
have nourified and given vigour to productive
labour in growing colonies.

or- BT so fertile and invitiln are the regions of

d-T ': , I I:' w-
p, ;,, :, America, which the Spaniards have occupied,

co . that, notwithfiandilgi all [ihe circum{iaracecs which

have checked and retarded population, it has
graduaily increased, and filled the colonies of
Spain with citizens of various orders. Among
thlic, the Spaniards, who arrive from Europe,

ci,-,n,,,:'sc dltilinguiilhcd by the name of ('/.i:r/roncrs, are the
[lit Ill it.

first in rank and power. Froiln tie jealous atten-
tion lo the Spanilh court to ticcure the depend-
ence of tle colonies on the parent state, all
departnlentls of confelquenc ae ar illed by persons
c'l:l firom lnurlope ; andi, in ordler to prevent
;y of' dlubious iulclity from1 being employed,
e;ch iml lll Ir-iun proel of a clcar lcfcelnt from a
faiily cf Old CJIJ'3i:.:ns, ulntainted with any

mixture

mixture of cwiflh or Mahometan blood, and B o o K
never disgraced by any censure of the inqui- vIii.
fitione. In such pure hands, power is deemed
to be fafeiy lodged, and alnmoft every public
function, from the viceroyalty downwards, is
committed to them alone. Every person, who
by his birth, or residence in America, may be
fufpeEed of any attachment or interest adverse
to the mother-country, is the object of distrust
to such a degree, as amounts nearly to an exclu-
sion from all offices of confidence or authority f.
By this conspicuous predileclion of the court,
the Chapeto-.cs are raiied to such pre-eminence
in America, that they look down with disdain on
every other order of men.

TIrE charaaer and state of the Creoles, or Creolest'r

descendants of Europeans fettled in America,
the second class of fubjcOds in the Spanifli colo-
nies, have enabled the Chapetones to acquire
other advantages, hardly less considerable than
tlhofe which they derive from the partial favour
of government. Though tome of the Creolian
race are ldelccnded firom the conquerors of the
New World; though others can trace up their
pedigree to the noblest families in Spain; though

Recopil. lb. i':. tit. xvi. 1. ri, ,,6.
f See NOTE X1.

n'any

Bo o K( many are possessed of ample fortunes, yet, by
VIII. the enervating influence of a sultry climate, by

the rigour of a jealous government, and by their
despair of attaining that diftindion to which
mankind naturally aspire, the vigour of their
minds is so entirely broken, that a great part of
them wafle life in luxurious indulgencies, mingled
with an illiberal superstition still more debating.
Languid and unenterprifing, the operations of
an active extended commerce would be to them
so cumbersome and oppreflivc, that in almost
every part of America, they decline engaging in
it. The interior traffic of every colony, as well
as any trade which is permittcd with the neigh-
bouring provinces, and with Spain itself, are
carried on chiefly by the Chapetones ; who,
as the recompence of their industry, amass
immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in
sloth, are fatisied with the revenues of their
paternal cftates.

piva'flip FROM this flated competition for power and
Lis.c,. wealth between those two orders of citizens, and

the various paflions excited by a rivalflip lo inte-
refling, their hatred is violent and implacable.
On every occasion, fymlptoms of this aversion
break out, and the commono apllcllations which

g Voy. de Ulloa, i. 27. 25 1. \V )'. dc lr i. ir, 2 ".

CicI

each bestows on the other are as contemptuous n o o K
as those which flow from the most deep-rooted vII-
national antipathy h. The court of Spain, from
a refinement of diftruflful policy, cherishes
those feeds of discord, and foments this mutual
jealousy, which not only prevents the two most
powerful classes of its fubjets in the New World
from combining against the parent state, but
prompts each, with the most vigilant zeal,
to observe the motions and to counteract the
schemes of the other.

THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanifl Ac mix.d

Face forTs
colonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of thi rtird

order of

an European and a Negro, or of an European citizei,.
and Indian, the former called Muzlattoes, the
latter MeJtizos. As the court of Spain, solicit-
ous to incorporate its new vassals with its ancient
fubjets, early encouraged the Spaniards fettled
in America to marry the natives of that country,
several alliances of this kind were formed in
their infant colonies'. But it has been more
owing to licentious indulgence, than to com-
pliance with this injunction of their fovcreigns,
that this mixed breed has multiplied so greatly,
as to constitute a considerable part of the popu-

h Gage's Survey, p. . I9rezicr, 226.

Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 2. Hercria, dc. l. lib. v
c. 12. dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 2.

vo.. IV. D lation

B o o K lation in all the Spanish settlements. The several

vIIi. stages of descent in this race, and the gradual

variations of shade until the African black or the
copper colour of America brighten into an
European complexion, are accurately marked
by the Spaniards, and each distinguished by a
peculiar name. Those of the firit and second
generations are confidered and treated as mere
Indians and Negroes; but in the third descent,
the charaderiftic hue of the former disappears;
and in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is
so entirely effaced, that they can no longer be
diftinguiaied from Europeans, and becomeentitled
to all their privileges '. It is chiefly by this
mixed race, wllofe frame is remarkably robust
and hardy, that the mechanic arts are carried on
in the Spanifl erttlements, and other active
fuln&ions in society are dilcharged, which the
two higher clafles of citizens, from pride, or
from indolence, disdain to exercile'.

';'""' ''Ti-rE negrroes hold the fourth rank among the
,;iu!l, inhabitants of the Spjanifi colonies. The intro-

duction of that ullhappy part of the human
Ipccies into America, together with their services
;iand fuirings there, shall be fully explained in

k Voy. ilc J11loa, i. p. 27.
I Ibid. i. 29 Voy. ic Bougucr, p. 104. Mclciidcz,
T''clulu Vi'cl ,tlci, i. 3541

another

another place; here they are mentioned chiefly B o o K
in order to point out a peculiarity in their fitua- vII.
tion under the Spanish dominion. In several of ~~
their settlements, particularly in New Spain,
negroes are mostly employed in domestic service.
They form a principal part in the train of luxury,
and are cherished and carefled by their superiors,
to whose vanity and pleasures they are equally
subservient. Their dress and appearance are
hardly less splendid than that of their masters,
whose manners they imitate, and whose paflions
they imbibe'". Elevated by this distinction,
they have assumed such a tone of fuperiorily
over the Indians, and treat them with such
insolence and scorn, that the antipathy between
the two races has become implacable. Even in
Peru, where negroes seem to be more nume-
rous, and are employed in field-work as well as
domestic service, they maintain their ascendant
over the Indians, and the mutual hatred of one
to the other subsists with equal violence. The
laws have indufirioufly fomented this aversion,
to which accident gave rife, and, by mofA
rigorous injunctions, have endeavoured to pre-
vent every intercourse that might form a bond
of union between the two races. Thus, by an
artful policy, the Spaniards derive strength from

'" Gage, p. 56. Voy. de Ulloa, i. 45'.

D 2 that

oo K that circumstance in population which is the
VII,. weakness of other European colonies, and have

secured, as associates and defenders, those very
persons who elsewhere are objets ofjealoufy and
terror ".

T'leTInlips TlHE Indians form the last and the moif
so m the last
oil of depressed order of men in the country, which

belonged to 'their ancestors. I have already
traced the progress of the Spanish ideas with
refpet to the condition and treatment of
that people, and have mentioned the mofl
important of their more early regulations, con-
cerning a matter of so much consequence in the
administration of their new dominions. But
since the period to which I have brought down
the history of America, the information and
experience acquired during two centuries, have
enabled the court of Spain to make such im-
provements in this part of its American system,
that a fliort view of the present condition of
the Indians may prove both curious and interest-
ing.

Tlir pre- By the famous regulations of Charles V. in
fcnt Condi- )
ti,,,. 1 542, which have been so often mentioned, the

" Rccop'Il. l). l ib .

vii .

ti .

v . 1. 7 llc

I craz, dec. 8. lib. vii.
c. 12. 1'rczicr-, 244.

high

high pretensions of the conquerors of the New B o o Ki
World, who confidered its inhabitants as slaves, vll.
to whose service they had acquired a full right of '
property, were finally abrogated. From that
period, the Indians have been reputed freemen,
and entitled to the privileges of fubjeds. When
admitted into this rank, it was deemed jufl,
that they flould contribute towards the support
and improvement of the society which had
adopted them as members. But as no confider-
able benefit could be expeEted from the voluntary
efforts of men unacquainted with regular indus-
try, and averse to labour, the court of Spain
found it necessary to fix and secure, by proper
regulations, what it thought reasonable to exact
from them. With this view, an annual tax was Tax im-

poled o011

impoled upon every male, from the age of tihm.
eighteen to fifty ; and at the fame time the nature
as well as the extent of the services which they
might be required to perform, were alcertained
with precision. This tribute varies in different
provinces; but if we take that paid in New
Spain as a medium, its annual amount is nearly
four fiillings a head; no exorbitant lumn in
countries where, as at the source of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low". The right

" See NOTE XII. Recopil. lib. v;. tit. v. 1.42.
sIacldluyt, vol. iii. p. 461.

i) 3 of

Bo o K of levying this tribute likewise varies. In Ame-

VIIn. rica, every Indian is either an immediate vassal

- of the crown, or depends upon some subjec' to

whom the diftric in which he resides has been
granted for a limited time, under the denomi-
nation of an encomienda. In the former cafe,
about three-fourths of the tax is paid into the
royal treasury; in the latter, the fame propor-
tion of it belongs to the holder of the grant.
When Spain first took poflelion of America,
the greater part of it was parcelled out among
its conquerors, or those who first fettled there,
and but a fiall portion reserved for the crown.
As those grants, which were made for two lives
only P, reverted successively to the sovereign, he
had it in his power either to diffuse his favours
by grants to new proprietors, or to augment
his own revenue by valuable annexations .
Of these, the latter has been fiequently chosen;
the number of Indians now depending imme-
diately on the crown is much greater than in the
first age after the conquest, and this branch of
the royal revenue continues to extend.

Thcfcrviccs THEt benefit arising from the services of the
Ilcililndcd.

Indians accrues either to the crown, or to the

R Rccopil. l)). v;. t v ;i. 1. 48. Sulolz. dc Ind. Juic,
ll i. ;i. c. 6.

'l Scc NOTE XI11I

holder

holder of the encomienda, according to the fame B o o ic
rule observed in the payment of tribute. Those VIII.
services, however, which can now be legally
exacted, are very different from the tasks origin-
ally imposed upon the Indians. The nature of
the work which they muff perform is defined,
and an equitable recompence is granted for their
labour. The stated services demanded of the
Indians may be divided into two branches. They
are either employed in works of primary necef-
fity, without which society cannot subsist com-
fortably, or are compelled to labour in the
mines, from which the Spanish colonies derive
their chief value and importance. In confe-
quence of the former, they are obliged to aflift
in the culture of maize, and other grain of necef-
fary consumption ; in tending cattle; in erecting
edifices of public utility; in building bridges; and
in forming high roadsr; but they cannot be
constrained to labour in raising vines, olives, and
sugar-canes, or any fpccies of cultivation, which
has for its objec the gratification of luxury, or
commercial profit . In consequence of the
latter, the Indians arc compelled to undertake
the more unpleasant tafl of extracting ore from

r Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Sulorz. dc Lid. Jure,
ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9.

' Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 8. SolorA. lib. L c. 7.
N 4I, &c.

u1 4 the

no o K the bowels of the earth, and of refining it by
VI11. successive processes, no less unwholesome than

operose '.

The mode TIIE mode of exacting both there services is
of sxa6ting
tiief. the fame, and is under regulations framed with

a view of rendering it as little oppressive as possible
to the Indians. They are called out successively
in divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can
be compelled to go but in his turn. In Peru,
the number called out must not exceed the
seventh part of the inhabitants in any diftric u.
In New Spain, where the Indians are more
numerous, it is fixed at four in the hundred '7
During what time the labour of such Indians as
are employed in agriculture continues, I have
not been able to learn . But in Peru, each
Mita, or division, destined for the mines, remains
there fix months; and while engaged in this
service, a labourer never receives less than two
shillings a day, and often earns more than
double that fum Y. No Indian, residing at a
greater distance than thirty miles from a mine,
is included in the Mita, or division employed in
working it "; nor are the inhabitants of the low

'Sec NOTE XIV. ' Rccop. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 2 .
' Rccopil. lib. vi. 1. 22. x Sce NOTE XV.
Y Ulloa Enrctret. 265, 266.

RKccopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3.

country

country exposed now to certain deflrucion, as B o 0 K
they were at first, when under the dominion of VI1.
the conquerors, by compelling them to remove
from that warm climate to the cold elevated
regions where minerals abound .

TH-E Indians who live in the principal towns tow do-

verncd.

are entirely fubjeEt to the Spanish laws and magi-
ftrates; but in their own villages they are
governed by caziques, some of whom are the
descendants of their ancient lords, others are
named by the Spanish viceroys. These regulate
the petty affairs of the people under them,
according to maxims of justice transmitted to
them by tradition from their anceflors. To the
Indians this jurisdiction, lodged in luch friendly
hands, affords fnme consolation; and so little
formidable is this dignity to their new maflers,
that they often allow it to descend by hereditary
right . For the farther relief of men so much
exposed to oppreflion, the Spanifl court has
appointed an officer in every diftirict, with the
title of Protedor of the Indians. It is his func-
tion, as the name implies, to affirt the rights of
the Indians; to appear as their defender in the

i' Recopil. jlib. i. tit. xii. 1. 29. and tit. . i. 13. Sec
NOTE XVI.

') Solorz. de Jure Irend. ib. i. c. 26. Rccopil. lib. vi.
tit. vii.

courts

B O O K courts of justice; and, by the interposition of
VIIi. his authority, to set bounds to the encroach-

ments and exactions of his countrymen c. A
certain portion of the reserved fourth of the
annual tribute is destined for the salary of the
caziques and protectors; another is applied to
the maintenance of the clergy employed in the
instruction of the Indians d. Another part seems
to be appropriated for the benefit of the Indians
themselves, and is applied for the payment of
their tribute in years of famine, or when a
particular district is affected by any extraordinary
local calamity c. Betides this, provision is made
by various laws, that hospitals ihall be founded
in every new settlement for the reception of
Indians . Such hospitals have accordingly been
erected, both for the indigent and infirm, in
Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico, where the
Indians are treated with tenderness and huma-
nity ".

SuciI are the leading principles in the jurif-

prudclnce and policy by which the Indians are
now governed in the provinces belonging to

c Solorz. lib i. c. 17. p. 201. Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. vi.
* R ccOpi. lib. vi. tit v. 1. 30. tit. Avi. 1. 12 -15.
e Ibid. illb. vi. tit. iv. i. j3.
f Ibil. li)b. i. tit. iv. 1. I, &c.
g Voy. de Ulloit, i. 429. 509. Clhtclill, iv. 496.

Spain.

Spain. In those regulations of the Spanish B 0 0 K
monarchs, we discover no traces of that cruel vill.
system of extermination, which they have been
charged with adopting; and if we admit that
the neceflity of securing subsistence for their
colonies, or the advantages derived from work-
ing the mines, give them a right to avail them-
selves of the labour of the Indians, we mufft
allow, that the attention with which they regu-
late and recompence that labour, is provident
and sagacious. In no code of laws is greater
solicitude displayed, or precautions multiplied
with more prudent concern for the preservation,
the security, and the happiness of the subject, than
we discover in the collection of the Spanish laws
for the Indies. But those later regulations, like
the more early edidts which have been already
mentioned, have too often proved ineffetual
remedies against the evils which they were
intended to prevent. In every age, if the fame
causes continue to operate, the fame ef'eds
must follow. From the ilnmcnfe distance be-
tween the power entrusted with the execution
of laws, and that by whose authority they are
enadted, the vigour even of the most absolute
government mult relax, and the dread of a
fupcrior, too remote to observe with accuracy,
or to punish with difliatcli, nmufl infenlibly abate.
Notwithllianding the numerous injuncfions of

the

B o o K the Spanish monarch, the Indians still susSer on
VII}. many occasions, both from the avarice of indi-

viduals, and from the exacions of the magi-
ftrates, who ought to have protected them:
unreasonable talks are imposed; the term of
their labour is prolonged beyond the period
fixed by law, and they groan under many of
the insults and wrongs which are the lot of a
dependent people h. From some information on
which I can depend, such oppreflion abounds
more in Peru, than in any other colony. But
it is not general. According to the accounts,
even of those authors who are most disposed to
exaggerate the sufferings of the Indians, they, in
several provinces, enjoy not only ease, but aflu.
ence; they possess large farms; they are matlers
of numerous herds and flocks; and, by the
knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and industry, are supplied not only
with the necessaries, but with. many luxuries of
life .

Eccleiafti- AFTER explaining the form of civil govern-
'al conlti-
tutionotli ment in the Spanifl colonies, and the Itate of
colonit. the various orders of persons subjed to it, the

peculiarities in their ecclesiastical constitution

Ah Sec NOTE XVII.
Gag;'s Survey, P. 85. 90. 104. 1 19, &c.

merit

merit consideration. Notwithstanding the super- B o o K
flitious veneration with which the Spaniards are vnII.
devoted to the Holy See, the vigilant and jealous "
policy of Ferdinand early prompted him to take
precautions againcf the introducion of the papal
dominion into America. With this view he Refiraints
solicited Alexander VI. for a grant to the crown jurliPtLn.
of the tithes in all the newly-difcovered coun-
tries k, which he obtained on condition of his
making provision for the religious instruction of
the natives. Soon after Julius II. conferred on
him, and his successors, the right of patronage,
and the absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical bene-
sices there'. But these pontiffs, unacquainted
with the value of what he demanded, bellowed
those donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their successors have often lamented, and
wiffied to recall. In consequence of those
grants, the Spaniih monarchs have become in
effect the heads of the American church. In
them the administration of its revenues is vetted.
Their nomination of persons to supply vacant
benefices is instantly confirmed by the pope.
'hus, in all Spanish America, authority of every
species centers in the Crown. There no collision

k Bulla Alcx. VI. A. D. 150o, ap. Solurz. de Jure Ined.
n. p. 48.

Bulli Julii, ii. 150' , up. Solorz. dC Jute Ild. ii. 509.

B O O K is known between spiritual and temporal jurif-

VIII. diCtion. The king is the only superior, his name
b"'"'"^ alone is heard of, and no dependence upon any

foreign power has been introduced. Papal bulls
cannot be admitted into America, nor are they
of any force there, until they have been pre-
vioufly examined, and approved of by the royal
council of the Indies m; and if any bull should
be surreptitiously introduced, and circulated in
America without obtaining that approbation,
ecclesiastics are required not only to prevent it
from taking effecE, but to seize all the copies of
it, and transmit them to the council of the
Indiesn. To this limitation of the papal jurif-
diction, equally singular, whether we confider
the age and nation in which it was devised, or
the jealous attention with which Ferdinand and
his successors have studied to maintain it in full
force °, Spain is indebted, in a great measure,
for the uniform tranquillity which has reigned
in her American dominions.

Form and THE hierarchy is established in America in the
,entdoftle fame form as in Spain, with its full train of
ciutcl] in archbishops, bishops, deans, and other digni-
tlhe Spanifli
colonies.

In Recopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. 2. and Autas dcl Confejo de
las Indias, clxi.

" Rccop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55
o Ibid. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. panim.

taries.

taries. The inferior clergy are divided into B o o K
three classes, under the denomination of Curas, vm.
Doarlneros, and Mifoneros. The firfl are
parifli-priefts in those parts of the country where
the Spaniards have fettled. The second have
the charge of such diflricts as are inhabited by
Indians subjected to the Spanifl government,
and living under its protecion. The third are
employed ill inftruLEing and converting those
fiercer tribes, which dildain fubmiflion to the
Spanifi yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible
regions, to which the Spanish arms have not
penetrated. So numerous are the ecclesiastics
of all those various orders, and such the profuse
liberality with which many of them are endowed,
that the revenues of the church in America are
immense. The Romifli superstition appears
with its utmotl pomp in the New World.
Churches and convents there are magnificent,
and richly adorned; and on high festivals, the
display of gold and silver, and precious stones,
is such as exceeds the conception of an Euro-
pean P. An ecclesiastical eftablifhinent so splendid
and expensive, is unfavourable, as has been
formerly observed, to the progress of rising
colonies; but in countries where riches abound,
and the people are to delighted with parade,

P Voy. de Ulloa, i. 430.

that

B o o K that religion must assume it, in order to attract

VIII. their veneration, this propensity to ostentation

has been indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

Pernicious THE early inflitution of monafleries in the
nolafcic Spanish colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in
iulttutions. multiplying them, have been attended with

consequences more fatal. In every new fettle-
ment, the first objet flhould be to encourage
population, and to incite every citizen to contri-
bute towards augmenting the number and
strength of the community. During the youth
and vigour of society, while there is room to
spread, and futenance is procured with facility,
mankind increase with amazing rapidity. But
the Spaniards had hardly taken poffeefion of
America, when, with a most preposterous policy,
they began to eret convents, where persons of
both sexes were slut up, under a vow to defeat
the purpose of nature, and to counterac the first
of her laws. Influenced by a misguided piety,
which arcribes tranfcendant merit to a slate of
celibacy, or allured by the prospect of that
lifllefs cafe, which, in sultry climates, is deemed
fup!emc felicity, numbers crowded into those
mansions of sloth and fuperflition, and are loft
to society. As none but persons of Spanish
extract are admitted into the monatceries of the
New World, the evil is more sensibly felt, and

every

every monk or nun may be confidered as an active n o o K
person withdrawn from civil life. The impro- vIr.
priety of such foundations in any situation where
the extent of territory requires additional hands
to improve it, is so obvious, that tome catholic
states have cxprefsly prohibited any person in
their colonies from taking the nmonaflic vows'i.
Even the Spanish monarchs, on some occasions,
seem to have been alarmed with the spreading
of a spirit so adverse to the increase and pro-
fperity of their colonies, that they have endea-
voured to check itr. But the Spaniards in
America, more thoroughly under the influence
of superstition than their countrymen in Europe,
and direted by ecclefiaflics more bigoted and
illiterate, have conceived such an high opinion'
of monaflic fancdity, that no regulations can
restrain their zeal; and, by the excess of their
ill-judged bounty, religious houses have mnulti
plied to a degree no lcfs amazing than pernicious
to society '

IN viewing the lrate of colonies, where not ('"^.."ouf

only the number but influence of ecclesiastics is in ,pilln
lb great, the character of this powerful body is A" ""'*r

1 Voy. dc IJllua, ii. 124..
r I lcrrc:Itl, t lc( . v. lil. ix. . 1, 2. Rccop. lib, i. tit. iii.
1. , 2. tit. iv. c. ii. Soioi:.. lLb i;i. c. 23.

5Se NOT'' XVIII.
vo).. \. an.

O o K an obje't that merits particular attention. A
vinI. considerable part of the secular clergy in Mexico

and Peru are natives of Spain. Als persons long
accuftrnomd, by their education, to the rerire-
ment and indolence of academic life, are more
incapable of ateive nteerprize, and les disposed
to flrike into new paths, than any order of men,
flie cccclfiaflical ad.linturers by whom the Ame-
i-ican church is recruited, are commonly such as,
fro;n merit or rank in life, have little profpea of
of .:lt.:,i-. fuccCefi in their own country. Accordingly, the

fccular pri-its in the New World are fill led
difiinguifcd than their brethren in Spain for
literary accomplishments of any species; and
though, by the ample provision which has been
made for the American church, many of its
me;mbers enjoy the ease and independence which
are favourable to the cultivation of science, the
body of secular clergy has hardly, during two
centuries and a half, produced one author whose
works convy) fiuch ufefll information, or pofifcl
fuich a degree of merit, as to be ranked among
ithofe which attract the attention of enlightened
. ,'.- nations. But the greatefi part of the ecclefialics

in the Spanifih fttlements are regulars. On the
discovery of America, a new field opened to the
pious zeal of the monastic orders ; and, 'witl ;,.
becoming alacrity, they immediately sent iorlli
miittionarics to labour in it. The fir: attem'.

t,'

to initrult and convert the Americans was made n o o ic
by monks; and, as soon as the conquest of any vIII..
province was completed, and its ecclesiastical ,,
elfablifhment began to afume some form, the
popes permitted the miflionaries of the four
mendicant orders, as a reward for their services,
to accept of parochial charges in America, to
perform all spiritual funcions, and to receive the
tithes, and other emoluments of the benefice,
without depending on the jurisdiction of the
bishop of the diocese, or being subjed to his
censures. In consequence of this, a new career
of usefulness, as well as new objeEts of ambition,
presented themselves. Whenever a call is made
for a fi-reh supply of miflionaries, men of the
molr ardent and aspiring minds, impatient under
the restraint of a cloister, weary of its insipid
uniformity, and fatigued with the irksome repe-
tition of its frivolous functions, offer their service
iwith cagerncfs, and repair to the New World in
quefl of liberty and diftinCion. Nor do they
pursue diftintion without success. The higheSt
ecclesiastical. honours, as well as the most lucra-
tive prefcrmlents in Mexico and Peru, are often
in the hands of regulars; and it is chiefly to the
monastic orders that the Americans are indebted
ior any portion of science which is cultivated
Imrnong them. They are alnmoft the only Spanifn
(cclclianlics from whom we have received any

i.: 2 accounltS

Bo o iK accounts, either of the civil or natural history
vn.l- of the various provinces in America. Some of

them, though deeply tinged with the indelible
superstition of their profeflion, have publiflhed
books which give a favourable idea of their
abilities. The natural and moral hiftorv of the
New WVorld, by the Jesuit Acofta, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more
found science, than are to be found in any
description of remote countries publishcd in the
lixteenILl century.

~i:i-t= BUT the fame difuft: with monastic life, to

111 .1 !IIS

..
(to. of which 2Ameiica is indebted for some inftruaors

of worth and abilities, filled it with others of a
very different character. The giddy, the pro-
fligate, the avaricious, to whom the poverty and
rigid discipline of a convent are intolerable,
confider a miflion to America as a release from
mortification and bondage. There they soon
obtain some parochial charge ; and far removed,
by their fitualion, friom the infpccion of their
monaltic superiors, and exempt, by their cha-
radter, fiom the jurilfidcion of their diocesan ",
they are hardly fuibjc to any control. Accord.
ing to the teflimony of the mofl zealous
catholics, many of the regular clergy in the

" Avciduo Thliif. I1ndic. ii. 253.

Spanish

Spanish settlements are not only destitute of the B o o K
virtues becoming their profession, but regardless vIIm.
of that external decorum and refped for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a semblance
of worth where the reality is wanting. Secure
of impunity, some regulars, in contempt of their
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce, and
are so rapaciously eager in anafling wealth, that
they become the mofL grievous opprefibrs of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have pro-
tecred. Others, wvith no less flagrant violation
of their vow of chastity, indulge with little
disguise in the inoft dissolute licentiouinlc 'x.

VARIOUS fchlcies have leen proposed for

redrefling enormities lo manitefL and so offen-
five. Several perlbus, no lets emi'.:icnt f;)r ';icty
than difcerninenr, have contendedi, tlal tlhe
regulars, in conflorinilty to the c;illil of thel
churcli, ought to be colfined wxitlil the walls oi
their cloificrs, and should IIo long- r be perminted
to encroach on the fuiiclionis of the secular
clergy. Some public-liiriteld nagifirlaes, frolm
convic'tion of its being necclary to depiive tie
regulars of' a privilege bcll[, 'd at firitl. xvili
good intention, bunt of wlicl time and cil e-
rience had ldicovcledl the pernicious tilc&s,

x ,;c NOEl': iX.

1,0 ,), 15

B o o Io openly countenanced the secular clergy in their

vllI. attempts to assert their own rights. The prince
,.8. D'Eiquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philip III.

took measures so decisive and efietual for cir-
cumfcribing the regulars within their propel
sphere, as firuck them with general conflerna-
tion Y. They had recourse to their usual arts.
They alarmed the fupcrltitious, by representing
the proceedings of the viceroy as innovations
fatal to religion. They employed all the refine-
ments of intrigue, in order to gain persons in
power; and seconded by the powerful influence
of the Jesuits, who claimed and enjoyed all
the privileges which belonged to the Mendicant
orders in Amnerica, they made a deep imprefion
on a bigoted prince, and a weak ministry. The
ancient practice was tolerated. The abuses
which it occasioned continued to incieafe, and
the corruption of monks, exempt from the
restraints of discipline, and the infpedion of any
superior, became a disgrace to religion. At last,
as the veneration of the Spaniards for the
monaflic orders began to abate, and the power

June 23, of the Jesuits was on the decline, Ferdinand VI.
X757. ventured to apply the only eflfclual remedy, by

iliuing an edit, prohibiting regulars of every
denomination from taking the charge of any

Y Sec NOTE XX.

ai-i (el~

parifli with the cure of fouls; and declaring, n o o ni
that on the demise of the present incumbents, VIII.
none but secular priests, hubjet to the jurifdilion ' '""
of their diocesans, ihall be presented to vacant
benefices . If this regulation is carried into exe-
cution with steadiness in any degree proportionai
to the wisdom with which it is framed, a very
considerable reformation may take place in the
ccclefiaitical state of Spanish America, and the
secular clergy may gradually become a rel pet-
able body of men. The deportment of many
ccclefiaftics, even at present, seems to be decent
and exemplary, othlcrwif' we can hardly supp1ose
that they would be held in iuch high c(lihnhi.i:,
and poflefs such a wonlderful ascendant over the
minds of their countrymen throughout all thc
Spanish settlements.

I3Brr whateCver merit the Spanifl ecclcfiafics 'i:.liir.,-

1 I* I I

t- 11

;11 America may pofiLfs, the fuccfes of their 'li m 1lll,.,
cndeavours inl co)lilullicallilg the klnowled ge of .hli',,,;,.,..
true religion to the Indians, has been more
imperfed than might have been cxpected, either
from the degree of their zeal, or fiom the domi-
nion which they had acquired over tlh.t p'-op!'.
For this, various: reasons rill: be afiliice. 'i le
iirft mifiionariis, in their ardur to make v ol-

R iC:.l Cctll!a M.S. pir.c.; 11,.

= ,1- I) tes,

B o o Ilytes, admitted the people of America into the
vIIT. christian church, without previous inftrucion in

' '""the doftrines of religion, and even before they

themselves had acquired such knowledge of tl-.e
Indian language, as to be able to explain to
the natives the mysteries of faith, or the pre-
cepts of duty. Rclfing upon a lubtle diftinEtion
in scholastic theology, between that degree of
assent which is founded on a colmplete know-
ledge and convic-ion of duty, and that which
may be yielded when both tlicfc are imperfec-,
they adopted this strange pradice, no less incon-
fiftent with the spirit of a religion which addrefics
itself to the underfianding of men, than repug-
nant to the dictates of reason. -s obon as any
body of people, overawed by dread of the Spanish
power, moved by the example of their own
chiefs, incited by levity, or yielding from mere
ignorance, expressed the flighteit desire of
embracing the religion of their conquerors, they
were instantly baptized. While this rage of
conversion continued, a single clergyman bap-
tized in one day above five thousand Mexicanz,
and did not defill until he was so cxhlaullcd by
fatigue, that he was unable to lift his lhands '.
In the course of a few years, after the lrcducjlio
of the Mexican empire, the facraincnt of bap-

I:. Torribio, MS. Torqtui. Monid. ntlidl. l li. x. .6

..,i l

timfn was adminiitered to more than four mil- B o o K
lions '. Proselytes adopted with such inconfider- vIII.
ate hafle, and who were neither inflruted in
the nature of the tenets to which it was supposed
they had given aflent, nor taught the ablurdity
of tl!ole which they were required to relinquish,
retained their veneration for their ancient super-
flitions in full force, or mingled an attachment
to its dofrines and rites wiih that fiender know-
ledge of Chriflianiy which they had acquired.
These fentinCIuts the new converts tranfmiittcd to
their pof'erity, into whose minds they have funk
fb deep, that the Spanilh ccckfiaftics, with all
their indufRry, have not been able to eradicate
them. The religious institutions of their an-
ceftors are still remembered, and held in honour
by many of the Indians, both in Mexico and
Peru; and whenever they think tlihmfelves
out of reach of inlpection by the Spaniards,
tlcey afliinble and celebrate their idolatrous
rites .

BuTr this is not tlin; ii'f l ul'ltnmoun!:tble

obilacle to the I)rog ¥rcl:-;

, (:lirifliIlity aniolnr

lthe tlitdian:. 'I'lJI p(n 'r(..: ; l' tlli'i;' tncultivated
utidclrft.alidiigA, arc li liiltii'.L , tli 'l (iblcrvations

t 'l'.!I , :, M ^ .;

. ' . 1l1; li; .
! .; i. C. . H.

\'o). ,l '

U !in , i. !

| . '}-I;'j'.:,i' bl. :ilv. .. ';

5. x i. ,:. :'I. G "., ,
,' 1.

Bo o K and reflections reach so little beyond the mere

vII. objects of sense, that they seem hardly to have

the capacity of forming abflrat ideas, and
possess not language to express them. To fuci
men the sublime and lpiritual doctrines of Christ-
ianity muff be, in a great meafurec, incompre-
henfible. The numerous and splendid cere-
monies of the popifi worship catch the eye,
please and interest them; but when their in-
itrudors attempt to explain the articles of faith,
with which those external observances are con-
neced, though the Indians may liften with
patience, they so little conceive the meaning of
what they hear, that their acquiefccnce does not
merit the name of belief. Their indifference is
fill greater than their incapacity. Attentive
only to the present moment, and engrossed by
the objects before them, the Indians so felldon
relled upon what is past, or take thought for
what is to come, that neithcr the promiilms nor
threats of religion make much imlprellion upon

l iem

n; ande while their forcfight rarely extends

lfo ii- as the next day, it is alnoft iinpoflible to
inlir)iL them with solicitude about the concerns
<:,1 a future world. Astonished equally at their
li)Xlncls ol' c.)n)prhelcnfion, and at their insen-
Iibilily, lbmic of tlhe early iflionarics pronounced
t llem a race of mien l brutifl, as to be incalpabl
of uiiderfillingi thle til t priciplets of religiIn.

A council

A council held at Lima decreed, that, on account B o o n
of this incapacity, they ought to be excluded vm.
irom the sacrament of the Eucharifl d. Though "'"
Paul III. by his famous bull, issued in the year
1537, declared them to be rational creatures,
entitled to all the privileges of Chritians ; yet,
after the lapse of two centuries, during which
they have been members of the church, so
imperfect are their attainments in knowledge,
thar very few posiess such a portion of spiritual
lJiicerInment, as to be deemed worthy of being
admitted to the holy communion . From this
idea of their incapacity and imperfeit knowledge
of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. eftablifled
the inquisition in America in the year 1570, the
Indians were exempted from the jurifdition of
that severe tribunal , and Rtill continue under
the infpetion of their diocesans, Even after
the most perfect iniiruElion, their faith is held
to be feeble and dubious; and tlough some of
them have been taught the lcarned languages,
and have gone through the ordinary course of
academic education with applause, their frailty is
ilill lb much ifufpeted, that few Indians are

d Torqucmi. llb. xvi. c. o0.

T'orquein. lib. xvi. c. 25. G;arcia origin. 311.
Voy. de Ullou, i. 343. g ltccou. lib. vi. tit. i. I. 5.

citl;r

BOO K either ordained priests, or received into any

vinr. religious order '.

irtlo uiols FROM this brief survey, folne idea may be
of the S.a-_
nl!.h colo- formed of the interior slate of the Spanifi colo-

nies. The various productions with which they
supply and enrich the mother country, and the
fyfttei of commercial intercourse between them,
come next in order to be explained. If the
dominions of Spain in the New World had been
of such moderate extent, as bore a due propor-
tion to the parent fiate, the progress of her
colonizing might have been attended with the
Iame benefit as that of other nations. But
when, in less than half a century, her incon-
fiderate rapacity had seized on countries large-
than all Europe, her inability to fill such vafl
regions with a number of inhabitants sufficient
for the cultivation of them, was so obvious, as to
give a wrong dlirecdion to all the efforts of the
colonifis. 'ley did not lorn compact fettil:-
incii, where indultry, circumilcrilbcd within
proper limits, both in its views and operations,
is condcuctedl with that fober persevering Ipirit,
v.'licli gradually converts whatever is in its pofld:
lion to a propelr ufi, and derives thence thi'

T 'i'u ( clll. iii b.

'

.
1 b. i. i NOT XXI.

grcatt'!e

greatelt advantage. Instead of this, the Spa- 1 o o 1t
niards, seduced by the boundless prospect which vII.
opened to them, divided their pofieiions in ."
America into governments of great extent.
As their number was too small to attempt the
regular culture of the immense provinces vwhicih
they occupied rather than peopled, they bent
their attention to a few objelts, that allured them
with hopes of sudden and exorbitant gain, and
turned away with contempt from the humbler
paths of industry, which lead more ilowly, -but
with greatcr certainty, to wealth and increase of
national fireiigh.

OF all the methods by v.hich riches may be i'ln t',i,

acquired, that of fcarching for the precious
metals is one of the mofi inviting to men, who
are either unaccuflomed to the regular assiduity
with wlich the culture of the earth and the
operations of commerce Imuth be carried on, or
who are so entcrprifing and rapacious as not to
be satisfied with tli gradual returns of profil
which they yield. Accordingly, as Ibon als llth
several countries in America were lfbjected to
tTfe dominion of Spain, this was almonlt the only
method of acquiring weallh which occurred to
the adventurers, by whom they were conquered.
Such provinc:es of the conlimient as did not allure
icihe to lct lc, by tlie prol)pelt of their aslbrdulg

ald

B O O IZ gold and silver, were totally neglected. Those

VIii. in which they met with a disappointment of

the sanguine expectations they had formed, were
abandoned. Even the value of the islands, the
first-fruits of their discoveries, and the first objec.
of their attention, funk so much in their eftima-
tion, when the mines which had been opened in
th!em -ere exhausted, that they were deserted

I.y many of the planters, and left to be occupied
bv more induflrious possessors. All crowded to
Mexico and Peru, where the quantities of
gold and silver found among the natives, who
fiarched for them with little industry and less
skill, promised an unexhaufted fiore, as the
recompence of more intelligent and persevering
eltorts.

Difcovcrvo u DURING fieveral years, the ardour of their
thli_ (,t !-'l

,,,i:ll4 refcarches vw.as kept up by hope, rather than
curc ,. success. At length, the rich silver mines of

Potofi, in Peru, were accidentally discovered in
the year 1545 i, by an Indian, as he was clam-
becring up the mountain, in pursuit of a Llanma
which had firaycd from his flock. Soon after
the mines of Sacotecas, in New Spain, little
inferior to the other in value, were opened.
'rom that time, fucccilive cdifcoverics have

Fcrnai.lcz, p. i. lib, xi, c. i.

belen

been made in both colonies, and fllver mines B o o K
are now so numerous, that the working of them, viii
and of some few mines of gold in the provinces '"
of Tierra Firme, and the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a system no less
complicated than interesting. To describe the
nature of the various ores, the mode of extract-
ing them from the bowels of the earth, and to
explain the several proccfies by which the metals
are separated from the substances with which tley
are mingled, either by the action of fire, or the
attradtive powers of mercury, is the province of
the natural philosopher or chymift, rather than
of the hitorian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the Rlis

mountains of the New World poured forth their ycd.
treasures astonished mankinl, wlo had been
accuftoced hitherto to receive a penurious supply
of the precious metals, from the more scanty
itores contained in Ihe mines of the ancient:
hemifpllere. According to principles of compu-
tation, which appear to be extremely moderate,
the quantity of gold and fllver lliha has been
regularly entered in the ports of Spain, is equal
:n val le to fimr millions i1'rling annually,
reckoiiniig from the y)ar 1,192, in which Aie-
ric'. Ws dilcovcrcd, to the prcl'cnt time. This,

i.)!

B O O K in two hundred and eighty-three years, amounts

viii. to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions. Im-

mense as this fum is, the Spanish writers contend,
that as much more ought to be added to it, in
consideration of treasure which has been extracted
from the mines, and imported fraudulently into
Spain, without paying duty to the king. By this
account, Spain has drawn from the New World
a iupply of wealth, amounting at least to two
thousand millions of pounds sterling k.

Spirit tohi TiH mines, Iwhich have yielded this amazing
wl.ich this
gives lie., quantity of treasure, are not worked at the

expence of the crown, or of the public. In
order to encourage private adventurers, the
person who discovers and works a new vein, is
entitled to the property of it. Upon laying his
claim to such a discovery before the governor of
the province, a certain extent of land is measured
off, and a certain number of Indians allotted
him, under the obligation of his opening the
mine xithin a limited time, and of his paying
the cultoln.ary duty to the king, for what it flall
produce. Invited by the facility with which fucli
grants are obtained, and encouraged by forme
ftrikingm examples of success in this line of
adventi ire; not only tie lt:anguine and the

; I;.,/;;i/. "li' cr. v 1 ;'.- 1,' Colime-rcii, c. 3. IIlr-

rcr;l, ud', vii . Xi . .
ii. . c. 15. S NOTE XX sI.

bolJ,

bold, but the timid and diffident, enter upon it Bn o K
with altonifhing ardour. With vast objects Vi.
always in view, fed continually with hope, and
expecting every moment that fortune will unveil
her fecrer flores, and give up the wealth which
they contain to their willies, they deem every
other occupation insipid and unin.teresting. The
charms of this pursuit, like the rage for deep
play, are so bewitching, and take such full
possession of the mind, as even to give a new
bent to the natural temper. Under its influence
the cautious become enterprising, and the covet-
ous profuse. Powerful as this charm naturally
is, its force is augmented by the arts of an order
of men known in Peru by the cant name of
fearchcrs. These are commonly persons of
desperate fortune, who, availing themselves of
some skill in mineralogy, accompanied with the
insinuating manner and confident pretensions
peculiar to proje&ors, address the wealthy and
the credulous. By plausible descriptions of the
appearances which they have discovered of rich
veins hitherto unexplored; by producing, when
requisite, specimens of promising ore; by affirm-
ing, with an imposing assurance, that success is
certain, and that the expence muff be trifling,
they seldom fail to persuade. An association is
formed; a small furn is advanced by each
copartner ; the mine is opened; thefiearcher is

VOL. v. F entrusted

n o o K entrusted with the sole direction of every opera-,
VIlI. tion; unforeseen difficulties occur; new demands

of money are made; but, amidlt a succession of
disappointments and delays, hope is never extin-
guifhed, and the ardour of expectation hardly
abates. For it is observed, that if any person
once enter this seducing path, it is almost impof-
fible to return; his ideas alter, he seems to
be possessed with another spirit; visions of
imaginary wealth are continually before his
eyes, and he thinks, and fpcaks, and dreams of
nothing else'.
Fatal tiffas SUCH is the spirit that must be formed, wherc-

ever the acive exertions of any society are chiefly
employed in working mines of gold and silver.
No spirit is more adverse to such improvements in
agriculture and commerce, as render a nation
really opulent. If the system of administration
in the Spanish colonies had been founded upon
principles of found policy, the power and inge-
nuity of the legislature would have been exerted
with as much ardour, in refiraining its fubjets
from such pernicious industry, as is now em-
ployed in alluring them towards it. " Projedt:
" of mining" (fays a good judge of the political
conduct of nations), " inftcad of replacing the

Ulloa Entrctcn. p. 223.

C capitai

6 capital employed in them, together with the B o o K
"ordinary profit of flock, commonly absorb VIII.
"both capital and profit. They are the projets, S '
c' therefore, to which, of all others, a prudent
"lawgiver, who desired to increase the capital

of his nation, would leait choose to give any

"extraordinary encouragement, or to turn
' towards them a greater flare of that capital
"than would go to them of its own accord,
" Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence which
" all men have in their own good fortune, that
" wherever there is the least probability of
" success, too great a flare of it is apt to go to
" them of its own accord m." But in the Spa-
nifl colonies, government is studious to cherish
a spirit which it should have laboured to depress,
and, by the fanifon of its approbation, augments
that inconsiderate credulity, which has turned
the ative industry of Mexico and Peru into
such an improper channel. To this may be
imputed the flcnder progress which Spanish
America has made, during two centuries and a
half, either ill useful manufactures, or in those
lucrative branches of cultivation, which furnifil
,lie colonies of other nations with their staple
commodities. In comparison with the precious
metals every bounty of nature is so much dcfpifed,

,' Dr. Smnith's Inquiry, &c. ii. 155.

1 2 that

Bo o iK that this extravagant idea of their value has
vII. mingled with the idiom of language in America,

and the Spaniards fettled there denominate ;
country rich, not fiom the fertility of its foil,
the abundance of its crops, or the exuberance
of its pastures, but on account of the mineralt
which its mountains contain. In quest of there,
they abandon the delightful plains of Peru and
Mexico, and resort to barren and uncomfortable
regions, where they have built some of the
largest towns which they possess in the New
World. As the activity and enterprise of the
Spaniards originally took this direction, it is now
so difficult to bend them a different way, that
although, from various causes, the gain of
working mines is much decreased; the fafcina-
tion continues, and almost every person, who
takes any aftive part in the commerce of New
Spain or Peru, is fRill engaged in some adventure
of this kind".

inlll cu.m- BuTr though mines are the chief objea of the

ti', sp;,,lt Spaniards, and the precious metals which theyl
uilulics. yield form the principal article in their commerce

with America; the fertile countries which they
poflcfs there abound with other commodities o'
such value or scarcity, as to attradt a confider-

" Sec NOTE XXIII.

;bie

able degree of attention. Cochineal is a pro- B o O K
dusion almost peculiar to New Spain, of such vln.
demand in commerce, that the sale is always ~'~
certain, and it yields such profit, as amply
rewards the labour and care employed in rearing
the curious infecs of which this valuable drug is
composed, and preparing it for the market.
Quinquina, or Jesuits Bark, the most salutary
filple, perhaps, and of most restorative virtue,
that Providence, in compassion to human infir-
mity, has made known unto man, is found only
in Peru, to which it affords a lucrative branch
of commerce. The Indigo of Guatimala is
luperior in quality to that of any province in
America, and cultivated to a considerable extent.
Cacoa, though not peculiar to the Spanish colo-
nies, attains to its highest state of perfection
there, and, from the great consumption of cho-
colate in Europe, as well as in Amlerica, is a
valuable commodity. The Tobacco of Cuba,
of more exquisite flavour than any brought
tromn the New World ; the Sugar raised in that
island, in -ilpainiola, and in New Spain, toge-
ther with drugs of various kinds, may be men-
tioned among the natural produtlions of Ame-
rica, which enrich the Spanish commerce. To
there must be added an article of no inconfiledl-
;iblc account, the exportation of hides; for which,
;. , wll as for manay of thole which I Iiave cnrinie-

Y ', rated.

B o O K rated, the Spaniards are more indebted to thL

VIIi. wonderful fertility of the country, than to their

own foresight and industry. The domeflic
animals of Europe, particularly horned cattle,
have multiplied in the New World with a rapi.
dity which almost exceeds belief. A few year:
after the Spaniards fettled there, the herds of
tame cattle became so numerous, that theii
proprietors reckoned them by thousands °. Les.
attention being paid to them, as they continuied
to increase, they were suffered to run wild, ani
spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate, and covered with rich
pasture, their number became immense. They
range over the vast plains which extend from
Buenos Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of
thirty or forty thousand; and the unlucky
traveller who once falls in among them, may
proceed several days before he can difcntanglc
himself from among the crowd that covers thc
face of the earth, and seems to have no en!.
They are hardly less numerous in New Spain,
and in several other provinces: they are killed
merely for the fake of their hides; and tle
Daughter at certain Ieafons is so great, that the
stench of their carcases, which are left in the

o Ovicdo ap Ra f .

iRa

u B.

i . . Hacklyt, i)i. .4(,
511.

sicd,

field, would inseE the air, if large packs of B o o 1~
wild dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazos, or vm.
American vultures, the most voracious of all -'"
the feathered kind, did not inflantly devour
them. The number of those hides exported in,
every fleet to Europe is very great, and is a
lucrative branch of commerce P.

ALMOST all thefemay be confidered as flaple

commodities peculiar to America, and different,
if we except that lafr mentioned, from the pro-
du&tions of the mother country.

WHIEN the importation into Spain of those Advantages

.w·ikh Spain
various articles from her colonies firit became dcriveslrom

mte-r her irnterior~~~

in

i her colonies.

aAtive and considerable, her interior industry
and manufadures were in a state so prosperous,
that with the produEt of there flhe was able both
to purchase the commodities of the New World,
and to answer its growing demands. Under the
reigns of Ferdinand and Ifahella, and Charles V.
Spain was one of the most industrious countries
in Europe. 1Her manufactures in wool, and
flax, and silk, were so extensive, as not only to
Iurnifi what was hifficient for her own conifump-
tion, but to afford a surplus for cxportation.

Acolli, 111). iii. c . 'c. O all, ITiif. (f Chili. Cllhlrch.

Collcdt. ii;;. f17 .

f bd. v. v p.

p. 68 . 9z2. L ltcs Editl

. 2

3i . F
i23 i i. 2l , 9.

l 4 Vlhcin

B O O i When a market for them, formerly unknown.
VIII. and to which she alone had access, opened in

America, The had recourse to her domefsic
store, and found there an abundant supply .
This new employment must naturally have added
vivacity to the spirit of industry. Nourifled
and invigorated by it, the 'manufactures, the
population, and wealth of Spain, might have
gone on increasing in the fame proportion with
the growth of her colonies. Nor was the state
of the Spanish marine at this period less flou-
rifhing than that of its manufactures. In the
beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain i:-
said to have possessed above a thousand mer-
chant-ihips r, a number probably far superior to
that of any nation in Europe in that age. By
the aid which foreign trade and domestic industry
give reciprocally to each other in their progress,
the augmentation of both muff have been
rapid and extensive, and Spain might have
received the fame accession of opulence and
vigour from her acquisitions in the New World,
that other powers have derived from their
colonies there.

Why e

C BUT various causes prevented this. The lfinc

(dot,. not
lnow c, ive thing happens to nations as to individuals.
the fame.

q See NOTE XXIV. ' Ca;mpomancs, ii. 140.

W ealtIl)

Wealth, which flows in gradually, and with B o o I
moderate increase, feeds and nourishes that VIII
activity which is friendly to commerce, and calls
it forth into vigorous and well-conduced exer-
tions; but when opulence pours in suddenly, and
with too full a stream, it overturns all fober
plans of industry, and brings along with it a
taste for what is wild and extravagant, and
daring in business or in adion. Such was the
great and sudden augmentation of power and
revenue, that the pofFeflion of America brought
into Spain; and some symptoms of its pernicious
influence upon the political operations of that
monarchy soon began to appear. For a confi-
derable time, however, the supply of treasure
from the New World was scanty and preca-
rious; and the genius of Charles V. conducted
public measures with such prudence, that the
effects of this influence were little perceived.
But when Philip II. ascended the Spanifi throne,
with talents far inferior to thole of his father,
and remittances from the colonies became a
regular and considerable branch of revenue, the
fatal operation of this rapid change in the Itate
of the kingdom, both on the monarch and his
people, was at once conspicuous. Philip, pol-

fliing that spirit of unccafing afliduity, which

often charaderiles the ambition of men of mode-
rate talents, entertained such an high opinion of

6 his

B o K his own resources, that he thought nothing too

VIII. arduous for him to undertake. Shut up himself

in the solitude of the Escurial, he troubled and
annoyed all the nations around him. He waged
open war with the Dutch and English ; lie encou-
raged and aided a rebellious faction in France;
he conquered Portugal, and maintained armies
and garrisons in Italy, Africa, and both the
Indies. By such a multiplicity of great and
complicated operations, pursued with ardour
during the course of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the
weak administration of his fucceflor, Philip III.,
the vigour of the nation continued to decrease,
A.D. 6:i. and funk into the lowest decline, when the

inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expclled
at once near a million of his moit industrious
fubjets, at the very time when the exhausted
ilate of the kingdom required rome extraordinary
exertion of political wifdlom to augment it;
numbcrs, and to revive its flrength. Early in
the feventecnth century, Spain felt such a dimi-
nution in the number of her people, that from
inability to recruit her armies, flie was obliged
lo contira her operations. Her ilouri'liing
manufacturcs were fallen into decav. I-Her fleets,
whi:(.'.i had been the terror of all Europe, were
ruined. Iler extensive foreign comlni'rce was
loft. The trade between dlilltrent parts of Ih-ir

0', ;1

own dominions was interrupted, and the ships B o o K
which attempted to carry it on were taken viii.
and plundered by enemies whom fihe once
despised. Even agriculture, the primary obje&t
of induftiy in every prolperous tate, was
negyleced, and one of the most fertile countries
in Europe hardly raised what was sufficient for
the fuipport of its own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manu- R,,p',l

factures of the parent fate declined, the demands la,., lt
of her colonies continued to increase. The Spa-
niards, like their monarchs, intoxicated with
the wealth which poured in annually upon them,
deserted the paths of induitry, to which they
had been accustomed, and repaired with eager-
ness to those regions from which this opulence
ifued. By this rage of emigration, another
drain was opened, and the ftrcngth of the colo-
nies augmented by exhaufling that of the mother
country. All those emigrants, as well as the
adventurers who had at firll fettlcd in Amlerica,
depended absolutely upon Spain for almost every
article of neccirary collumlption. l'kEgaged iil
more alluring and lucrative pursuits, or prevented
by rellraints which government imposed, they
could not turn their own attntiion towards efta.
blillingi the man ulacturcs rcrquiite Ior comI;l i -
able Iubfiftencc. They received (as 1 I n

G1)1.1 v\.\

B o o K observed in another place) their clothing, their

v'I. furniture, whatever ministers to the ease or

luxury of life, and even their instruments of
labour, fiom Europe. Spain, thinned of people,
and decreasing in induitry, was unable to supply
their growing demands. She had recourse to
her neighbours. The manufadtures of the Low
Countries, of England, of France, and of Italy,
which her wants called into exiltence, or ani.
mated with new vivacity, furnished in abundance
whatever she required. In vain did the funda-
mental law, concerning the exclusion of foreigners
from trade with America, oppose this innovation.
Neceflity,more powerful than any statute, dcfeated
its operation, and conflrained the Spaniards
themselves to concur in eluding it. The Englifih,
the French, and Dutch, relying on the fidelity
and honour of Spanish merchants, who lend
their names to cover the deceit, fend out their
inanufadures to America, and receive the exor-
bitant price ior which they are Ibld there, citlher
in specie, or in the rich coimoloditics of the NUvW
World. Neither tle dread of danger, nor tlie
allurement of profit, ever induced a Spanifl
fator to betray or defraud the periion who con-
fided in him ' ; and that probity, which is the
.pride and difitini2oii of the nation, contributes

Z av ;l t l prc fciit ciou, p. 22 6.

t'o

to its ruin. In a flort time, not above a twen- B o o K
tieth part of the commodities exported to VIII.
America was of Spanilf growth or fabtiic'. All
the refi was the property of foreign merchants,
though entered in the name of Spaniards. The
treasure of the New 'World may be said hence-
forward not to have belonged to Spain. Before
it reached Europe, it was anticipated as the price
of goods purchased from foreigners. That
wealth which, by an internal circulation, would
have spread through each vein of induitry,
and have conveyed life and movement to every
branch of manufacture, flowed out of the king-
dom with such a rapid course, as neither enriched
nor animated it. On the other hand, the artizans
of rival nations, encouraged by this quick sale
of their commodities, improved so much in skill
and induitry, as to he able to afford them at a
rate so low, that the manufactures of Spain,
which could not vie with theirs, either in quality
or cheapness of work, were still farther dleprefled.
'1'i.h deitruciive commerce drained oil' the riches
of tie nation faiter and lmore completely, than
even the extravagant Ichcmes of ambition carried
on by its monarchs. Spain was lo much afto-
niflcd and difth-cfl;l, at clholdiing her American
I tlaflurCS vanifilh :ln.lt as roon as they were

:(','"1o,.;", [ii. I S. ·

in !l'oj ttc,

B o o 1 imported, that Philip III. unable to supply what
ViII. was requisite in circulation, issued an edid, by

which he endeavoured to raise copper money to
a value in currency nearly equal to that of
silver U'; and the lord of the Peruvian and Mexi-
call mines was reduced to a wretched expedient,
which is the last rcfource of petty impoverifled
htates.

THrU the possessions of Spain in America have

not proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other
nations. In the countries of Europe, where the
spirit of industry fubrifts in full vigour, every
person fettled in such colonies as are Iimilar in
their situation to those of Spain is supposed to
give employment to three or four at home in
iupplying his wants x. But wherever the mother
country cannot afford this supply, every emigrant
may be confidered as a citizen lofl to the com-
munity, and firangers mull reap all the benefit
of answering his demands.

i1tic.i(.' Iy SuciI las been thl internal slate of Spain
tile Illo(!c oi(
rcg .i.i i. fronm the clolc of the fixLcenth century, and
,l,-it, ,ih lfucli her inability to supply the growing wants
"""'"' of her colonies. The faial cfllcts of this dif-

" U.t;ir.'z, c. 10o. v Child on Trade and Colonica.

proporlion

proportion between their demands, and her B o K
capacity of answering them, have been much viii.
increased by the mode ill which Spain has endea-
voured to regulate the intercourle between the
mother country and the colonies. It is from her
idea of monopolizing the trade with America,
and debarring her fubjeds there fiom any com-
munication with foreigners, that all her jealous
and fyflematic arrangements have arifcn. 'liefe
are so singular in their natLire and conlcquences
as to merit a particular explanation. In order
to secure the monopoly at which she aimed,
Spain did not vest the trade with her colo:cics in
an exclusive company, a plan which has been
adopted by nations muore commercial, and at a
period when mercantile policy was an objeet of
greater attention, and ought to have been better
tunderftood. The Dutch gave up the whole
trade with their colonies, both in the East and
Weift Indies, to exclusive companies. The
Lnglifh, the 'rench, the D.nes, have imitated
their example with recic.i In the Eafl Indian.
commerce; antd the two firn:er have laid a
fillilar reflrainrt upon lil(me brancles of their
rrade willi the New \V'ld. 'The wit of mnlr
cannot, perhaps, devilL a nmethod fr checking
the progress of idiittlly andl luplIation in a new
colony lmore clledual tlali tlis. T''e intcrcl:
''i the coluoni, and of the (xclufivc collpal),y,

11mul

B o O 1 must in every point be diametrically oppofitc;
vIII. and as the latter possesses such advantages in this

unequal contest, that it can prescribe at pleasure
the terms of intercourse, the former mull not
only buy dear and fell cheap, but muff susser
the mortification of having the increase of its
surplus flock discouraged by those very persons
to whom alone it can dilpofe of its produc-
tions Y.

T'his con- SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from
fin; d to one
oirlin falling into this error of policy, by the high ideas

which flie early formed concerning the riches of
the New World. Gold and silver were commo-
dities of too high value to veil a monopoly of
them in private hands. The crown wished to
retain the direction of a commerce so inviting.;
and, in order to secure that, ordained the cargo
of every fliip fitted out for America, to be
infpeaed by the officers of the Cosa rde Contra-
iac'(i/i in Seville, before it could receive a licence
to make the voyage; and that on its return, a
report of the commodities which it brougli
flould be Inade to the fame board, before it
could be pernlitted to land them. In confe-
quence of llis regulation, all the trade of Spain
withthhe Nc\ World centred originally in the

"'-;:,'.h't l l'p'. ii. 171t

poi;

port of Seville, and was gradually brought into B o o x
a form, in which it has been conduced, with VIII.
little variation, from the middle of the sixteenth
century almost to our own times. For the
greater security of the valuable cargoes sent to
America, as well as for the more easy prevention
of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its colo-
nies is carried on by fleets which fail under strong
convoys. These fleets, confifling of two fqua-
drons, one distinguished by the name of the
Galeons, the other by that of the Flota, are
equipped annually. Formerly they took their
departure from Seville ; but as the port of Cadiz
has been found more commodious, they have
failed from it since the year 1720.

THE Galeons deflined to supply Tierra Firmej, Car,,-l, on

and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost lj Ga-
every article of luxury, or neceflary confump-
tion, that an opulent people can demand, touch
first at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To
the former, the merchants of Santa Martha,
Caraccas, the New Kingdom of Granada, and
several other provinces, retort. The latter is
the great mart for the rich commerce of Peru
and Chili. At the Icalon when the Galeons are
expcetcd, the productL of all the mines in these
two kingdoms, together witli their other valu-
allc commodities, is tranlforted by lea to

VOL. V. i P'alna.

B o o K Panama. From thence, as soon as the appearance

VIII. of the fleet from Europe is announced, they are
"'"' conveyed across the isthmus, partly on mules, and

partly down the river Chagre to Porto-bello.
This paltry village, the climate of which, from
the pernicious union of excessive heat, continual
moilture, and the putrid exhalations arising
from a rank Ibil, is more fatal to life than any
perhaps in the known world, is immediately filled
with people. From being the residence of a
few negroes and mulattoes, and of amiferable
garrison relieved every three months, Porto-
bello assumes suddenly a very different afpecd,
and its fireets are crowded with opulent mer-
chants from every corner of Peru, and the
adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wealth
of America is exchanged for the manufaturcs
of Europe; and, during its prescribed term of
forty days, the richest traffic on the face of the
earth is begun and finifled, with that simplicity
of tranfation and that unbounded confidence,
and Flora. which accompany extensive commerce . Tlhe

Flota holds its course to Vera Cruz. The trea-
fures and commodities of New Spain, and the
depending provinces, which were depofitecd at
Puebla de los Angeles, in expectation of its
arrival, are carried thither; and the commercial

v ',., NOTIE XV.

operations of Vera Cruz, conduded in the fame B o o K
manner with those of Porto-bello, are inferior vlI.
to them only in importance and value. Both
fleets, as soon as they have completed their
cargoes from America, rendezvous at the
Havanna, and return in company to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while Bad effc&as

of this ar-

thus fettered and reftrided, came necessarily to i.ingemicnt
be condu&ed with the fame spirit, and upon the
fame principles, as that of an exclusive company.
Being confined to a single port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole
of it was gradually engrossed by a small number
of wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now
in Cadiz. These by combinations, which they
can easily form, may altogether prevent that
competition which preserves commodities at their
natural price; and by acing in concert, to
which they are prompted by their mutual
interest, they may raile or lower the value of
them at pleasure. In consequence of this, the
price of European goods in America is always
high, and often exorbitant. A hundred, two
hundred, and even three hundred per cent. are
profits not uncommon in the commerce of Spain
with her colonies . From the fame engrofing

' B1. TUllo;l Rttablli. p;at ii. p. 191.

2 f pirit

B O O K spirit it fiequently happens, that traders of thle

VI1. second order, whose warehouses do not contain

a complete assortment of commodities for the
American markct, cannot purchase from the
more opulent merchants such goods as they
want, at a lower price than that for which they
are fold in the colonies. irth the fame vigilant
jealouly that an exclusive company guards againlt
the intrusion of the siee trader, those overgrown
nonopolilts eindeavour to check the progress of
every one wholf encroachinents they dreadb.
This reflraint of the Amierican commerce to one
port, not only afTects its domeflic f-ate, but
limits its foreign operations. A monopolist may
acquire more, and certainly will hazard less, by
a confined trade which yields exorbitant profit,
than by an c 'tcnfive commerce in lwhich he
receives only a moderate return of gain. It is
often his intere(t not to enlarge, but to circuin-
icribc the sphere of his activity; and, inftcad of
calling l ;rth more vigorous exertions of coni-
mercial indulryl, it may be the object of his
attention to check and let bounds to them. B3y
lni iicfuh Ima:im, the mercantile policy of Spain
I'crnls to have rceiulated its intercourle vithl
.:iAmertica. fllftc.td of ilurnlilhiin t1he clolnieCs

, -Smithl': lIi'.il''',,', 5. i1 . C.iil ulloi cbs, ldii'' l\ iiil

kith European goods in such quantity as might B o o K
render both the price and the profit moderate, vil.
the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem to have '
supplied them with a sparing hand, that the
eagerness of competition amonglt customers,
obliged to purchase in a scanty market, might
enable the Spanish facors to dispose of their
cargoes with exorbitant gain. About the middle
of the last century, when the exclusive trade to
America from Seville was in its moit flourilhing
slate, the burthen of the two united squadrons
of the Galeons and Flota did not exceed twenty-
seven thousand five hundred tons . The supply
which such a fleet could carry must have been
very inadequate to the demands of tholf popu-
lous and extensive colonies, which depended
upon it for all the luxuries, and many of the
necelTries of life.

S,;IAIN early became sensible of lher dcclcllioun ilR,.d;b

from her former prosperity ; and many relpcCt-
able and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts
in (leviling methods for reviving the decaying
iiinluftry and commerce of their country. From
the violence of the remedies proposed, we may
julge how desperate and fatal the malady
appi)ared. Some, confounding a violation of

C (';;iil;,'lllilitS, L'"ilC. PopU l. i. '135. ii. i Io.

',.*; 3 cpolice

B O K police with criminality against the tfate, con.
VIl'. tended that, in order to check illicit commerce,

every person conviaed of carrying it on should
be punished with death, and confiscation of all
his effets d. Others, forgetting the diftin&ion
between civil offences and acts of impiety,
insisted, that contraband trade flould be ranked
among the crimes reserved for the cognizance of
the Inquisition; that such as were guilty of it
might be tried and punished, according to the
secret and summary form in which that dreadful
tribunal exercises its jurifdidion c. Others, unin-
firuded by observing the pernicious effeds of
monopolies in every country where they have
been eftablilhed, have proposed to velt the trade
with America in exclulive companies, which
interest would render the most vigilant guardians
of the Spanish commerce against the incroach-
ment of the interlopers '

BESIDES these wild projecs, many schemes,

better digested and more beneficial, were fug-
gested. But under the feeble monarchs, with
whom the reign of the Austrian line in Spain
closed, incapacity and indecision are conspicuous
in every department of government. Inficad of

' M. de Santa Cruz Coimmrcrcia Sucllo, p. 142.
e Moncada Rcltaura;cion politica de EIfpagnla, p. 41.
f Zavalla y Augnon Reprclfetacion, &c. p. 1to.

taking

taking for their model the acive adminifiration Bn o K
of Charles V. they affected to imitate the cautious vmI.
procrastinating wisdom of Philip II. and deltitute
of his talents, they deliberated perpetually, but
determined nothing. No remedy was applied
to the evils under which the national commerce,
domefic as well as foreign, languished. These
evils continued to increase; and Spain, with
dominions more extensive and more opulent than
any European Rate, possessed neither vigour,
nor money g, nor industry. At length, the vio-
lence of a great national convulsion roused the
slumbering genius of Spain. The efforts of the
two contending parties in the civil war, kindled
by the dispute concerning the succession of the
crown at the beginning of this century, called
forth, in some degree, the ancient spirit and
vigour of the nation. While men were thus
forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than those which had influenced the
councils of the monarchy during the course of
a century, Spain derived fiom an unexpected
bource the means of availing itself of their
talents. The various powers who favoured the
prctenfions either of the Austrian or Bourbon
candidate for the Spanish throne, sent formidable
llccts and armies to their support ; France,

Sec NOTE XXVI.

; 4 England,

B O o IK England, and Holland remitted immense fums

VIII to Spain. These were spent in the provinces

which became the theatre of war. Part of the
American treasure, of which foreigners had
drained the kingdom, flowed back thither.
From this era, one of the most intelligent Spanifl
authors dates the revival of the monarchy; and,
however humiliating the truth may be, he
acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate
to the exigencies of the public h.

Step to- As fcon as the Bourbons obtained quiet posses-
W;)in . ill -
p,-r..,,I;.t sion of the throne, they discerned this change in
by the
-o''oun the spirit of the people, and in the state of the
molarcls, nation, and took advantage of it; for although

that family has not given monarchs to Spain
remarkable for superiority of genius, they have
all been beneficent princes, attentive to the
happiness of their fubjedts, and felicitous to
promote it. It was, accorlingly, the first
objed of Philip V. to suppress an innovation
which had crept in during the course of the
war, and had overturned the whole fyflem of

ylrxcluin:g the Spanifli commerce with America. The
tio] nir.d1. ]',ntglifl and Dutch, by their iuperiority in naval
'.",th fci;, ;

l' Campon'l;mtus, i. 4.20.

O)Vl',,:

power, having acquired such command of the n o o K
sea, as to cut off all intercourse between Spain viI.
and her colonies, Spain, in order to furnifl her {'~
fubjedts in America those necessaries of life, with-
out which they could not exist, and as the only
means of receiving from thence any part of
their treasure, departed so far from the usual
rigour of its maxims as to open the trade with
Peru to her allies the French. The merchants
of St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the
privilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in
it with vigour, and carried it on upon principles
very different fiom thole of the Spaniards. They
supplied Peru with European commodities at a
moderate price, and not in flinted quantity.
The goods which they imported were conveyed
to every province of Spanish America, in such
abundance as had never been known in any
former period. If this intercourse had been
continued, the exportation of European com-
modities from Spain mufft have cealed, and the
dependence of the colonies on the mother
country have been at an end. The inofl: 17.
peremptory injunctions wcre therefore issued,
prohibiting the admillion of foreign vetels into
any port of Peru or Chili , and a Spanish

' Fr'ezier Voy. 25). B. Ulloa Rrtub. II. o14, &r.
Alccdo y I-lcrrcii. A\vifu, &c. 236.

squadron

B o o R squadron was employed to clear the South Sea
vrin. of intruders, whose aid was no longer necef-

fary.

by chccking BUT though, on the cessation of the war,
contraband
trade, which was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht,

Spain obtained relief from one encroachment on
her commercial system, she was exposed to
another, which file deemed hardly less pernicious.
As an inducement that might prevail with queen
Anne to conclude a peace, which France and
Spain desired with equal ardour, Philip V. not

pnrticularly only conveyed to Great Britain the A4tiento,
of the Eln-
1ah Affinto or contrat for fipplying the Spanish colonies
conan with negroes, which had formerly been enjoyed

by France, but granted it the more extraordinary
privilege of fending annually to the fair of Porto-
bello a ship of five hundred tons, laden with
European commodities. In confcquence of this,
Britiflh factories were eflablifhed at Carthagena,
Panama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres, and other
Spanifl fettlcments. The veil with which Spain
had hitherto covered the rfate and tranlaclions
of her colonies was removed. The agents of a
rival nation, residing in the towns of molt exten-
five trade, and of chief relort, had the belt
opportunities of becoming acquainted with the
interior condition of the American provinces,
of oblerving their itatcd and occasional wants,

and

and of knowing what commodities might be B o o K
imported into them with the greatest advantage. vIII.
In consequence of information so authentic and
expeditious, the merchants of Jamaica and other
English colonies who traded to the Spanifli main,
were enabled to assort and proportion their
cargoes so exaftly to the demands of the market,
that the contraband commerce was carried on
with a facility and to an extent unknown in any
former period. This, however, was not the
most fatal consequence of the Afliento to the
trade of Spain. The agents of the British
South Sea Company, under cover of the import-
ation which they were authorised to make by the
ship sent annually to Porto-bello, poured in their
commodities on the Spanish continent, without
limitation or restraint. Inflead of a ship of five
hundred tons, as stipulated in the treaty, they
usually employed one which exceeded nine
hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three smaller vessels, which,
mooring in some neighbouring creek, supplied
her clandeltinely with fresh bales of goods, to
replace such as were fold. The infpedors of
the fair, and officers of the revenue, gained by
exorbitant presents, connived at the fraudk.
Thus, partly by the operations of the company,

k Sec NOTE XXVII.

and

B o o R and partly by the activity of private interlopers,
vnII- almost the whole trade of Spanish America was

engrossed by foreigners. The immense com-
merce of the Galeons, formerly the pride o;'
'737- Spain, and the envy of other nations, funk to

nothing, and the squadron itself reduced from
fifteen thousand to two thousand tolls', served
hardly any purpose but to fetch home the royal
revenue arising from the fifth on silver.

CGurda WIILE Spain observed those encroachments,
Cofias em-
ployed for and felt so sensibly their pernicious effcEts, it wias
inplwr" impossible not to make Ibme effort to restrain

them. Her firl expedient was to Ration ships of
force, under the appellation of Guarla Co/glas,
upon the coafits of those provinces to which
interlopers most frequently resorted. As private
interest concurred with the duty which they
owed to the public, in rendering the officers
who commanded those vessels vigilant and ative,
some check was given to the prngrefs of the
contraband trade, though in doininions so extcn-
five, and so acceflible by sea, hardly any number
of cruisers was sufficient to guard against: its
inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourse, which had been carried on with
so much facility, that the merchants in the

Aliccd y lcIrci ;ia, p. 359. Canpomaics, i. 436.

Il3ritifh

British colonies were accustomed to confider it B o o K
almost as an allowed branch of commerce, vIm.
excited murmurs and complaints. These autho-
rifed, in some measure, and rendered more
interesting, by several unjufiifiable ats of vio-
lence committed by the captains of the Spanifih %
Guarda Costas, precipitated Great Britain into 1739.
a war with Spain; in consequence of which the
latter obtained a final release from the Afliento,
and was left at liberty to regulate the commerce
of her colonies, without being restrained by
any engagement with a foreign power.

As the formidablle encroachments of the Eng- Tlc fcof

lifh on their American trade, had discovered to hilps intro-
the Spaniards the vafl consumption of European ducd.
goods in their colonies, and taught them the
advantage of accommodating their importations
to the occasional demand of the various pro-
vinces, they perceived the necessity of devising
tolme method of flipplying their colonies, differ-
ent from their ancient one of fending thither
p:riodical fleets. That mode of communication
had been fouInd not onlv to be uncertain, as the
dep.rture of the Galcols and Flota was some-
timcs retarded by various accidents, and often
prevented by the wars which raged in Europe;
but long experience had lhewn it to be ill
adapted to allbrd America a regular and timely

fu pplly

B 0 o K supply of what it wanted. The scarcity of
ViII. European goods in the Spaniffi settlements fre.

quently became exceflive; their price rose to
an enormous height; the vigilant eye of mer.
cantile attention did not fail to observe this
favourable opportunity; an ample supply was
poured in by interlopers from the English, the
French, and Dutch islands; and when the
Galeons at length arrived, they found the
markets so glutted by this illicit commerce, that
there was no demand for the commodities with
which they were loaded. In order to remedy
this, Spain has permitted a considerable part of
her commerce with America to be carried on by
regifterJhips. These are fitted out, during the
intervals between the flated seasons when the
Galeons and Flota fail, by merchants in Seville
or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence from the
council of the Indies, for which they pay a very
high premium, and are deflined for those ports
in America where any extraordinary demand is
foreseen or expcetcd. By this expedient, such
a regular lupply of the commodities, for which
there is the greatest demand, is conveyed to the
American market, tliat the interloper is no
longer allured by the firie I'rof'jcl oi' excelive
gain, or the people in the colonies urged by the
fame neccnity to engage inl the hazardous advln-
tures of contraband trade.

I N

IN proportion as experience manifefled the B o o K

advantages of carrying on trade in this mode, vII.
the number of register ships increased; and at The Gale-
length, in the year 1748, the Galeons, after onsbo-
having been employed upwards of two centuries,
tRvere finally laid aside. From that period there
has been no intercourse with Chili and Peru but
by tingle flhips, dispatched from time to time as
occalson requires, and when the merchants
expec a profitable market will open. These
flips fail round Cape Horn, and convey directly
to the ports in the South Sea the producions
and manufactures of Europe, for which the
people lettled in those countries were formerly
obliged to repair to Porto-bello or Panama.
These towns, as has been formerly observed,
must gradually decline, when deprived of that
commerce to which they owed their prosperity.
This disadvantage, however, is more than com-
penfated by the beneficial effics of this new
arrangement, as the whole continent of South
America receives new supplies of European
commodities, with so much regularity, and in
such abundance, as mult not only contribute
greatly to the happiness, but increase the popu-
lation of all the colonies fettled there. But as
all the regifler flips deflined for the South Seas
mulfl lill take their departure from Cadiz, and

are

B o O I are obliged to return thither , this branch of
VIII- the American commerce, even in its new and

improved form, continues subjet to the restraints
of a ipecies of monopoly, and feels those per-
nicious effects of it, which I have already de-
fcribed.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined
reviving : '
commmrce. to regulating the trade with its more flourishing

colonies, it has extended likewise to the reviving
commerce in those fettlenients where it was
negleEted, or had decayed. Among the new
talles which the people of Europe have acquired.
in consequence of importing the productions of
those countries which they conquered in America,
that for chocolate is one of the molt universal.
The use of this liquor made with a paste, formed
of the nut or almond of the cacao-tree, com-
pounded with various ingredients, the Spaniards
first learned from the Mexicans ; and it has
appeared to them, and to the other European
nations, so palata!le, io nourifling, and lo
wholcfoine, that it has become a commercial
article of conliderable importance. The cacao-
tree grows lponitaleoufly in leveral parts olf the
torrid zone; but the nuts of the befl quality,

" C'amipomliac, l , i. .r-3t4 440'

1Lcxt

next to thdoe of Guatimala, on the South o o Ki
Sea, are produced in the rich plains of Caraccas, vII
a province of Tierra Firinc. In consequence
of this acknowledged fupcriority in the qua-
lity of cacao in that province, and its com-
munication with the Atlantic, which facilitates
the conveyance to Europe, the culture of
the cacao there is more extensive than in any
diftrici of America. But the I)utch, by the
vicinity of their settlements in the finall islands
of Curazoa and Buen-Ayre, to the coast of
Caraccas, gradually engrossed the greatest part
of the cacao trade. The traffic with the mother
country for this valuable commodity ceased
almost entirely; and such was the supine negli-
gence of the Spaniards, or the defects of their
coimmercial arrangements, that they were obliged
to'receive from the hands of foreigners this
produEtion of their own colonies, at an exor-
b)itant price. In order to remedy an evil no less i,)ycflhii.ih
difTgraceful than pernicious to his fubjets, cozlpaly of
Philip V. in the )year 1728, granted to a body ca"-c".
of merchants an exclusive right to the commerce
nwith Caraccas and Cumana, on condition of
lic,;r emplo)ying, at their owni cxpence, a fuffi-
(n'irt inumnber of armed vessels to clear the coast
ol' ilteitrlopers. This focic y, cliftinguilled some-
liiiec, by the iname of tle C.ompany of Guipufcoa,
fi')m the province of Spain in which it is efta-
lI! 'ld, and Lbomctillns by that of the Company

V i.. IV, lI of

B o o K of Caraccas, from the difiril of America tc
vilI. which it trades, has carried on its operation,.

.'- ~w
w ith such vigour and success, that Spain ih:;

recovered an important branch of commerce,
which ihe had fuflered to be xvrefted from her,
and is plentifully supplied with an article (,4
extenfivc consumption at a moderate price. No:
only the parent Ilatc, but the colony of Caraccai,
has derived great advantages from this inftitu.
tion ; for although, at the first aspect, it nma
appear to be one of those monopolies, whifc
tendency is to check the spirit of induf.rv,
infiead of calling it forth to new exertions, i'
has been prevented from operating in tliu,
manner by fiveral salutary regulations, fiam.d
upon forclight of such bad effEcts, and of purpoiL
to obviate them. The planters in the Caracc;.
are not left to depend entirely on the companly,
either for the importation of European conmmol-
lities, or the falc of their own prodluciolns. 'ii.
inhabit lnts of the Canary islands have the privi-
lege of fndling thither annually a regiiLh r lhl'
of considerable burden ; and frol Vera Cr(li::
in New Spain, a free trade is pcrmitted in ever,'
port comprehended in the charter of the cori-
Ip:;my. In consequence of this, there is fucli a
cormplctitioll, that both witLh refped to what tlhe
colonies piLlchafe, and what they fell, the pricc
!eeis to be fixed at its natural and cquitall

rate. The company has not the power of B o o IK
railing the former, or of degrading the latter at VIll.
pleasure; and accordingly, since it was efta-
blifhed, the increase of culture, of population,
and of live flock, in the province of Caraccas,
has been very considerable n.

BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquifhl any rnn.lY-

nenrt oif

fyflem which time has rendered venerable, and commercial
as it is fill more slowly that commerce can be Spain.
diverted from the channel in which it has long
been accustomed to flow, Philip V. in his new
regulations concerning the American trade, paid
such deference to the ancient maxim of Spain,
concerning the limitation of all importation from
the New World to one harbour, as to oblige
both the register fliips which returned from
Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan Company
from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in the
port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments
more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in
Spain. 'The spirit of philosophical inquiry,
which it is the glory of the present age to have
turned fiom frivolous or abftrufc speculations,
to the business and affairs of men, has extended
its influence beyond the Pyrenees. In the
refeaichels of ingenious authors, concerning the

"Sec NOTE XXVIII.

H 2 police

B o o 1.: police or coimmerce of nations, the errors anld

vIL- defects of the Spaniiih fyfrcin hisil rcfipcd to both

met every eye, a;:d have notr niy been exposed
with fevcritr, but are held up a: a warning to
other artes. 'The Slpaniards, fi.nng with tlie
reproach:csO cf thc'l authors, or convinced by
their arguliitIs, and admonifihed by fevenal
cnllightened wricrs of their own country, fecm
at lengti to have difcovcrcd the deftruc:ive teii-
(icncy of tlhoe llarrow mlaxims, which, by
cramping c(.lllmmlerce in all its operations, have
1o long rctaldcdc its progress. It is to the mo-
narch now on the throne, that Spain is indebted
for the firil public regulation formed in conie-
quence of such enlarged ideas.

r.o::l;h- 1iT.':ii.l: Spain adhered with rigour to ILe
:'l,,: anci.'tt nlCilt m':aximl concerning her comlmerce will
boii. \Amierica, flie was so much asiaid of opening [ ily

chalnnl, b)y lwhich an illicit trade might find
admiflion into the Colonies, that flie alinoiil fli!!
hierflcl out firom any i:ltcrcourlfe w\ith theni, bul
that which was carried on by her annual fleeL.
'here :ws no cftablinfi mnt for a regular commiu-
nication of cirher pb!lic or private iiicllicaiicc,
betLlvcn tlhe motlier country and its Ame:ricua
Icttlellcmnl s. Froml the want -of tlis Iecccfi'll
illfliilioln, the operationis of the slate, as W\ll
a: the bufiefls of ilndividuals, were retarded (r

conliKalcl

conducted unflilfully, and Spain often received Bn o K
fi-om foreigners her first information 'with refpea vn
to very interesting events in her own colonies.
But though this defect in police was sensibly
felt, and the remedy for it was obvious, that
jealous spirit with which the Spanish monarchs
guarded the exclusive trade, restraincd them
from applying it. At lelngth Charles ll1. f'r-
mounted those considerations which had deterred
his predectflos, andi in the year 1764 appointed
packet-boats to be difpalched on the first day ot
each month, frl o Corugina to tlde IIL'va;n o;r
Porto-R ico. From thence l etters are conveyed
in fna!llr vcflels to VeTr Cruz andi orLo-bcilo,
;(.il tranfilitted by polt tliroughi llhc kiigduiis
if' Tierra Firmc, CGranada, P eru, andl New
tSpain. With no lc!s reCzula;irL y pa;:'et-boats
,::il once in two montiois to Rio dc la I i:la, for
i: accominmodation of tlie po'.iticess tle ic ali
ot the Andes. Tis l p1rovilinu is ia',,ij in a
lccdLl and ccrtl:;n circulation oft iltii. .'
llhroughout the vaulal dlominiuon ol Spaini, Iroim
w'hich equal advaintags itill I redolilnd to thle
)'>litical and mercaintil interetl of thle Lkindoie ".
\Viiil this nev. arranl.r;enell', aitt.mt.' o' c xi lid-
ig collierce ias been niorc jiiiolcdiatlly cOl-
iicdlcl. Each of tlhe p:cket-l;ols, \ii: hi le

1' ,/ \' i

,l .
I1 I ): i: . I ) p . 1 5.

iI ; vefilei

B o o x vessels of fore considerable burden, is allowed
VIII. to take in half a loading of such commodities as

are the produat of Spain, and mofi in demand
in the ports whither they are bound. In return
for these they may bring home to Corugna a;
equal quantity of American productions P. This
may be confidered as the firfl relaxation of those
rigid laws, which confined the trade with the
New World to a single port, and the first attempt
to admit the reft of the kingdom to some share
in it.

Free trade IT was loon followed by one more decisive.
permittcld
to fceral In the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the
provilncs. trade tb the windward iisands, Cuba, Hispaniola,

Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his
fubjeds in every province of Spain. He per-
mitted them to fail from certain ports in each
province, which are specified in the edit, at any
season, and with whatever cargo they deemed
most proper, without any other warrant than a
finple clearance from the custom-house of the
place whence they took their departure. l1c
relaead them from the numerous and opprclive
duties imposed on goods exported to America,
and in place of the whole fubltituted a moderate
.ax of Lix in the hundred on the coinmmoditie;

A Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 3 .

' int

flnt from Spain. He allowed them to return B o o K
cither to the fame port, or to any other where v .l
they might holpe for a more advantageous
;larket, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
on payment of the usual duties. This ample
privilcge, which at once broke through all the
fences which the jealous policy of Spain had
been labouring, for two centuries and a half,
to throw round its commercial intercourse with
the New VWorld, was ioon after extended to
Iouifiana, and to the provinces of Yucatan and
Campeachy '.

'l'H-E propriety of this innovation, iwhich may n. efic::i

be confidered as the molt liberal effort of Spanih "
Icgiflation, has appeared from its el-ecls. Pri r
to the edict in favour of the free trade, Spain
lerived hardly any benefit from its negleted
colonies in Iili)aniola, Porto-Rico, Margarii: ,
1and Trilnidad. Its coiiimmerce ith (C'uba was
inconsiderable, aincl that of ''cat;i aild ('.1-
peachy was engrofed alhnoll entirely by iitlLr-
lopers. But as Ibon as a general liberty of trade
':as permitted, tle intercourse with thole' pro-
vilnces revived, and has gone on wvilh a rapidily
(, progrcflion, of which there arc ac examples
il the hillory of nations. In li's than ten year:,

'J A .lq cl, . ii. ;t !;! l':.iL c 1'o . 37. 5-t. 9'

JI .1. t:'

B O O X the trade of Cuba has been more than tripled.

VInI. Even in those settlements where, fromn the lan.

guifliing state of induLfry, greater efforts were
requisite to restore its ac'ivity, their commerce
has been doubled. It is computed, that fuc';
a number of flhips is already employed in tlu;
free trade, that the tonnage of them far excceds
that of the Galeons and Flota, at tle mofli
flouriflhing era of their commerce. The bencits
of this arrangement are not confined to a few
merchants, eftablifhled in a favourite port. Tihey
are diffused through every province of the king-
dom; and by opening a newo market for their
various productions and manufatures, mufi
encourage and add vivacity to the industry of
the farmer and artificer. Nor does the kingdom
profit only by what it exports; it derives advan-
tage likewise from what it receives in return,
and has the prospect of being soon able to supply
itself with several commodities of extenfivc
consumption, for which it formerly depelnded on
foreigners. The consumption of sugar in Spain
is perhaps as great, in proportion to the number
of its inhabitants, as that of any Eurolpe;a
kingdom. But though 1poflcflid of countries in
the New World, whole iuil and climate are mnoft
proper for rearing the sugar-cane ; though the
donmeftic culture of lhat valluable plant in tliu
kingdom of Granada was once coiliderablc;

sutl}

such has been the fatal tendency of ill-judged B o o K
institutions in America, and such the prcfFure vII.
of improper taxes in Europe, that Spain has
lolt almost entirely this branch oif indufiry,
which has enriched other nations. This com-
imoditv, whlich has now become an article of
primary necessity in Europe, the Spaniards were
obliged to purchase of foreigners, and had the
mnortification to fee their country drained annu-
ally of great fums on that account'. But if
that spirit, which the permilniion of free trade has
put in motion, shall pcr-vere in its cfi(-rts with
the fame vigour, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba
and Porto-Rico may incrcafk lo much, that in
a few years, it is probable, that their growth of
f'lgars may be equal to the demand of the
kingdom.

SPAIN has been induced, by her experience l.,l , t:u,:

of the beneficial confiqucnccs rclThing fiom '"''"il,
having relaxed somewhat of t;c: lig(, r of her c''l
ancient laws with rcfptct: to the commerlllce of
the mother-country witll tlie cololits, to lpermit
a more liberal intcrcoL.ufc of oneic colony wilh ;In-
other. B), one of the jcalouis maxims of the
old fyftlem, all the provinc': fitriil:lcd on the
South Seas were prohibitedl, under the moll

~r 'TU t'iZu c. 9.;'re

fbv'Crer

; o o K severe penalties, fiom holding any communi.
vlmr cation with one another. Though each of thele

'r-'" yield peculiar productions, the reciprocal ex-

change of which might have added to the happi-
niefs of their refpeEtive ilhabitants, or have faci-
litated their progress in indultry, so solicitous
was the Council of the Indies to prevent their
receiving any supply of their wants, but by the
periodical fleets from Europe, that in order to
guard against this, it cruelly debarred the Spa-
niards in Peru, in the southern provinces of
New Spain, in Guatimala, and the New King
dom of Granada, from such a correfpondencc
with their fellow-fubjests, as tended manifetily
to their mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous
reftritions devised by Spain for securing the
cxclufive trade with her American settlements,
none perhaps was more illiberal, none seems to
have been more sensibly felt, or to have pro-
duccd more hurtful effecs. This grievance,
coc'.al with the fcttlements of Spain in the coun-
tries situated oil the Pacific Ocean, is at lalf
rdlrelcld. In the year 1774, Charles III. pub-
lifJc:d an edit, granting to the four great
provinces which I have mentioned the privilege
of a free trade with each other '. \Vhat may

e Ic.sl Ccditl. pcncs me. Ponttz V i dlpc td Efpnl-Tnal, x.
IProl ,';. 2.z. NOTE XXIX.

( )'.

be the effects of opening this communication B O O K
between countries destined by their situation for vlII.
reciprocal intercourse, cannot yet be determined
by experience. They can hardly fail of being
beneficial and extensive. The motives for
granting this permission are manifictly no less
laudable, than the principle on which it is
founded is liberal; and both discover the pro-
grels of a spirit in Spain, far elevated above
the narrow prejudices and maxims on which her
fvftem for regulating the trade, and conduEting
the government of her colonies, was originally
founded.

AT the fame time that Spain has been intent New rcgu

lations con-

on introducing regulations, fuggeflted by mnore ctrimll tle
enlarged views of policy, into her system of cni"t^ "'
American commerce, file has not been inattentive .,i'
to the interior government of her colonies.
Here too there was much room for reformation
and improvement ; and Don Joseph Galvez,
who has now the direction of the dcpartment
for Indian affairs in Spain, liu:; enjoyed the befl:
opportunities, not only of obfcrviing the dcfcCi:;
and corruption in the political firanl of tlie
colonies, but of discovering the sources of llihol
evils. After beiiin employed Ievcei years in
the New World on an extraordinary iiillill,
and with very extensive povlr':, :a i: i':(ltcol-

i\ ii, r l

j; o o K general of New Spain ; after visiting in perfrtn

- the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora, anie

California, and making several important alter-
ations in the fate of the police and revenue;
he began his ministry with a general reformation

Rnform.3- of the tribunals of jufice in America. In con-
t-on 0o tile
.ut,, ot fccquence of the progress of population and wealth

in the colonies, the business of the Courts of
Audience has increased so much, that the number
of judges of which they were originally comu-
poted, has been found inadequate to the growing
labours and duties of the office, and the salarics
fettled upon them have been deemed inferior to
the dignity of the fRation. As a remedy fl r
both, he obtained a royal edict, cfiablifhiini an
additional number of judges in each court of
Audience, with higher titles, and more ample
appointments '.

.'v(!di1i- To the fame intelligent miniflcr Spain is

!.1)ron t.
,.,-,i- indebted for a new diflribution 1f governiment

inl its iAm ricn lprovinces. eI vcn fiince hll
ctf2allllfment of a third viceroyalty in the New
Kingdom of Granada, to great is the extent of '
tlie Spmnifh domnionls in the New Worldl, tliat
I.vcral iplaces fiIbjct to the jurilflition of cacl
iviceroy were at lilch all enormous diflanlce lfom

r ( d:c7. (ia tilc ki\LO l, 19th /'r.'ch 7 .

llC'

the capitals in xwhich they resided, that neither s o o

0

their attention, nor their authority, could reach vIIr.
so far. Some provinces subordinate to the vice-
ro)' of New- Spain lay above two thou Lsnd miles
from Mexico. Thelie were countries subject to
the viceroy of Peru still farther from Lima.
The people in those remote diftrics could hardly
be said to enjoy the benefit of civil government.
The oppreflion and insolence of its inferior
ininifters they often feel, and rather submit to
thele in silence, than involve themselves in the
expence and trouble of rcforting to the distant
capitals, where alone they can find redrcfs. Ais rc vice-
a remedy lor this, a furtll viceroyalty has been ,>:i.,,
crecled, to tlhe jurifdidion of which are fubjecLded 0',

!'

the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres,
Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, St' Cruz de Ila
Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Menldoza and
St. iuani. By this well-judged arrangement,
two advantages are gained. All the inconve-
nicncies occasioned by the rcinute iiluatioll o!
thofb provinces, whlich had beccn long ilt, ,an!
long complained of; al:c, in a great inealure,
renlove(d. The countrics m1lftl difanit Iroll
Iina are l;paralcd floIl the viccroyalty (o' ICrul,
and united under a vfuprlil,, w\\olte lCt t. cl
,go'vei'rmiL:; at uens:b-Ay\)'rCs will le colin11o-
dious andl aiccflibl. T'he contrabaend Irade
uhill) til( 1ortutgutel, lwhiclh xwas become so

cxtclnflvc

B o o ix extensive, as muff have put a final flop to the

III. exportation of commodities fiom Spain to her

southern colonies, may be checked more tho-
roughly, and with greater facility, when the
fuprerne magifirate, by his vicinity to the places
in which it is carried on, can view its progress
anud leflcts with his own eyes. Don Pedro
Zevallos, who has been raised to this new,
dignity, with appointments equal to those of
tlle other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the f{t:.c and the intreif of the countries over
which he is to prefiie, having served in them
long,, and with difiintion. By this difmem-
bericnt, f!cccedilng that which took place
at the crcon of te alty of the New
Kingdom of Gran;(lda, almost two-third parts
of tile territories, origiunally fubjecl to the vice-
roys ns Peru, are now lopped off from their
jurifdlic.ion.

Newgo- IrI limiits of the viceroyal:y of New Spain
¥¢rnlmul'1 It I11 ,
prvo,;.. Iave likco1ile Leen confidel'ably circumfcribcdl,

boo iind, & h no

l.il I e
11 p-ropriet) anld (dicernmllent. Four

of' its niofl remote pn')inccs, Sonora, Cinalo;a,
( ';iforllia, and New Navarre, have been formedC
ilrlo a leparate governimein. The Chevalier dc
Croix, wlio is cntrufted with this command, is
Ino dignifilcld with tlhe title of' viceroy, nor does
lie c)joy the appoiintmitcnts belonging to that

rank j

rank; but his jurifdidion is altogether indc- a o o K.
pendent on the viceroyalty of New Spain. The vrll.
eredion of this last governmcnt seems to have
been suggested, not only by the consideration of
the remote situation of those provinces from
Mexico; but by attention to the late difcovcrlcs
made there, which I have nmentioncd ''. Coun-
tries containing the riches: mines of gold that
have hitherto been difcovcred in the New World,
and which probably may arilf into great inmport-
ance, requircd the imnmediate infpe)ion of a
governor, to whom they should be specially
committed. As every consideration of duty,
of interest, and of vanity, Imurt concur in
prompting those new governors to encourag'e
such exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and
prosperity through the provinces committed to
their charge, the beneficial efllcts of this arrange-
ment may be considerable. Many difirids in
Amnerica, long depressed by the languor and
fecblcneis natural to provinces which compole
tile extremities of an overgrown emlnpire, may
be animated with vigour ail activity, when
brought tl near the feat of puowr as to feel its
livigoratill influence.
Sirren, incc tlihe tactc.iln of tlhe princes ()f Ait.lctpts

tu rn Ic'i'n
'li IIjI :c of BoJurlni to tlie throne of Spain, ,(,IOI.,Lc

I jul y.
" 1uk vii.

has

B o o I has been the progress of their regulations, andl
VIII. the gradual expansion of their views with refpec(

to the commerce and government of their Ame-
rican colonics. Nor has their attention been
so entircly enroffed by what ielated to the more
remote parts of their dominions, as to render
them neglctcful of what was flill more important,
the reformation of domc-lfic errors and defc&ts in
policy. Fully l-ffible of the causes to which
the dcclenfion of Spain, fiom her former pro-
Ipcrity, oui;ht to be il:i. tecd; they have made
it a great oject of the'r policy to revive a fiirit
of induitllry among tli-ir subjects, and to give
fIch extent and p-rfeItLion to their manufatu;ies,
a;, max enable tihemi to supply the demands of
1merica from tlheir own stock, and to exclude
ireignerlls 0from at blralch of commerce which
Las bCeen ilo titl to the kingdom. This thcv
lave endelavolured to accomplish, by a variety ot
ccldics itiled since the peace of Utrecht. Thec
liave grallted bounties fOr the encouragement ol
i;'mc biralnches of' induflry ; they have lowerce
the taxCS on o(llrs ; they have either erltircl,
prohilbited, or have loaded with addition::
utleiCS, such biorci ,n manulacuires as colie 1i
competition with their own ; they 1have inflitutLiC
locietics for Ihe ilml)rovement of trade andl agri-
culture; they have planted clolonies of hunfbl;i.-
lien in Ionie uncultivated dillrid.ts of Spai,

and divided among them the wafle fields; they B 0 o K
have had recourse to every expedient devised by vlII.
commercial wisdom, or commercial jealousy, for
reviving their own industry, and difcounte-
nancing that of other nations. These, however,
it is not my province to explain, or to inquire
into their propriety and effecls. There is no
effort of legislation more arduous, no experi-
ment in policy more uncertain, than an attempt
to revive the spirit of industry where it has
declined, or to introduce it where it is unknown.
Nations, already poffefied of extensive commerce,
enter into competitition with such advantages,
derived from the large capitals and extensive
credit of their merchants, the dexterity of their
manufacurers, the alertness acquired by habit
in every department of business, that the fiate
which aims at rivalling, or supplanting them,
nmuft exped to struggle with m :my ditliculties,
and be content to advance slowly. If the
quantity of produEtive indultry, now in Spain,
be compared witlh that of the ki;ngdom under
ilic lafl listless monarchs of the Aufnrian line, its
progres nmuft appear conliderable, and is fiiffi-
cient to alarm the jealousy, and to call forth the
amoi vigorous Cl;rts, of the nations now in
pofncflioii of the lucrative trade which the Spa-
Lilards aim at wrefling from them. (One circum-
llancc may render tlole exertions of Spaill an

VyA.. IV. j objec-

B O O K objet of more serious attention to the other

V"II- European powers. They are not to be ascribed

wholly to the influence of the crown and its
ministers. The sentiments and spirit of the
people seem to second the provident care of
their monarchs, and to give it greater effect.
The nation has adopted more liberal ideas, not
only with refpecl 'to commerce, but domeflic
policy. In all the later Spanish writers, defects
in the arrangements of their country concerning
both are acknowledged, and remedies proposed,
- which ignorance rendered their ancestors inca-

pable of dicerning, and pride would not have
allowed them to confefsx . But after all that
the Spaniards have done, much remains to do.
Many pernicious inflitutions and abuses, deeply
incorporated with the system of internal policy
and taxation, which has been long cftablifled in
Spain, must be abolished, before induitry and
manulfactires can recover an extensive activity.
; [' ,i S.TII.., howcvcr, tlie commercial rcgulationi

c, S pain \ith rc i)ct to iher colonies, are too
rigid anld fyIl!cn ttical to be carlied into compllte
c'XccUi' ion. 'I'lic lec'ill, iluitre that loads trade \will
iupofcilions too ls avy, or Iftlers it by refiidocs
1(o vy cre;. d.ls is owmn iltceniion, and is only

',,* t.' (.)'rl. ,\ .x,

multiplying the inducements to violate its r o o K
flatutes, and proposing an high premium to VlI-
encourage illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both
in Europe and America, being circumscribed in
their mutual intercourse by the jealousy of the
crown, or oppressed by its exactions, have their
invention continually on the stretch how to elude
its edicts. The vigilance and ingenuity of pri-
vate intereit discover means of effecting this,
which public wisdom cannot forcfee, nor public
authority prevent. This spirit, counteracting
that of the laws, pervades the commerce of
Spain with America in all its branches; and
from the highest departments in government,
Jefcends to the lowel'. The very officers ap-
pointed to check contraband trade, are often
employed as inftrunents in carrying it on; and
the boards instituted to restrain and punilif it,
are the channels through which it flows. The
king is supposed, by the most intelligent Spanish
w:iters, to be defrauded, by various artificcs, of
more tlan one half of the revenue which he
ought to receive from America Y; and as long
as it is the interest of so many persons to screen
ihofe artifices from detection, the knowledge of
them will never reach the throne. " Ilow many
'* ordinances," fays Corita, "' how many inllruc.

Y Solorz. d(' Irld. urc, i.i li. v.

.1 ' i o l',

B O I C" tions, how many letters from our sovereign,

VIII. " are sent in order to correc abuses, and how

'"'~' 6 little are they observed, and what finall

"advantage is derived from them! To me
I' the old observation appears just, that where
'" there are many physicians, and many medi.
GC cines, there is a want of health; where there
" are many laws, and many judges, there is
" want ofjuflice. We have viceroys, presidents,
C governors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and
" thousands of alguazils abound everywhere;
" but notwithltanding all these, public abuses
' continue to mutiply"." Time has increased
the evils which he lamented as early as the reign
of Philip II. A spirit of corruption has infected
all the colonies of Spain in America. Men far
removed from the feat of government; impatient
to acquire wealth, that they may return speedily
from ,lhat they are apt to confider as a ftatc of
exile in a remote unhealthful country; allured
by oppol tunities too tempting to be refilled, and
ieduced by the example of those around them;
find their fentimcnts of honour and of duty
gradually relax. In private life, they) give thcln-
ilyvcs up to a difiolute luxury, while in their
public conduct they become unmindful of what
hicy owe to their sovereign and to their country.

z MS. p)nciC I1C.

BLI.'o .;'

BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish B o o IK

trade in America, there remains one detached, v'IIT
but important branch of it, to be mentioned. Trade le
Soon after his accession to the throne, Philip II. S'lvind
formed a scheme of planting a colony in the tlheli!'ip.
Philippine islands, which had been neglected
since the time of their discovery; and he accom-
plinfed it by means of an armament fitted out
from New Spain ". Manila, in the island of .
Luconia, was the station chosen for the capital
of this new eflablifhment. From it an active
commercial intercourse began with the Chinese,
and a considerable number of that induitrious
people, allured by the profpeat of gain, fettled
in the Philippine islands under the Spaniflh pro-
teEtion. They supplied the colony so amply
with all the valuable produEtions and manufac-
tures of the East, as enabled it to open a trade
with America, by a course of navigation, the
longest from land to land on our globe. In the
infancy of this trade, it was carried on with
Callao, on the coast of Peru; but experience
having discovered the impropriety of fixing upon
that as the port of communication with Manila,
the staple of the commerce between the eafl and
weft was removed from Callao to Acapulco, on
the coast of New Spain.

q

Torl uiere . i. I;ll. '
. 1., *..

I Al'EiRl

B3 0 K AFTER various arrangements, it has been

VII. brought into a regular form. One or two ships

'~
' depart annually from Acapulco, which are per-

mitted to carry out silver to the amount of fire
hundred thousand pcfos '; but they have hardly
any thing else of value on board ; in return for
which, they bring back spices, drugs, china, and
japan wares, calicoes, chintz, muslins, silks, and
every precious article with which the benignity
of the climate, or the ingenuity of its people,
has enabled the East to supply the reft of the
world. For some time the merchants of Peru
were admitted to participate in this traffic, a;nd
might fend annually a ship to Acapulco, to \ait
the arrival of the veffes from Manila, and receive
a proportional flare of the commodities which
they imported. At length, the Peruvians wcre
excluded from this trade by most rigorous edidcs,
and all the commodities from the Last reftc\Ic
solely for the consumption of New Spain.

IN confcquence of this indulgence, the inlhi

bitants of that country enjoy advantages un-
known in the other Spanifhl colonies. T'he
nmanuifaurcs of the East are not only more
fuitced to a wvarni climate, and more flhoy than
thotc of 1Lurupec, but can be fold at a low1

b RIccop. . ix. c. - 5'. 1. 6.

price;

price; while, at the fame time, the profits upon B o o K
them are so considerable, as to enrich all those vmi.
who are employed, either in bringing them from
Manila, or vending them in New Spain. As the
interest both of the buyer and feller concurred il
favouring this branch of commerce, it has con-
tinued to extend in spite of regulations concerted
with the most anxious jealousy to circumscribe
it. Under cover of what the laws permit to be
imported, great quantities of India goods are
poured into the markets of New Spainc; and
when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz from Eu-
rope, it often finds the wants of the people
already supplied by cheaper and more acceptable
commodities.

TIIE RE is not, in the commercial arrange-

ments of Spain, any circumstance more inex-
plicable than the permission of this trade between
New Spain and the Philippines, or more repug-
nant to its fundamental maxim of holding the
colonies in perpetual dependence on the mother
country, by prohibiting any commercial inter-
course that might suggest to them the idea of
receiving a supply of their wants from any other
quarter. This permiflion must appear fill more
extraordinary, from confidering that Spain

c See NOTE XXXI.

I 4 herself

B o o K herself carries on no direCt trade with her fettle.
vi'I. ments in the Philippines, and grants a privilege

to one of her American colonies, which she
denies to her subje&c in Europe. It is probable,
that the colonists who originally took poffeflion
of the Philippines, having been sent out fiom
New Spain, begun this intercourse with a country
which they confidered, in some measure, as their
parent state, before the court of Madrid was
aware of its consequences, or could establish
regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon.
firances have been presented against this trade,
as detrimental to Spain, by diverting into an.
other channel a large portion of that treasure
which ought to flow into the kingdom, as tend.
ing to give rife to a spirit of independence in the
colonies, and to encourage innumerable frauds,
against which it is impossible to guard, in
tranfaEtions so far removed from the infpetion
of government. But as it requires no flight
effort of political wisdom and vigour to abolish
any practice which numbers are interested in
supporting, and to which time has added the
fandion of its authority, the commerce between
New Spain and Manila seems to be as confider-
able as ever, and may be confidered as one
chief caule of the elegance and splendor confpi-
cuous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

B3u r'

BUT notwithifanding this general corruption n o o K

in the colonies of Spain, and the diminution of v1II.
the income belonging to the public, occasioned '-'i"c'
by the illicit importations made by foreigners, vAlul from
as well as by the various frauds of which the
colonists themselves are guilty in their commerce
with the parent state, the Spanish monarchs
receive a very considerable revenue from their
American dominions. This arises from taxes
of various kinds, which may be divided into
three capital branches. The first contains what
is paid to the king, as sovereign, or superior lord
of the New World: to this clais belongs the duty
on the gold and silver raised from the mines,
and the tribute exaced from the Indians; the
former is termed by the Spaniards the right of
fgniory, the latter is the duty of vafalage. The
second branch comprehends the numerous duties
upon commerce, which accompany and oppress
it in every ftep of its progress, from the greatest
tranfaaions of the lholefale merchant, to the
petty traffic of the vender by retail. The third
includes what accrues to the king, as head of
the church, and adminiflrator of ecclefiafical
funds in the New World. In consequence of
this he receives the first fruits, annarcs, spoils,
and other Ipiritual revenues, levied by the apo-
ftolic chamber in Europe ; and is entitled like-
wife to the profit ariling from the sale of the

bull

B o o i bull of Cruzado. This bull, which is published

vIII. every two years, contains an absolution from

past offences by the pope, and, among other
immunities, a permiffon to eat several kinds of
prohibited food, during Lent, and on meagre
days. The monks employed in dispersing those
bulls extol their virtues with all the fervour of
interested eloquence; the people, ignorant and
credulous, liften with implicit assent; and every
person in the Spanifli colonies, of European,
Creolian, or mixed race, purchases a bull, which
is deemed essential to his salvation, at the rate
set upon it by government d.
Iss amnunt. WHAT may be the amount of those various

funds, it is almost impoflible to determine with
precision. The extent of the Spanish dominions
in America, the jealousy of government, which
renders them inacceflible to foreigners, the
inyfterious silence which the Spaniards are accuf-
tomed to observe with refpedE to the interior
Riate of their colonies, combine in covering this
fubjedE with a veil, which it is not easy to remove.
But an account, apparently no less accurate than
it is curious, has lately been published of the
royal revenue in New Spain, from which we
may form binme idea with respect to what i,:

1i Stc NOTE XXXII.

coilte d
l

collected in the other provinces. According to n o o ir
that account, the crown does not receive from vmII.
all the departments of taxation in New Spain '"
above a million of our money, from which one
half must be dcduced as the expence of the
provincial eftablifhmente. Peru, it is probable,
yields a fum not inferior to this; and if we
suppose that all the other regions of America,
including the islands, furnish a third share of
equal value, we shall not perhaps be far wide
from the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America,
does not exceed a million and a half flerling.
This falls far short of the immcnfe fums to
which. suppositions, founded upon conjec&ure,
have raised the Spaninf revenue in America f.
It is remarkable, however, upon one account.
Spain and Portugal are the only European
powers, who derive a diret revenue from their
colonies. All the advantage that accrues to
other nations, from their American dominions,
arises from the exclusive enjoyment of their
trade; but betide this, Spain has brought her
colonies to contribute towards increasing the
power of the slate; and in rcturn for protection,
to bear a proportional flare of the common
burden.

Scc NOTE XXXIII. f Scc NOTE XXXIVX

ACconD-

B o 0 K ACCORDINGLY, the fum which I have corn.
viii. puted to be the amount of the Spanilh revenue

from America, arises wholly from the taxes
collected there, and is far from being the whole
of what accrues to the king from his dominions
in the New World. The heavy duties imposed
on the commodities exported from Spain to
America g, as well as what is paid by those which
she fends home in return; the tax upon the
negro-flaves, with which Africa supplies the New
World, together with several fnaller branches
of finance, bring large fums into the treasury,
the precise extent of which I cannot pretend to
ascertain.

Expence of BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from
adminiftra-
:ion. America be great, the expence of administration

in her colonies bears proportion to it. In every
department, even of her domestic police and
finances, Spain has adopted a systen more
complex, and more encumbered with a variety
of tribunals, and a multitude of officers, than
that of any European nation, in which the fove-
reign pofleffes ich extcnfive power. From the
jealous spirit with which Spain watches over her
American settlements, and her endeavours to
guard againfl fraud in provinces lb remote from

Set NOTE XXXV.

inrllpfclion;

infpetion; boards and officers have been mul- B o o K
tiplied there with still more anxious attention. viII.
In a country where the expence of living is '?
great, the salaries allotted to every person in
public office mutt be high, and muse lbad the
revenue with an immense burden. The parade
of government greatly augments the weight of
it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and the New
Kingdom of Granada, as representatives of the
king's person, among people fond of ostentation,
maintain all the state and dignity of royalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly eftablified, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, diltlIaying such pomp,
as hardly retains the appearance of a delegated
authority. All the expence incurred by sup-
porting the external and permanent order of
government is defrayed by the crown. The
viceroys have besides peculiar appointnlnts suited
to their exalted fiation. The filaries fixed by
law are indeed extremely modcrate that of the
viceroy of Peru is only thirty thoutand ducats ;
and that of the viceroy of lMexico, twenty thou-
sand ducats ". 01 L,'tc they have been ri-:ed to
forty tho.usand.

B O O K THESE salaries, however, conflitute but a finall

vIIr. part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys. The

exercise of an absolute authority extending to
every department of government, and the power
of disposing of many lucrative offices, afford
them many opportunities of accumulating wealth.
To rhefe, which may be confidered as legal and
allowed emoluments, large fums are often added
by exactions, which, in countries so far removed
from the feat of government, it is not easy to
discover, and impofible to reflrain. By mono-
polizing some branches of commerce, by a lucra-
tive concern in others, by conniving at the fiauds
of merchants, a viceroy may raile such an annual
revenue, as no subjec of any European monarch
enjoys . From the single article of prefcn:.i
made to him on the anniversary of his Ni:;c-Ji,'
(which is always observcd as an high festival),
I am informcd that a viceroy has been known to
receive sixty thousand pcfos. According to a
Spanilf faying, the legal revenues of a viceroy
are known, his real profits depend upon his
opportunities and his conflience. Sensible o'
lhis, the kings of Spain, as I have formerlv
hb*ferved, grant a commnision to their vicer('l
only for a lcw years. lhis circuimlftancc, how\

iever, rend'jrs tllem often more Iapac>ou., ;u,1!

i . NOTE'] ,. XX .

a,..-

.ads to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith n o o K
they labour to improve every moment of power VIII.
which they know is hastening fait to a period; ; '"
and hort as its duration is, it usually affords
sufficient time for repairing a ibattered fortune,
or for creating a new one. But even in fitua-
tions so trying to human frailty, there are
indtances of virtue that remains un!cdiuccd. In
the year 1772, the Marquis de Croix finilfhcd
the term of his viceroyalty in New Spain with
unsuspected integrity; and instead of bringing
home exorbitant wealth, returned withi the admi-
ration and applause of a grateful pcop-!, \!: oin
ii.s govrnmcU;nt had rendered -hapiy.

THE
H ISTO R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOK S IX. AND X.,

CONTAINING
THE HISTORT OF T'IRGINLA,

TO THE YEAR i688; AND
THriEs HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND,

TO THE YEAR i652.
VOL. IV. KI

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISE IMENT.

THE original plan of my Father, the late

Dr. Robertson, with refpe& to the IIiftory of
America, comprehended not only an account
of the discovery of that country, and of the
conquelts and colonies of the Spaniards, but
embraced also the history of the Britifl and
Portuguese Eftablifhiments in the New World,
and of the Settlements made by the several
nations of Europe in the Weft-India Ilands. It
was his intention not to have published any part
of the WTork until the whole was completed. In
the Preface to his History of America, he has
fiated the reasons which induced him to depart
from that resolution, and to publish the Two
Volumes which contain an account of the disco-
very of the New W\orld, and of the progress of
the Spanish arms and colonies in that quarter of
the globe. He fays, " he had made tome pro-
grefs in the Hiflory of Bririfh America;" and
he announces his intention to return to that part
of his Work, as loon as the ferment which at
that time prevailed in the British Colonies in
America fllould fLublide, and regular govern-
ment be re-eflabliflcd. Various cau1es concurred
in preventing him from fulfilling his intention.

K 2? DUItUNT.

DUR NG the course of a tedious illness, which

he early foresaw would have a fatal termination,
Dr. Robertson at different times destroyed many
of his papers. But after his death, I found that
part of the History of British America which he
had wrote many years before, and which is now
offered to the Public. It is written with his own
hand, as all his Works were; it is as carefully
corrected as any part of his Manuscripts which I
have ever seen; and hle had thought it worthy
of being preserved, as it escaped the flames to
which so many other papers had been com-
mitted. I read it with the utmost attention;
but, before I came to any resolution about the
publication, I put the MS. into the hands of
Iome of those friends whom my Father used to
consult on lhch occasions, as it would have been
rashness and presumption in me to have trustcd
to my own partial decision. It was perused by
iole other perlbns also, in wlhofe taste and
judgment I have the greatest confidence: by all
of them I was encouraged to offer it to the
Public, as a fragment curious and intercfting in
itlclf, and not inferior to any of my Fatllhr's
Wolrks.

WnHEN I deterninced to follow that advice, it

was a circumlLance of great weight with me,
thlt as I never could think myself at liberty to

dellrAy

destroy those Papers which my Father had
thought worthy of being preserved, and as I
could not know into whose hands they might
hereafter fall, I confidered it as certain that they
would be published at some future period, when
they might meet with an Editor who, not being
actuated by the fame sacred regard for the repu-
tationof the Author, which I feel, might make
alterations and additions, and obtrude the whole
on the Public as a genuine and authentic work.
The MS. is now published, such as it was left
by the Author; nor have I presumed to make
any addition, alteration, or correction whatever.

WV ROBERTSON.
QEEN-STREFT, EDINBURG IH,

April 17,6.

K )

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IX.

T II E
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I C A

BOOK IX.

iHE dominions of Great Britain in America B o o K
are next in extent to those of Spain. Its ix.
acquisitions there are a recompence due to those S"pi"'t

Spirit of

enterprising talents which prompted the Englifl aivt,,r
to enter early on the career of discovery, and i, e.,].l:,

by Coluln-

to pursue it with persevering ardour. England i, Is,,ili)-
was the second nation that ventured to visit the v"'i
New World. The account of Columbus's fuc-
celsful voyage filled all Europe with aflonifli-
ment and admiration. But in England it did
something more; it excited a vehement desire
of emulating the glory of Spain, and of aiming
to obtain some share in those advantages which
were expeced in this new field opened to
national aAivity. The attention of the English

K 4 court

B O 0 K court had been turned towards the discovery of

IX. unknown countries, by its negotiation with

Bartholomew Columbus. Henry VII. having
listened to his propositions with a more favour.
able ear than could have been expeEted from a
cautious, distrustful prince, averse by habit as
well as by temper to new and hazardous projets,
he was more easily induced to approve of a
voyage for discovery, proposed by some of his own
fubjeds, soon after the return of Christopher
Columbus.

cliccd. by BUT though the English had spirit to form
un fkiffutl.
ness in na- the scheme, they had not, at that period,

attained to such skill in navigation as qualified
them for carrying it into execution. From the
inconsiderate ambition of its monarchs, the
nation had long waited its genius and activity
in pernicious and. ineffetual efforts to conquer
France. When this ill-direded ardour began to
abate, the fatal contest between the houses of
York and Lancaiter turned the arms of one
half of the kingdom againl: the other, and
exhausted the vigour of both. During the
course of two centuries, while industry and
commerce were making gradual progress, both
in the loulh and north of Europe, the English
continued so blind to the advantages of their
own situation, that they hardly began to bend

their

their thoughts towards those objets and pursuits, u o o it
to which they are indebted for their present opu- ix.
lence and power. While the trading vessels of '
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, as well as those of
the Hans Towns, visited the most remote ports
in Europe, and carried on an active intercourse
with its various nations, the English did little
more than creep along their own coasts, in
small barks, which conveyed the producions of
one county to another. Their commerce was
almost wholly paflive. Their wants were sup-
plied by strangers; and whatever necessary or
luxury of life their own country did not yield,
was imported in foreign bottoms. The cross of
*St. George was seldom displayed beyond the
precints of the narrow seas. Hardly any Eng-
lifl flip traded with Spain or Portugal before
the beginning of the fifteenth century; and
half a century more elapsed before the Englifl
mariners became so adventurous as to enter the
Mediterranean.

IN this infancy of navigation, Henry could Expedition

not commit the conduct of an armament, dcflined 'to. undcr
to explore unknown regions, to his own fuljccs. ,,.Id ,i
He invested Giovanni Gaboto, a Venetian c.
adventurer, who had fettled in Bristol, with
the chief command ; and issued a commission to
hin and his three ions, empowering them to

2 lfil,

B o o K fail, under the banner of England, towards the

ix. east, north, or weft, in order to discover coun.
'^~'- tries unoccupied by any Christian state; to take

poffeflion of them in his name, and to carry on
an exclusive trade with the inhabitants, under
condition of paying a fifth part of the free
profit on every voyage to the crown. This
commillion was granted on March 5th, 1495, in
less than two years after the return of Columbus
from Americaa. But Cabot (for that is the
name he aitumed in England, and by which he
is belt known) did not set out on his voyage for
two years. He, together with his second son

1497, Sebastian, embarked at Bristol, on board a flip
Alay. furnished by the king, and was accompanied

by four finall barks, fitted out by the merchants
of that city.

cbot dif- As in that age the most eminent navigators,
coVrs Nc"wfcund- formed by the intfructions of Columbus, or
:lend, and animated by his example, were guided by ideas
f.ils along
ri, co;af of derived from his superior knowledge and expe-

rience, Cabot had adopted the system of that
great man, concerning the probability of opening
a new and shorter passage to the East Indies, by
holding a western course. The opinion which
Columbus had formed with refped to the island&

a llickl lyt, iii. 4.

which

which he had discovered, was universally re- B o 1o
ceived. They were supposed to lie contiguous Ix.
to the great continent of India, and to constitute
a part of the vaif countries comprehended under
that general name. Cabot accordingly deemed it
probable, that, by fleering to the north-west, he
might reach India by a shorter course than that
which Columbus had taken, and hoped to fall
in with the coast of Cathay, or China, of whose
fertility and opulence the descriptions of Marco
Polo had excited high ideas. After failing for
some weeks due well, and nearly on the parallel
of the port from which he took his departure,
he discovered a large island, which he called
Prima VTla, and his sailors Newfoundland; and
in a few days he descried a smaller isle, to which
he gave the name of St. John. He landed on jun :+.
both these, made some observations on their foil
and producions, and brought off three of the
natives. Continuing his course westward, he
soon reached the continent of North America,
and failed along it from the fifty-fixth to the
thirty-eighth degree of latitude, from the coaf:
of Labrador, to that of Virginia. As his
chief objec& was to discover some inlet that
might open a paflage to the wefl, it does not
appear that he landed anywhere during this
extcnfive run; and he returned to England,

without

3 o o K without attempting either settlement or conqueil

Ix- in any part of that continent b

H-enry does IF it had been Henry's purpose to prosecute
not profit
by ot's the

objeo the he commifion given by him to
difeovery; Cabot, and to take pofleffion of the countries

which he had discovered, the success of this
voyage muff have answered his most sanguine
expectations. His fubjeds were undoubtedly
the firt: Europeans who had visited that part of
the American continent, and were entitled to
whatever right of property prior discovery is
iuppofed to confer. Countries which firetched
in an uninterrupted course through such a large
portion of the temperate zone, opened a pro.
fpet of fettling to advantage under mild
climates, and in a fertile foil. But by the time
that Cabot returned to England, he found both
the state of affairs and the king's inclination
unfavourable to any fclemre, the execution ot
which would have required tranquillity and
leisure. Henry was involved in a war with
Scotland, and his kingdom was not )yt fully
composed after the commotion excited by a
formidable infurretlion of his own fubjeds inl
the weff. An ambafildor from Ferdinand ol
Arr.gon was then in Iondon; and as Ilcnry

" 1Monfo '> i ',,,:ll 'J.'ia/ 'ls, ill C':u ,Il '
, Collc9. ii;. 211.

set a high value upon the friendship of that B o o i
monarch, for whose character he professed much Ix.
admiration, perhaps from its similarity to his "~'
own, and was endeavouring to itrengthen their
union by negociating the marriage which after-
wards took place between his eldest Ion and the
princess Catharine, he was cautious of giving
any offence to a prince, jealous to excess of all
his rights. From the position of the islands
and continent which Cabot had discovered, it
was evident that they lay within the limits of
the ample donative which the bounty of Alex-
ander VI. had conferred upon Ferdinand and
Isabella. No person, in that age, questioned
the validity of a papal grant; and Ferdinand
was not of a temper to relinquiflh any claim to
which he had a shadow of title. Submission to
the authority of the pope, and deference for
an ally whom he courted, seem to have con-
curred with Henry's own situation, in deter-
mining him to abandon a scheme, in which lhe
had engaged with fonme degree of ardour and
expectation. No attempt towards dilcovery was
made in England during the remainder of hi;
reign; and Sebaltian Cabot, finding no encou-
ragenmct for his aftive talents there, entered
into the I'rvicc of Spain'. C.

C Some fclenici s of difi.'ovcry fecin to ,li.L Iecln Iolln, . d

:1I E g ll t

: 11

todIV l '
t C bCrillllillr )f the fi::lcc:tl l cclIn

l).t

Bo o IC THIS is the most probable account of tile

ix. sudden cessation of Henry's activity, after such

nor his success in his firlt eflay as might have encou.
^cmeorate raged him to persevere. The advantages of

commerce, as well as its nature, were so little
understood in England about this period, that
by an a& of parliament in the year 1488, the
taking of interest for the use of money was
prohibited under revere penalties'. And by
another law, the profit arising from dealing in
bills of exchange was condemned .as favouring
of usury . It is not surprising then, that no
great effort should be made to extend trade, by
a nation whose commercial ideas were (till so
crude and illiberal. But it is more difficult to
discover what prevented this scheme of Henry VII.
from being resumed during the reigns of his son
and grandson; and to give any reason why no

But as there is no other memorial of them, than wlhat
rcemains in a patent granted by the king to the adventurers,
it is probable that they were feeble or abortive projeets. If
any attempt had been made in confequcnce of this patent,
it would not have escaped the knowledge of a compiler so
iiiluflitous and inquisitive as lHaklu)t. In his patent,
Ilciiiy refriies the adventurers from encroaching on the
comltries difcovcred by the kings of Portugal, or any otlit
prince in confederacy. with England. Rymer's lccaika,
vo, . xiii. p. 37.

t3 Hen. V iI. c. C 3 Hecn. V.II. c. 6.

attempt

attempt was made, either to explore the northern i o o K
continent of America more fully, or to fettle in ix.
it. Henry VIII. was frequently at open enmity
with Spain: the value of the Spanish acquisitions
in America had become so well known, as might
have excited his desire to obtain some footing in
those opulent regions; and during a considerable
part of his reign, the prohibitions in a papal
bull would not have restrained him from making
encroachment upon the Spanish dominions. But
the reign of Henry was not favourable to the
progress of discovery. During one period of
it, the active part which he took in the affairs of
the continent, and the vigour with which he
engaged in the contest between the two mighty
rivals, Charles V. and Francis I., gave full
occupation to the enterprising spirit both of the
king and of his nobility. During another period
of his administration, his famous controversy
with the court of Rome kept the nation in
perpetual agitation and suspense. Engrossed by
those objets, neither the king nor the nobles
had inclination or leisure to turn their attention
to new pursuits; and without their patronage
and aid, the commercial part of the nation was
too inconsiderable to make any effort of confe-
quence. Though England, by its total fepara-
tion from the church of Rome, soon after the
acccilion of Edward VI., disclaimcd that autho-

rity

B o o K rity which, by its presumptuous partition of the

Ix. globe between two favourite nations, circum.

fcribed the acivity of every other state within
very narrow limits, yet a feeble minority, dif-
traded with fation, was not a junture for
forming schemes of doubtful success, and remote
utility. The bigotry of Mary, and her marriage
with Philip, disposed her to pay a sacred regard
to that grant of the Holy See, which vested in
a husband, on whom she doated, an exclusive
right to every part of the New World. Thus,
through a singular succession of various causes,
fixty.one years elapsed from the time that the
English discovered North America, during
which their monarchs gave little attention to that
country which was deltined to be annexed to
their crown, and to be a chief source of its
opulence and power.

Expecition BUT though the public contributed liltl'
Americ,, towards the progress of discovery, naval kiill,
under the
colm.:nnd knowledge of commerce, and a spirit of enter-

bt ioltial prize, began to fprcad among the Englifl.

During the reign of Henry VIII. efveral ncn
channels of trade were opened, and privat(:
adventurer.; visited remote countries, with whlichi
England had formerly no intercourfie. Solic
merchants of Briltol, having fitted out two fhilt,
for thc fouthcrn regions of America, coillmilti'

!lr.

the conduct of them to Sebastian Cabot, who B o o K
had quitted the service of Spain. He visited the IX.
coails of Brasil, and touched at the islands of ,sl;
Hispaniola and Puerto Rico; and though this
voyage fcems not to have been beneficial to the
adventurers, it extended the sphere of English
navigation, and added to the national flock of
nautical science '. Though disappointed in their
expectations of profit in this first efl'ay, the
merchants were not discouraged. They sent,
fuccefilvely, several veflils from different ports
towards the fame quarter, and seem to have
carried on an interloping trade in the Portuguese
fettlemcnts with fuccels '. Nor was it only
towards the wecft, that the activity of the Englifl
was direced. Other merchants began to extend
their commercial views to the east ; and by
eflablifiling an intercourse with several islands
in the Archipelago, and with tonme of the towns
on the coafl of Syria, they found a new market
for woollen cloths, (the ()nly manultlctLure which
the nation had begun to cultivatc,) and supplicd
their countrymen wvith various procldutions of
the east, formerly unknown, or received fromn
the Venetians at an exorbitant price ''.

r 11'1k1y ii ,. iid . i. 7 .

: l1iklduyt , ii. ó, 'e.
'VOI, IV,. L l-1'

B o 0 K BUT the discovery of a florter pafiage to thie

IX. East Indies, by the north-west, was still tlz

Unfucccfs- favourite project of the nation, which beheld
fi'olattem with envy the vast wealth that flowed into Po;.
to difo 'r
a nolh- tugal, from its commerce with those region:.
weft p.iffai'e
to the The scheme was accordingly twice refun;ci
Indies.

under the long adminiltration of Henry VIIi.;
1527 and firit, with some slender aid from the kin!g, 'ili

then by private merchants. BIoth voyarcs nwre
disastrous and unsuccessful. In the former, c(1.
of the ships was loft. In the latter, the flock of
provisions was so ill-proportioned to the number
of the crew, that although they were but si:;
months at sea, many perillhcd with hungtir, and
the survivors were constrained to support life by
feeding on the bodies of their dead companions'

lr'iHuin THE- vigour of a commercial spirit did not

WilloIlshby
(,lls in relax in the reign of Edward VI. The gr.;c,
fcarclh of a
north-caat fifliery on the banks of Newfoundland bccname

lgc an object of attention ; and fi-om tome regula-

tions for the encouragement of that branch (lt
trade, it eemns to have been profecurtc wihl
activity and success". But the prolicjtl (c
opening a communication with China and tili

i Iakltlyt, i. 213, &c .

ii. 29, 130.
'I [bid. iii. 131.

S1 ':

Spice Islands, by some other route than round o o K
the Cape of Good Hope, still continued to allure ix.
the English, more than any scheme of adven- "~~'
ture. Cabot, whose opinion was deservedly of
high authority in whatever related to naval
enterpIize, warmly urged the Englifl to make
another attempt to discover this passage. As it
had been thrice searched for in vain, by flcering
towards the north-west, he proposed that a trial
should now be made by the north-eat ; and
supported this advice by such plausible reasons
and conjeclures, as excited sanguine exp:c&-
ations of success. Several noblemen and per-
iOns of rank, tcgcther with tome principal
merchants, having afciatcd fr this purpose,
vere incorporated, by a clarter from the king,
under the title of The Company of Merchant
Adventurers for the Difovery of Regions,
DIominions, flands, and Places unknown.
(abot, lwho was ap-pointeld governor of tihis 'ssi
comp:aly, soon flited out two ships and a bark,
iurnifiLcd \Vililt iruclin:I il his own hand, xvhich
dilcover the great extent botJh of his naval lkill
and mercantile sag-acity.

SIR Hugh Willouglby, who was cntruficd
vith the command, flooi dircl-ill nortlnwards
:adrg' the coafl. (f' Nolr\\'ay, and dloubled ll: I . .y ,..
ol tllh Cape. }But in tIha telinp1 (ltous oc(: acn, li.s

- 2 fi',all

a o o K small squadron was separated in a violent storm.

IX. Willoughby's flip and the bark took refuge in

an obscure harbour in a desert part of Ruflian

Willoughby Lapland, where he and all his companions were
one J ilis frozen to death. Richard Chancelour, the
/hipis win.
t 7rs at captain of the other vessel, was more fortunate;
Ar,; 3ngt1 he entered the White Sea, and wintered in safety

at Archangel. Though no vessel of any forcign
niation had ever visitcd that quarter of the gl:.!,
before, the inhabitants received their new
visitors with an hospitality which would hlave
done honour to a more polifiled people. The
English learned there, that this was a pro\ince
of a vast empire, fubjeci to the Great D)uke or
Czar of Muscovy, who resided in a great citi

Thiccartain twelve liundred miles from Archangel. Chan-
';U,;'-.. celour, with a spirit becoming an officer em-

ployed in an expedition for discovery, did not
hesitate a moment about the part which he oulht
to take, and set out for that distant capital. ()n
his arrival in Moscow, he was admitted to audi-
ence, and delivered a letter which the c;iptain
of each ship had received from Edward VI. lor
the sovereign of whatever country they fiti:i;J
dilcover, to John Vafilowitz, who at that tille
filled the Ruflian throne. John, though lie
ruled over his uIbjecds bwith the cruelry and
caprice of a barbarous defpct, was not dcilitute
of political sagacity. lie inflantly perceived [lie

h-'ilpr

happy consequences that might flow from open- B o o K
ing an intercourse between his dominions and Ix.
the weflern nations of Europe; and, delighted ,"-.
with the fortunate event to which he was indebted
for this unexpecded benefit, he treated Chan-
celour with great respect; and, by a letter to the Feb.
king of England, invited his subjects to trade in
the Ruffian dominions, with ample promises of
protection and favour .

CI-RANCEI.OI;R, on his return, found Mary Tra'Ie

o;,cT c~i with

feated on the Englifn throne. The success of 'in.
this voyage, the discovery of a new course of
navigation, the eflablifliment of commerce with
a vast empire, the name of which was then hardly
known in the weft, and the hope of arriving, in
this direction, at those regions which had been
so long the objec of desire, cxcited a wonderful
ardour to prosecute the design with greater
vigour. Mary, implicitly guidcd by her hulband
in every aat of adliniifratioin, was not uinwilling
to turn the commercial activity of her lubjces
towards a quarter where it could not excile the
jcalouly of Spain, by cncroachin on0 its poilCl-
sions in the New V'orld. She wrote to John
Valilowitz in the most rcl'fclful terms, courting
hiis fricndfhip. Shel confirmed the charter ot

I IIakilnyt, i. 226, &;c.

i 3 Edward

B o o i Edward VII., empowered Chancelour, and twu

Ix. agents appointed by the company, to negociat:
''"-' with t he Czar in her name ; and accordinlg 10

tlhc spirt ui' tlhalt age, hlc granted an exclullvc
ri(ht oil trade wx ith Rufia to the Corporation i1
Merchant Adventurers''. In virtue of this,
tle'c not only cfltabliilicd an active and gainful
commerce wiih .Rufiia, but, in hopes of reach-
ing China, they pufiled their diicoveries eastwards
to the coali of Nova Zeinbla, the Straits oi
'xraigatz, and towards the inouth of the great
river Oby. 3BLt in those fi-ozen seas, whicl
Nature ieems not to have destincd for navigation,
they were exposed to innuncrable dila!icri,
and met with fuccefiive disappointments.

cn-.rii,;- NoR wvere their attempts to open a commu-
l^ ,'l"ll'!' nication with India made only in this channel.
land. They appointed tome of their factors to accom-

panly the Ruflian caravans mxhich travelled into
'eria by the way of Atrhacan and the Cafipiii
Sea, iniirui; lg lhc;n to penetrate as far as
pofiible towairds thle eait, and to endeavour,
i:ot only to cliiabilifl a trade with thole coun-
tn;cs, but to acqulire cvcry inlformatiolh tlat
nilillt aftilrd any) liglit towards the difcoveryt oI
1a Iailiage to China by the north-eall.". NoIt

!'1 I Ji] ;! i, i. iS. , &c. l- Hakhl 'yt, i. 3or.

withlnanldin;

vithftanding a varicty of dangers to which they E o o iK
vcre exposed in travelling through so many ]x.
provinces, inhabited by fierce and licentious
nations, some of these factors reached Bokara,
in the province of Chorafan ; and though pre-
vented from advancing farther by the civil wars
which desolated the country, they returned to
Europe with tome hopes of extending the com-
merce of the Company into Persia, and with
much intelligence concerning the state of those
remote regions of the eaf °.

THE successful progress of the Merchant Expedition

to tilhe coast

Adventurers in discovery routed the emulation oi Afrca
of their countrymen, and turned their acivity
into new channels. A commercial intercourse,
hitherto unattempted by the Englifll, having
been opened with the coast of Barbary, the
rpecimens which that afforded of the valuable
produtiions of Africa invited some enterprising
navigators to visit the more remote provinces of
lhat quarter of the globe. They failed along
its weltern florc, traded in different ports on
hl(th fides of the Line, and after acquiring con-
fiderable knowledge of ;hole countries, returned
*'jilha cargo of gold-dufR, ivory, and other ricl

o Tllaklt lt, i. 3 1. &c.

L 4 commtrio

B O O K commodities, little known at that time in Eng.

Ix. land. 'This commerce with Africa seems to

have been pursued with vigour, and was at that
time no less innocent than lucrative; for as the
English had then no demand for slaves, thlv
carried it on for many years, without violating
the rights of humanity. Thus far did the
Engliflh advance during a period which may be
confidered as the infant Rate of their navigation
and commerce; and feeble as its steps at tha:
time may appear to us,. we trace them with an
interefling curiosity, and look back with satis-
fadiion to the early essays of that spirit vwhich
we now behold in the full maturity of its firength,
Even in those firfi efforts of the Englifl, an
intelligent observer vill discern presages of their
future improvement. As soon as the activity ci
the nation was put in motion, it took various
directions, and exerted itself in each with than
Ileady, plerfevering induflry, which is the fol'.
aInd guide of commerce. Neither discouragcd
by the hardlhilps and dangers to which tliey
were cexpofed in those northern seas wliici
they firfi attempted to explore, nor afraid (i
vcillurnll into the sultry climates oi thl
torrid Zo ll, the Englifli, during the rcinns (o
.Icl-) 'y V I11., Edxdward VI., and Mary, opcnllcd
Iflonc ofl' h11. molt confidcrable sources of their

commcrcia1.

commercial opulence, and gave a beginning to n o o K
their trade with Turkey, with Africa, with Russia, Ix.
and with Newfoundland. "- -

By the progress which Englanhd hal already Rc;:nor

made in navigation and commerce, it was now aufliciou.
prepared for advancing fartlher; and on the r,>.
accefion of Eliza)beth to the throne, a period
commenced, extremely auui;icioui to tils spirit
iwhich was rising in the nation. 'he domeflic
tranquillity of the kingdom, mla:itainci, almost
withiout interruption, dui1ng lthe courlf of a
long and pro:perous rcitln ; the peace with
foreign nations, that fu.iilhd miore than twenty
years after Elizabeth was iba!cd cn the thione ,
the Oueen's attentive ecnonomy, wlich cxemipted
her fubjeds from the burden of taxes olp)reflive
to tralde; the populariy of hier adminif'!ation ;
were all favourable to coiunnercial cntcrprife,
and called it forth into vihrous c:ertion. The
difccrniing eye of l'lizabeil l:a\ing ciarly per-
ceived that tIc fIcurily of a kin ladonl , environed
by the tea, dependedl on it; laval force, fie
began her government with adding to the num-
ber and stren.gth of the royal navy ; which,
during a factious minority, and a reirgn intent
(in ino objc: but that of luIpplnlling heresy, had
lcen neglc&ted, amnd full'ered to decay. Slie
filled her arlinalls \vith naval itiorcs; fie Ililr

Icveai

B oO several ships of great force, according to the

IX ideas of that age, and encouraged her fubjests

to imitate her example, that they might no longer
depend on forcigners fiom whom the English
had hitherto purchased all veffls of any confi.
derable burden . By those eforts the skill of
the English artificers was improved, the number
of tailors increased, and the attention of the
public turned to the navy, as the most important
national objet. Instead of abandoning any of
the new channels of commerce which had been
opened in the three preceding reigns, the Eng-
lifh s'equented them with greater afliduity, and
the pat onage of their sovereign added vigour
to all their efforts. In order to fccure to them
the continuance of their exclusive trade with
Ruflia, Elizabeth cultivated the conneaion
with John Vafilowitz, which had been formed
by her predeceflor, and, by.,fuccelive embaflies,
gained his cc(ilfidence so thoroughly, that the
Englilh enjoyed that lucrative privilege during
his long reign. She encouraged the Company
of Merchant Adventurers, whole monopoly of
tle Ruflian trade was confirmed by a:t of paxrlia-
meint', to relume their dcfign of penetrating into
1i(. 1Pcrfia by land. Their eicond al tempt, con-

r Cainld. A in: s, p1) 70. cdi;. 1615; fol.
' l .ikluyt, i 39.

du ced.

ducled with greater prudence, or undertaken at B o o K
a more favourable juncture than the first, was Ix-
more successful. Their agents arrived in the
Persian court, and obtained such protection and
immunities from the Shah, that for a course of
years they carried on a gainful commerce in his
kingdom'; and by firequenting the various
provinces of Portia, became so well acquainted
with the vafi richles of the ealt, as ltrerlgthened
their design of openin a more diret intercourle
with those fertile regions by lea.

BUT as every eflort to accomplifhi thlis by thle Frof.hr

north-eafl had proved abortive, a scheme was :.t,,pt,,,t
firmed, under the patronage of the Earl of ',t°"v'l" '
W'arw ick, the head of the cnterpriling family pill'sgs
of )udley, to make a new attempt, by holdingr
an opposite course by the nor!h-wel. The
conduct of this enterprise was comrmiltcd to
Martill Frobisher, an ofiiccr o[ experience and
reputation. In tlirce fucccefive voyages he ex- r,
plored the inhiopitable coast of Labrador, and , i ,'57s.
that of Greenland, (to which Elizabeth gave
the name of McII l/ii,<niat ) without discovering
any probable appearance of that paflige to Idial
for which le fbu Ilit. Thlls ncv tlifaplpointmlet:
v'"s ien iily felt, anld mighl t have damlped the

'r Ialclytu ;t, I' t4, &c.

htiriMt

B o o I spirit of naval enterprise among the English, if

1:'- it had not relfumed fr-ef vigour, amidfi the

general exultation of the nation, upon the

si;r :.n. i fucccfsful expedition of Francis Drake. Thai
Drake ;ic ails;
rouLnd ;JiJ bold navigator, emulous of the glory which

M.agellan had acquired by failing round the
globe, formed a scheme of attempting a voyage,
vhich' all Europe had admired for sixty years,
without venturing to follow the Portuguele dif-
coverer in his adventurous course. Drake
undertook this v ith a feeble squadron, in which
the largest veflel did not exceed a hundred tons,
and lie accompliiled it, with no less credit to
hilmfclf, than honour to his counitr). Even in
this voyage, conciuc'tcd with other views, Drake
Tleeis not to have been inattentive to the favourite
objec of lhis countrymen, the discovery of a
new route to India. Before he quitted the
Pacific Ocean, in order to flretch towards the
rPhillipinc ii!ands, he ranged along the coast of
( alilobrnia, as hiei'h as the latitude of forty-t.wo
degrees urioah, i1 hopes of dilcovcring, ol) ilhla
fide, the colnml:iication betweenl the two lC:s,

lwhich had so ofiten been fleachecd for in vaill Oil

the other. Bu1t tliis w\\as tlie only unfuccel;Iul
attemplt of 1)l ai. The xce;ive cold oft tlle
lilmaltt, intolcirablolc I) lll(n o

w ll ad long bLen

:;ccul omlcd to trop;icl Iheal, obliged hlim to flop
IhictL in llis p: grcls tow ards the n,'rh ; and

whtlclltcr
wlicilic

wvhether or not there be any pffaage from the B o o
Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean in that quarter is ix.
a point fiill unafcertainedl .

FROM this period, the English seem to have Entiufiafm

confided in their own abilities and courage, as OLOI Y
equal to any naval enterprise. They had now
vi!ited every region to which navigation extended
in that age, and had rivalled the nation of
bigheft repute for naval skill in its most i.plcndid
exploit. But notwitlhlanding the knowledge
which they had acquired of the diflcrent quarters
of the globe, they had not hitherto attempted
any settlement out of their own country. Their
merchants had not yet acquired fuc.i a degree,
either of wealth or of political influence, as
were requisite towards carrying a fcheime of
colonization into execution. Persons of' nolle
Dirth were destitute of the ideas and inlormn.iio
which might have dilpofcd them to patronize
such a design. The growing powecr of Spain,
how\evcr, and the altendanti over the other
nations of Europe to which it liad attained under
Charles V. and his Ion, naturally turned the
aitecllion of mankind towarlds tlhe ilmplrtance
of thole Iettlciicints in tlie Ne1w vV,,ld, ito
vllich they were o lmuch indebted Ifor illiat

1];1khl]lst, iii. ,| 1'. C',;( .1. A inl l. 3,,1, 3:.:.

, I .

oo K pre-eminence. The intercourse between Spain
Ix- and England, during the reign of Philip and

Mary; the relbrt of the Spanifl nobility to the
English court, while Philip residcd there; the
study of the Spanifb language, which became
fashionable; and the translation of several his-
tories of America into English, diffused gradually
through the nation a more ditlint5 knowvledge of
the policy of Spain in planting its colonies, and
of the advantages which it derived from them.
When hostilities commenced between Elizabctll
and Philip, the profpe&t of annoying Spain by
sea opened a new career to the entcrprifing
spirit of the Englifi nobility. Almost every
eminent leader of the age aimed at difi'nguifhing
himself by naval exploits. That service, and
the ideas conne&ed with it, the discovery of
unknown countries, the eflablifhlment of diilant
colonies, and the enriching of commerce by
new commodities, became famiiliar to pcIrfos us
rank.

' nIt i,)r- IN conIfequence of all tliofc concurrinI g

II CILlICS,

tololyn,, the English began seriously to form plans (l
,,li,:,. fettling colonies in those parts of America, which

hitherto they hadl only viitcd. The projector.s
and patrons of thefl pI!ans were moltly !clloii,;
of rank and influience. A1\1iu11 tlm11, Sir
Tumprly G(ilbrt, of Comipton in 1)cvtofhirc,

o l
I[ h

ought to be mentioned mith the diflincTon due B o o K
to the conducor of the firfl Englilh colony to ix.
America. He had early rendered hinfelf con-
fpicuous by his military services both in France
and Ireland ; and having afterwards turned his
attention to naval affairs, he publified a discourse
concerning the pr(obability of a north-west pas-
sage, hich difilovercd no inconsiderable portion
both of learning and ingenuity, mingled with
thi einhufiafm, the credulity, and sanguine
cxtpcc.ations which incite men to new and
lilz;irdlous undertakings '. With those talents
he .was dLenied a proper person to be employed
ii; citablifliing a new colony, and easily obtained
irim the Q<lten letters patent, vcfting in him Jun-1,
fuficient powers for this purpose.

As this is the first clhartr to a colony, granted clialcr

granted by

by the crown of 1.ng:Indc, the articles in it rntli- -
merit particular attention, as tliey unfold the Z "'
ideas of that age, with rclifcl to tri: nature of
fi(ch fettlmcincts. l lizabcth au lioiilcs hlii to
tlilcovcr and take pofliflion of all remote and
barbarous lands, unoccupied by any Chrifiian
prince or people. She vefis iln himi, lhis heirs
:itl afligns for ever, the full right of property
ii the foil of those countries wlihreof hie fill

B o o x take pofifeion. She permits such of her subjec;

Ix. as were willing to accompany Gilbert in lii

* voyage, to go and fettle in the countries which
he /hall plant. She empowers him, his heirs
and afligns, to dispose of whatever portion of
those lands he shall judge meet to persons fettled
there, in fee-fimple, according to the laws of
England. She ordains, that all the landis
granted to Gilbert shall hold of the crown of
England by homage, on paymnent of the fifili
part of the gold or silver ore found there. She
confers upon him, his heirs and afiigln, the
complete jurisdiCtions and royalties, as well
marine as other, within the said lands and Icas
thereunto adjoining ; and as their common safety
and interest would render good government
neceflary in their new settlements, fle gave
Gilbert, his heirs and afligns, full power t,
convicS, punish, pardon, govern and rule, by
their good discretion and policy, as well in caulcs
capital or criminal as civil, both narile and
other, all pcrluns who mhall, from lilc to tilie,
fettle within the Ilaid countlics, according to
fuich statutes, laws, and ordinances, as flall be
by him, his heirs and afligns, deviscd and efia-
linfl[ed lbr their better govcrnmient. Slie
(leclhlr(l, th;t all whlo fettled thcie fliould Ie1v
;11nd ciov all Ihe privilcees of i-ce ldenlli:cns anll(
natives t i Elnglandc! any lawl , clulomi, 0or lfic

i~(j,~~~~ ^*t')

to the contrary notwithltanding. And finally, i o o x
ihe prohibited all persons from attempting to IX.
fettle within two hundred leagues of any place
which Sir Humphry Gilbert, or his associates,
shall have occupied, during the space of fix
years L.

WITH those extraordinary powers, suited to First expc-

-,~ ~~

,. , . p. d ition jil .

the high notions of authority and prerogative
prevalent in England during the sixteenth cen-
tury, but very repugnant to more recent ideas
with refped to the rights of free men, who
voluntarily unite to form a colony, Gilbert
began to colled associates, and to prepare for
embarkation. His own character, and the zeal-
ous efforts of his half-brother Walter Ralegh,
who, even in his early youth, di'played those
splendid talents, and that undaunted spirit,
which create admiration and confidencc, soon
procured him a fuflicient number of followers.
But his ficcefs was not suited either to the
Sanguine hopes of his countrymen, or to the
expcnce of his preparations. Two expeditions,
hbtll of which he conduced in person, ended
ilifhfhroufly. In the last he himself perified, ,s
,iihout having effctled his intended settlement
(in the continent of America, or performing

" lakluyt, iii. 135.
voil. Iv. M any

B o O K any thing more worthy of notice, than the

Ix. empty formality of taking possession of the island

of Newfoundland, in the name of his sovereign.
The dififcfions among his officers; the licentious
and ungovernable spirit of some of his crew;
his total ignorance of the countries which he
purposed to occupy ; his misfortune in approach-
inlg the contiinent too far towards the north,
whcerc tle inihofpitable coast of Cape Breton did
not invite themn to fettle; the shipwreck of his
larcgft vessel; and, above all, the scanty provi-
sion which the funds of a private man coulcd
make of what was rcquifite for establishing a new
colony, were the true causes to which the
failure of the enterprise must be imputed, not
to any deficiency of abilities or resolution in its
leader '.

'rile pl.n BUT the mifcartiage of a fcheine, in which
10'u reed by
Ralkel,'. Gilbert had wafted his fortune, did not dilcou-

rage Ralcgli. He adopted all his brother's
ideas; and applying to the Quecn, in wlhofl
l; avour he flood high at that time, he procured
Mnh; lI6. a patent, with jurildiilion and prerogatives as

ample as had been granted unto Gilbert'.
Ralegh, no lets eager to execute than to under-
Api;l, take the fhIclle, inflantly difpalchcd two finail

:' ikllu)t, iii. 1 3, &c. X Ibid. 243.

vctl,:[%?

vessels, under the command of Amadas and i o o K
Barlow, two officers of trust, to visit the coun- IX.
tries which he intended to fettle, and to acquire
some previous knowledge of their coafis, their
foil, and produOtions. In order to avoid Gil- ODi^COry
bert's error, in holding too far north, they took
their course by the Canaries and the Weft India
islands, and approached the North American
continent by the Gulph of Florida. Unfortu-
nately, their chief refcarches were made in that
part of the country now known by the name of
North Carolina, the province in America most
destitute of commodious harbours. They
touched first at an island, which they call
Wokocon (probably Ocakoke), situated on the
inlet into Pamplicoe Sound, and rhen at Rao-
noke, near the mouth of Albemarle Sound. In
both they had some intercourse with the natives,
whom they found to be savages, with all the
claraderiftic qualities of uncivilized life, bra-
very, aversion to labour, hospitality, a propcnfity
to admire, and a willingness to exchange their
rude productions for Englifl commodities, cepe-
cillly for iron, or any of the uf'lull metals of
which they were dcifitutc. After fpcnding a
ilW weekcs in thlis trallic, and in visiting fomc
)pans of ihe adjacent continent, Amadas and sc. 15
larlovw returned to lnglland wil1 two ot tlle
!!:ativcs, ;l:nd : tv te luchi iple id dcilcriptions of

:, 2 the

n o o K the beauty of the country, the fertility of the

IX. foil, and the inildnefs of the climate, that Eli-

zabeth, dclighted with the idea of occupying a
tcnritory fpci-io-, so far, to the barrenl regions
towards the north hitherto visited by her
Iubljcs, b!e owed on it the name of Virgilia;
as a memnorial that this happy discovery had been
made under a virgin lueen y.

Cn:moy ; TH1'IEIR report encouraged Ralegh to lhalln
in V.rsinia his preparations for taking poflefion of such an
Iy Sirl

a
.h2rd inviting property. H-e fitted out a fquaidronl o

seven finail fiips, under the command of Sir
Richard Greenville, a man of honourable birti,
and of courage so uridaunted as to be conspicuous
even ill that gallant age. But the spirit of that
predatory war which the ;nglifh carried oi
againit Spain, mingled with this scheme of
Icttlclment; and on this account, as wcll as from
nilacqul'intance with a more direct and fllcrtc.'
courlc to North Amlerica, Greenville failed by tlih
'Weft India islands. H-e spent some time in cruifi,
amlong thcfe, and in taking prizes; so that il
was towards the close of June before he arrived
ion the coast of North America. Ie touchii
at both the illands where Amadas and Barlov.
had landed, and made some excursions into

Y Hakluyt, iii. i2f.

d in'lrcn'.

different parts of the continent round Pamplicoe B o o K
and Albemarle Sounds. But as; unfortunately, Ix.
he did not advance far enough towards the north,
to discover the noble bay of Chefapeak, he
eftablifled the colony which he left on the island Aug. z-.
of Raonoke, an incommodious station, without
any safe harbour, and almost uninhabited .

TnIS colony confited only of one hundred T,,(,.:,,.

of pcrfh ng

and eighty persons, under the command of hyttilinie
Captain Lane, aflifted by some men of note, ,n,;lail.
the mo:s distinguished of whom was HI-ariot, an
eminent mathematician. Their chief emnploy-
ment, during a residence of nine months, was
to obtain a more cxtenfive knowledge of the
country; and their researches were carried on
uwith greater spirit, and reached farther than
could have been expecced from a colony so
feeble, and in a fiation so disadvantageous.
B1ut from the fanml impatience of indigent adven-
turers to acquire sudden wealth, which gave
a wvrong dirieclion to the iiitluily of the i;pl-
niards in their settlements, the greater part of
the English feein to have coilidcercd nothing as
worthy of attention but mines of gold and silver.
Thlef they oiughlt for, wherever they came;
there they inquired after with unwvearied eagcr-

' I]alldyt, iii. 251.

,\1 9 nc'.A

o o ie ness. The savages soon discovered the favourite
IX. objects which allured them, and artfully amused

them with so many talcs concernilng pearl
fisheries, and rich mines of various metals, that
Lane and his companions wafted their time and
acivity in the chimnerical pursuit of these, inicad
of labouring to raifc proviflons for their own
subsistence. On discovering the deceit (cf ihc
Indians, they were so much exasperated, til;,
from expostulations and reproaches, they pro-
1586. ceeded to open hoflility. The supplies of pro-

visions which they had been accutromed to
receive from the natives were of course with-
drawn. Through their own negligence, no
other precaution had been taken for their sup-
port. Ralegh, having engaged in a Ichemc too
expensive for his narrow funds, had not been
able to fend them that recruit of stores with
which Greenville had promised to furnish them
early in the spring. ''he colony, reduced lo
the utmost diftrels, and on the point of pcrifhing
with famine, was preparing to difipcrfe into
different diftriits of the country in quelt o' food,
.1:,c ,. when Sir Francis Drake appeared with his fleet,

returning frorn a successful expedition againfi
the Spaniards in the Weft Inclies. A fchcice
which lie formed, of f'urniflinLg Lane and his
;ifllciates with fich supplics as mnight enable
thcnm to remain with comfort in their Itflitinl.,

'a s
;

was disappointed by a sudden storm, in which a B o o K
Irnall vessel that he destined for their service was lx.
dafled to pieces; and as he could not supply
them with another, at their joint request, as
they were worn out with fatigue and famine,
he carried them home to England". June 19.

SUCH was the inauspicious beginning of the Knowlcdge

of thie coun-
English settlements in the New WVorld; and, tlyncqiuired

in tlis ex-

after exciting high expcations, this first attempt p.io.
produced no cffet but that of affording a more
complete knowledge of the country; as it
enabled Hariot, a man of science and obferv-
ation, to deferibe its foil, climate, productions,
and the manners of its inhabitants, with a degree
of accuracy which merits no inconsiderable
praise, when compared with the childish anti
marvellous tales publifledl by ievcral of the
Larlv visitants of the New i\orld. 'I'here iq
another confiquciice of this abortive colony
important enough to entitle it to a; pl:ice in
hilfory. Lane and his aflociate: , by Ithir con-
llant intercourse with the Indilans, had acquired
a relish for their favourite enjoyment of fimoking
tobacco; to the use of' which, lic crctulily of ( 1r-',.i'
Ihat people not only ascribed a thoulllnd iiina!in- .' '
ary virtues, but their fllpcrllilion confildcreld ithe

ta HiljI'd

i,9 . 2

i . .2 aid.
CL l I. A a., 3a7.

!\! .!. p!:'nt

oB o K plant itself as a gracious gift of the gods, for the

I-. solace of human kind, and the most acceptable

offering which man can present to heaveno'
They brought with them a specimen of t>i;
new commodity to England, and taught the:
countrymen the method of using it; .-hich
Ralegh, and some young men of fallion, fondil
adopted. From imitation of them, from losv
of novelty, and from the favourablc opinion i0
its salutary qualities entertained by fcveral phl.
ficians, the practice spread among the Englifl.
The Spaniards and Portuguese had, previous to
this, introduced it in other parts of Europc.
This habit of taking tobacco gradually extended
from the extremities of the north to those of the
south, and in one form or other seems to be
equally grateful to the inhabitants of every cli-
mate; and by a singular caprice of the human
species, no lets inexplicable than uncxamIpled,
(so bewitching is the acquired taste for a weed
of no manifest utility, and at firtl not only
unpleasant, but nauseous,) that it has become
alioft as universal as the .demands of those
appetites originally implanted in our nature.
Smoking was the first mode of taking tobacco
in England; and we learn from the comic

h Ilariot lap. I akluyt, iii. 27i. DC Bry. Anmcle,
Pars i.

wrvl t citr

writers towards the close of the sixteenth cen. s o o K
tury and the beginning of the seventeenth, that IX.
this was deemed one of the accomplishments of
a man of fashion and spirit.

A rEw days after Drake departed from Roa-

noke, a finall bark, dispatched by Ralegh with
a supply of itores for the colony, landed at the
place where the Englifl had fettled; but on
tinding it deserted by their countrymen, they
returned to England. The bark was hardly
gone, when Sir Richard Greenville appeared
with three {hips. After searching in vain for
the colony which he had planted, without being
able to learn what had befallen it, he left fifteen
of his crew to keep poffefion of the island.
This handful of men was soon overpowered and
cut in pieces by the savages c.

TiOUGr- all Ralegh's efforts to establish a lalegl,'s

colony in Virginia had hitherto proved abortive, tf.nmpt t
and had been defeated by a fucceflion of disasters ettle

colony int

and disappointments, neither his hopes nor Vitn';a.
resources were cxhaufted. Early in the follow- 1537.
ing year, he fitted out three ifhips, under the
command of Captain John White, who carried
thither a colony more numerous than that which

c -IIklklyt, iii. 2G. 2233

had

B o o I had been fettled under Lane. On their arrival

Ix. in Virginia, after viewing the face of the country
o-'^ covered with one continued forest, which to

them appeared an uninhabited uw ii, as it was
occupied only by a few scattered tribes of lavages,
they discovered that they were destitute of many
things which they deemed efientially neceilary
towards their fubfiltence in such an uncomfort-
able situation; and, with one voice, requecedl
White, their commander, to return to England,
as the person among them nioft likely to solicit,
with efficacy, the supply on which depended the
exifence of the colony. i'Whit landed in his
native country at a mofl unfavourable season or
the negociation vwhiclh he had undertaken. I-e
found the nation in univerial alarm at the formi-
dable preparations of Philip II. to invade LEng-
land, and collcting all its force to oppolfi the
fleet to which lec had arrogantly given tlic
name of the invincible Armada. Ralegh, Green-
ville, and all the mnofi zealous patrons of tlih
new fcttlellent, wc!re called to a.C a diflinguiill
5ss. part in tLhe pcaiols of a year equally intcrell-

ing and glorious to England. Aimidfl danger
so inmmincnt, and during a contort for the 1hoJlour
of tlicir lovereign and the indiependence of tlicir
country, it was iinp)Jliil)le to. allend to a lc

Colony iin mportant and remote olbj)i c. l'lThc u;ortunllt
, -rmi)' colouly illn Romu'kc rCceived 1o i0'l)l)',
,11,ld

I"' il_ il-

perished miserably by famine, or by the unre- i3 o o K
lenting cruelty of those barbarians by whom ix.
they were surrounded.

DURING the remainder of Elizabeth's reign, RalePgl

the scheme of establishing a colony in Virginia tie resign
was not resumed. Ralegh, with a molt aspiring osio)y ia
mind and extraordinary talents, ellightened by \i'"'ia.
knowledge no less uncommon, had the spirit
and the defects of a projector. Allured by new
objects, and always giving the preference to
such as were most splendid and arduous, he was
apt to engage in undertakings so vast and so
various, as to be far beyond his power of accom-
plifhing. He was now intent on peopling and
improving a large diltrict of country in Ireland,
of which he had obtained a grant from the
queen. He was a deep adventurer il the scheme
o' fitting out a powerful armament againfl Spain,
in order to establish Don Antonio on the throne
of Portugal. He had begun to storm his favourit
but vilionary plan, of penetrating into the pro-
vince of Guiana, wherc he fondly dreamed of
?taking pofneflion of incxhanlulllile \\l s tl, flow-
iiig firo the richelt mines i l !i( NT'\w \Vr h!l.
Amidl: this multiplicity d ,oI(.jcd-s, of iu.cli
promilfing appearance, :iiul lcct)mlnc'lcd l)y
novelty, he lnaturally became cold towards liis
ancient and hitherto unpiroliable cliem of

ltltiil!g',

B o o fettling a colony in Virginia, and was ealily

Ix. induced to ailign his right of property in that

country, which he had never visited, togcther
vith all the privileges contained in his patent,
March, to Sir Thomas Smith, and a company of mer-

chants in London. This company, satisfied
nith a paltry traffic carried on by a few fmail
barks, made no attempt to take pofieflion of
the country. Thus, after a period of a hundred
and fix years fiom the time that Cabot disco.
vered North America, in the name of Henry Vli,
and of twenty years from the time that Rale'gh
planted the first colony, there was not a fin^l
Englifhlman fettled there at the de-nile: of (cceno
Elizabeth, in the year one thousand fix hundred
and thice,

(.,,,,,

- I HAVE already explained the caufcs of tih.:,
t.mIIIcc inll

,1,Iactls during the period previous to the acceilion of

voi.,lI' to Elizabeth. Other caufcs produced thle f/!':
o2ll-izl- cfect: under her adminifiration. Thlougih f ,:'

one half of her reign England was cngagil ed i:1
no foreign war, and commerce enjojyed thal.
perfcl security which is friendly to irs progrels;
though the glory of her latter years gave the
highest tone of elevation and vigour to Ilie
national 1)irit ; the queen hcrfelf, from len 1
extreme parsimony, and her averlion to dealcnl
extraordinary supp)lics of her ul) jcets, ,was mnol

apt to restrain than to second the ardent genius B o o o
of her people. Several of the molt splendid ix.
enterprises in her reign were concerted and
executed by private adventurers. All the fclhccs
for colonization were carried on by the funds of
inlividuals, without any public aid. Even the
felicity of her govcrenmcnt was adverse to the
cftabliflnment of remote cclouies. So powerful
is the attracion of our nal'ive foil, and such our
fortunate partiality to the la-_.;s ;'.n:d mnners of
our own country, tihat men feldo; choose to
abandon it, unless they be driven away by oppref-
sion, or allured by,'; . pro.pcC s of sudden

Cealth. B3ut the prcvince's of America, in
.lhich lthe English attcmptcd to itttle, did not,
like those occupied by Spain, invite them thither
by any appearance of silver or golden mnines.
All their hopes of gain were (difl ant; and they
fiiw that nothing could be earned but by pcrfe-
vering exertions of induflry. The imi:hns of
ilizabeth's adiniiifiration were, ii l i,'ir g?;Ccral
tenor, so popular, as did not flore ' i; ilibjccis
to emigrate, in order to fciape rir;n tlec heavy
or vexatious hand of power. It lccem; to 1have
been with difliculty that these ,;lndcr bands of
planters were collected, on v.hiich ilh wrilers of
that age befcow the name of the firhf and second
Virgiuian colonics. The fulnlile of tiilme for
.:igllifh colonization was not vet arriveJ.

J3.rr

B o o x BUT the fuccefion of the Scottish line to tlic

Y-" ccrown of England haflened its approach. James
,;,.. was hardly feated on the throne before he difeo.

vered his pacific intentions, and he soon tcrmi.

,;,:ut' - to natel the lon- wrar which had been carried on
thcilaIn-
blh'limLnt of between Spain and England, by an amicable
colilie s. .

treaty. From that period, uninterrupted trnn.
quillity continued during his reign. Many per.
sons of high rank, arid of ardent ambition, to
wvhoi the war wtith Spain had afforded constant
employment, and presented alluring prolpecds,
not only of fimei but of wealth, ioon became It
impatient ofi languifhingL at home witlout occupa.
tion or objeCl, that their invention. was on the
firetch to find fIoe exercise for their activil
and talents. T'o both .these North Anlirica
ieemed to open a new field, and fchemcs of
carrying colonies thither became more general
and more popular.

i.a;rct A vo.\OGI:, undertaken by Bartholomew
~T, c.o GOofnold in tie lafl year of the queen, facili-
r:i.lC,- trated,

t as well asi encouraged, the execution of

riia fiit 1

t
ilctl.ilp.d there fchelncs. le fiiled from' Falmouhl iln a

fi'all bark, with thirty-two men. Inflcad (,'
following lorlner navigators in their unneccllary
circuit by lle Weil India isles and the Gull' of
liorida, C olnol I fleered due weft, as nearly as,
tile winds would permiit, and.l was the firl:

En11lihl

Englifi commander who reached America by B o o ic
this shorter and more dircc course. That part Ix.
of the contilent which he first descried was a
promontory in the province now called IvMafia-
chulets Bay, to which he gave the name of
('ape Cod. Hlolding along the coast, as it
firetched towards the south-west, he touched at
ivo islands, one of which he called Martha's
Viineyard, the other Elii-; btlh's Island ; and
vifircd the adjoiningl contin ent, and traded with
its inhabitants. Ie an1d his companions were so
much delighted' cvery.'hcr w;ith the inviting
aspec: of the country, that notwiitanding the
inlallnefs of their number, a part of them con-
icnted to remain there. L'.t w-hen they had
ldifure to refncIe upon the fate of former settlers
inAmerrica, they retratcdc a resolution formed
in the first warmth of their admiration; and
CGofnold returned to England in less than four
months from the time of his departure'.

Tin-s voyage, however inconfiderablc it may c,,r,.

Aippar, had important cqci s. T'e Lnglifi ('..-1, .l'.
now difeovered the afpcl: of the American con-
tinent to be extremely inviting Ilir to the north of
the place where they liad irlierlly attempted to
Ittlic. IThe coalt of a vale country, ftretcling

' Pu'clI;m , iv. p. 1 r4.7.

'GUi lh,,X)

B o o K through the most desirable climats, lay before

Ix. them. The richness of its virgin foil promired

a certain recompence to their industry. In its
interior provinces unexpeced sources of wealth
might open, and unknown objets of commerce
might be iound. Its diflance from England was
diminiifhed almost a third part, by the new course
which Gofnold had pointed out. Plans for
establishing colonies began to be formed in
difi-erent parts of the kingdom; and before
these were ripe for execution, one small veflU
was !fnt out by the merchants of Bristol, an-
uther by the Earl of Southampton and Lord
Arundel of WVardour, in order to learn whether
Cofiinld's account of the country was to be con.
lidered as a juit reprefrntation of its slate, or a;
the exaggerated description of a fond discoverer.
Both returned with a full confirmation of hi\
veracity, and with the addition of so many n\e;
circumfanlccs in favour of the country, acquired
by a more extensive view of it, as greatly incrcatl-l'
the desire of planting it.

lTlnkuyt Ti'IHE 1mofl aive and efficacious promoter (ei
,'i 'n'- this was Richard IIakluyt, prebendary of Weft-
,t\,'l ;fj,' lminfier, to whonl England is mnore indebted fr
of tihat ;':' its American pofleflioiis lhan to any man of that

age. Formed under a kinfinan of the hnet;
na;mc, emiienlt for naval and colmmercial knov.-

1IcJ- ,

ledge, he imbibed a finiilar taste, and applied B o o K
early to the fiudy of geography and navigation. Ix.
There favourite sciences engrossed his attention, --
and to diffuse a relini for them was the great
object of his life. In order to excite his country-
men to naval enterprise, by flattering their
national vanity, he published, in the year one
thousand five hundred and eighty-nine, his valu-
able collection of voyages and discoveries made
by Englilhmen. In order to supply them with
what information might be derived from the
experience of the most successful foreign navi-
gators, he translated sone of the best accounts
of the progress of the Spaniards and Portuguese
in their voyages both to the East and Weft
Indics, into the English tongue. He was con-
fulted with refpe& to many of the attempts
towards discovery or colonization during the
latter part of Elizabeth's reign. IIe corre-
fponded with the officers who conducted them,
directed their researches to proper objeds, and
published the history of their exploits. By the
zealous endeavours of a person, equally refpeclcd
by men of rank and men of bufinWc, many of
both orders formed an allbciation to cflablifl
colonies in America, and petitionecd the king for
the fandion of his authority to warrant the
execution of their plans.

VOL. IV. N JAMUI S,

B o o K JAMES, who prided himself on his profound

ix. skill in the science of government, and who had
ames di- turned his attention to confider the advantages
cif tofe which might be derived from colonies, at a time
NorthAme- when he patronised his scheme for planting them
rica into
two parts; in some of the ruder provinces of his ancient

kingdom, with a view of introducing industry
and civilization there , was now no less fond
of direEting the active genius of his Englifl
fubjeas towards occupations not repugnant to
his own pacific maxims, and listened with a
favourable ear to their application. But as the
extent as well as value of the American conti-
nent began now to be better known, a grant of
the whole of such a vast region to any one body
of men, however refpeEtable, appeared to him
an aa of impolitic and profuse liberality. For
this rcafon, he divided that portion of North
America, which firetches from the thirty-fourth
to the forty-fifth degree of latitude, into two
dilh-riCs, nearly equal; the one called the firll
or south colony of Virginia, the other, the
-,-.,. second or north colony. He authorised Sir

Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, Richard
IIakluyt, and their associates, mostly resident in
London, to fettle any part of the former which

iifr . of Scotlniid, ii. 239.

;:1, v

they should choose, and vered in them a right B o ao
of property to the land extending along the coafl Ix.
fifty miles on each fide of the place of their first
habitation, and reaching into the interior country
a hundred miles. The latter diflriEt he allotted, and mrnts

clh;;rteirs to
as the place of settlement, to sundry knights, t.,vonm-

panics.

gentlemen, and merchants of Bristol, Plymouth,
and other parts in the weft of England, with a
similar grant of territory. Neither the monarch
who issued this charter, nor his fubjecs who
received it, had any conception that they were
proceeding to lay the foundation of mighty and
opulent states. What James granted was nothing
more than a simple charter of corporation to a
trading company, empowering the members of
it to have a common feal, and to at as a body
politic. But as the objec for which they afno-
ciated was new, the plan eflabliflhed for the
administration of their affairs was uncommon.
Instead of the power usually granted to corpo-
rations, of electing officers and framing bye-
laws for the condua of their own operations,
the supreme government of the colonies to be Tcrorot

thicc

fettled was veiled in a council resident in Eng- cil.ltcrio
land, to be named by the king, according to
such laws and ordinances as should be given'
under his sign manuail; and the fiubolrdinatc
jurifdilion was committed to a council rcfi(lnt
in America, which was likcwift to be nominated

N 2 by

B o o iK by the king, and to at conformably to his

IX. inflrucions. To this important clause, which

regulated the form of their conflitution, was
added the concefion of several immunities, to
encourage persons to fettle in the intended colo-
nies. Some of these were the fame which had
been granted to Gilbert and Ralegh; such as
the securing to the emigrants and their descend.
ants all the rights of denizens, in the farme
manner as if they had remained or had been
born in England; and granting them the privi.
lege of holding their lands in America by the
freest and least burdensome tenure. Others
were more favourable than those granted by
Elizabeth. He permitted whatever was neceflary
for the sustenance or commerce of the new colo-
nies to be exported from England, during the
space of seven years, without paying any duty;
and as a farther incitement to indufiry, he granted
them liberty of trade with other nations, and
appropriated the duty to be levied on forcign
commodities, for twenty-one years, as a fulnd
for the benefit of the colony .
Ip. fc s IN this singular clarC- r, the contents of which

,t -:-;L. have been little atiended tu by the historians of

,tilli. II ifl. of Xigini, p. 3 Append. p.

l . Pur-
cli,;;, v. 16H3.

America,

America, some articles are as unfavourable to B o O K
the rights of the colonists, as others are to the Ix.
interest of the parent state. By placing the ~
legislative and executive powers in a council
nominated by the crown, and guided by its
inftrudions, every person fettling in iAmerica
fiems to be bereaved of the noblest privilege of
a free man; by the unlimited permission of
trade with foreigners, the parent slate is deprived
of that exclusive commerce which has been
deemed the chief advantage resulting from the
efablifhment of colonies. But in the infancy of
colonization, and without the guidance of ob-
servation or experience, the ideas of men wkh
refpeEt to the mode of forming new fcttlements,
were not fully unfolded, or properly arranged.
At a period when they could not foresee the
future grandeur and importance of the comniu-
nities which they were about to call into cxifl-
ence, they were ill qualified to concert the
bell plan for governing them. Besides, the
English of that age, accuflomed to the high
prerogative and al'oitrary rule of their monarchs,
were not animated with such liberal sentiments,
either concerning their own personal or political
rights, as have become flamiliar in thl more
mature and improved tlate of their conflitu-
lion.

N 3 T.TITIIOlUT

B O O I WITHOUT hesitation or reluctance the pro.

Ix. prietors of both colonies prepared to execute

Coloniesof their refpedcive plans; and under the authority
Virzinia
nd' Newv of a charter, which would now be rejected with
nsgland. disdain, as a violent invasion of the sacred and

inalienable rights of liberty, the first permanent
settlements of the English in America were efta.
blifhed. From this period, the progress of the
two provinces of Virginia and New England
form a regular and connected story. The former
in the south, and the latter in the north, may
be confidered as the original and parent colonies;
in imitation of which, and under whose shelter,
all the others have been successively planted and
reared.

.Advan- THE firfl attempts to occupy Virginia and
&Ages of
ti;cing tlie New England were made by very feeble bodies
lhillory ofl
thcrecolo- of emigrants. As these fettled under great
nies in their
Inlant i'ate. diCadvantages, among tribes of savages, and in

an uncultivated defcrt; as they attained gradu.
ally, after long struggles and many disasters, to
that maturity of strength, and order of policy,
which entitles theln to be confidered as rcl}fect-
able flates, the hiflory of tleir persevering ecforts
merits particular attention. It will exhibit a
ijpectacle no less striking than inflrucive, and
prcfcnts an opportunity, ' which rarely occii s,

(C*t

of contemplating a society in the firfl moment of B o o I
its political existence, and of observing how its 'x.
spirit forms in its infant slate, how its principles
begin to unfold as it advances, and how those
characteristic qualities, which diftinguifl its
maturer age, arc successively acquired. The
account of the establishment of the other Eng-
lifih colonies, undertaken at periods when the
importance of such poffeflions was better under-
itood, and effeced by more direlt and vigorous
exertions of the parent state, is less interesting. I
fliall therefore relate the hifioryof the two original
colonies in detail. With refpec to the fubfe-
quent settlements, tome more general obferv-
ations concerning the time, the motives, and
circumfiances of their eftablifiliment, will be
sufficient. I begin with the history of Virginia,
the most ancient and most valuable of the British
colonies in North America.

TH-OUGHr many persons of diftintion became Ncvpor
proprietors in the company which undertook to v,,ila.
plant a colony in Virginia, its funds seem not to l)t"C 1
liave been considerable, and its first effort was
certainly extremely feeble. A finall veflel of a
hundred tons, and two barks, under the com-
mand of Captain Newport, iaildl with a hundred
and fivc men, deflined to remain in the country.
*5omc of thcfc were of rcfellelable families,

N .4 palr i:1larly

B 0 o iO particularly a brother of the Earl of Northum.

Ix. berland, and several officers who had served
"-""" \wvilhh reputation in the ieign of Elizabeth. New.

port, I know not for what reason, followed the
Aiyb~'I6. ancient course by the \Vest Indies, and did not

reach the coast of North America for four
months, But he approached it with betecr
fortune than any former navigator; for having
been driven, by tie violence of a storm, to the
northward of Roanoke, the place of his deftin.
ation, the first land he discovered was a pro.

iMcovcrs molntoory which he called Cape Henry, the
th c Lela-

southern boundary of the Bay of Chefapeak.
The Englifll food diretly into that fp-lcious
inlet, which seemed to invite them to enter;
and as they advanced, contemplated, xirth a
mnixture of delight and admiration, that grand
refcrvoir, into which are poured the waters of
all the vast rivers, which not only dilufe fertility
through tlat diftri&: of America, but open the
interior parts of the country to navigation, and
render a commercial intercourse more cxtcnfive
and cominodious than in any other region of
the globe. Newport, keeping along the foutli-
ern flore, failed up a river, wlich the niivcs
called Powhatan, and to which he gave the nalme
s:is irp of Jilmes-River. After viewing its l):;nk,

.l7
c during a run of above forty miles r-om its moulh,

they all concluded that a country, where htfc

1ai il

and convenient harbours seemed to be numerous, B o o K
would be a more suitable station for a trading IX.
colony, than the fhoally and dangerous coast to
the south, on which their countrymen had
formerly fettled. Here then they determined
to abide ; and having chosen a proper spot for
their residence, they gave this infant settlement
the name of James-Town, which it still retains; Fou-nd
and though it has never become either populous Town.
or opulent, it can boast of being the most ancient
habitation of the English in the New World.
But however well-chofen the situation might be,
the members of the colony were far from availing
themselves of its advantages. Violent animo-
fities had broke out among some of their leaders,
during their voyage to Virginia. Thele did not
subside on their arrival there. The firfl deed of
the council, which afTumed the government in
virtue of a commilsion brought from England Badadmilni-

£1 :ttianon.

under the feal of the company, and opened on
the day after they landed, was an aac of injustice.
Captain Smith, vwho had been appointed a
member of the council, was excluded fromi his
feat at the board, by the mean jealousy of his
colleagues, and not only reduced to the condi-
tion of a private man, but of one fulpscc:ed and
watched by his superiors. This diminution of
his influence, and refiraint on his adciviry, was
an essential injury to the colony, which at that

juncl.urc

B o o I juncure stood in need of the aid of both. For

Ix. soon after they began to fettle, the English were

involved in a war with the natives, partly by
their own indifcrction, and partly by the fufpi.
cion and ferocity of those barbarians. And

Colony although the Indians, scattered over the coun.
annoyed hy
theIndians. tries adjacent to James-River, were divided into

independent tribes, tb extremely feeble that
hardly one of them could muster above two
hundred warriors %, they teazed and annoyed an
infant colony by their incessant hostilities. To
iiis was added a calamity still more dreadful;
the flock of provilions left for their fubfifstence,
LJne 15. on the departure of their ships for England,

was so scanty, and of such bad quality, that a
scarcity, approaching almost to ablolute famine,

Slffclrfrom soon followed. Such poor unwholesome fare
tentcity,
ali ti,,lun brought on diseases, the violence of which was
,f the cl- so much increased by the sultry heat of the
f'atct. climate, and the moisture of a country covered

with wood, that before the beginning of Scp-
tember, one half of their number died, and
mofl of the survivors were sickly and dejee'ed,
In such trying extremities, the comparative
powers of every individual are dilcovercd and
called forth, and each naturally takes that
station, and aflinmcs that ascendant, to vwhich

S Pm-clha, vol. iv. i ;92. Snihll' Trivcl;, p.
2: .

liu

lie is entitled by his talents and force of mind. B o o K
Every eye was now turned towards Smith, and Ix.
all willingly devolved on him that authority of si,
which they had formerly deprived him. I-is c"llec'tot

comniand,
undaunted temper, deeply tincured with the reftohlst e

profpcrityof

wild romantic spirit charaaeriflic of military tie colony.
adventures in that age, was peculiarly suited to
such a situation. The vigour of his conffitution
continued fortunately still unimpaired by disease,
and his mind was never appalled by danger.
HIe instantly adopted the only plan that could
save them from dcftrution. ITe began by
surrounding James-town with such rude fortifi-
cations as were a sufficient defence againfi the
assaults of savages. -He then marched, at the
head of a small detachment, in quetl of their
enemies. Some tribes he gained by carefres and
presents, and procured from them a fuipply of
provisions. Others he attacked with open
lorce; and defeating them on cvery occasion,
xxhatever their superiority in numbers might be,
compelled them to impart to him fomc portion
of their winter flores. As the rccomipcncc of
all his toils and dangers, he faiv abundance and
contentment re-eflablifled in the colony, and
hoped that he fliould be able to mainlii:i themn
in that happy Rlatc, unlil the arrival of flips
l'roi England in the fprilng: but in o(ne of his

cxcurfionl

Bo o K excursions he was furprized by a numerous bo(iv

Ix. of Indians, and in making his escape from thenl,

~"'' after a gallant defence, he funk to the neck i,
rle is taken swamp, and was obliged to surrender. Thouhi
prisoner by
rhelndians. he knew well what a dreadful fate awaits the

prisoners of savages, his pretence of mind did
not forsake him. He shewed those who hlid
taken him captive a mariner's compass, and
amused them with so many wonderful accounts
of its virtues, as filled them with aftoniflmnient
and veneration, which began to operate very
powerfully in his favour. They led him, ho,.v-
ever, in triumph through various parts of itei
country, and conduted him at last to Powhatan,
the most considerable Sachim in that part oi
Virginia. There the doom of death being pro:
nounced, he was led to the place of execution,
and his head already bowed down to receive tl;e
fatal blow, when that fond attachment of thc
American women to their European invaders,
the beneficial effects of which the Spaniadls
often experienced, interposed in his beliali.
The favourite daughter of Powhatan ruffed in
between him and the executioner, and by her
intreatics and tears prevailed on her father to
fiare his life. The beneficence of his delivcrer,
whom the early English writers dignify with the
titlc of the Princcfs Pocahuntas, did not tcr-

mina.lI
/

linate here; flie soon after procured his liberty, n o o ic
and sent him from time to time seasonable pre. IX.
sents of provisions h.

SMITH, on his return to James-Town, found n01 liit

return, he
the colony reduced to thirty-eight persons, who, ti(ld tliu

c olony nl-

in despair, were preparing to abandon a country nmoltuined.
which did not seem destined to be the habitation
of Engliflimen. lie employed caresses, threats,
and even violence, in order to prevent them
from executing this fatal resolution. With
difficulty he prevailed on them to defer it so
long, that the succour anxiously expected from
England arrived. Plenty was inltantly rellored; se¢fr,,''l
a hundred new planters were added to their firol Eng-
number, and an ample stock of whatever was
requisite for clearing and sowing the ground was
delivered to them. But an unlucky incident
turned their attention from that species of
indufllry which alone could render their situation
comfortable. In a small fiream of water that issued Colu,;!s

dcccive·l by

from a bank of sand near James-town, a sediment tlleie ,p'c: -
of some filining mineral substance, which had :`i`;o
some resemblance of gold, was discovered. At a
timewhen theprccious metals were conceived to be
the peculiar and only valuable productions of the

h Smith's Travel:;,, I). 1., &c. Pulrhas, iv. 1704.
S;iil, 1p. 45, &c.

New

B o o ic New World, when every mountain was supposed

ix to contain a treasure, and every rivulet was

searched for its golden sands, this appearance
was fondly confidered as an infallible indication
of a mine. Every hand was eager to dig; large
quantities of this glittering duff were amassed.
From some assay of its nature, made by an artilt
as unskilful as his companions were credulous,
it was pronounced to be extremely rich. "There
"' was now," fays Smith, " no talk, no hope,
4 no work, but dig gold, wafl gold, refine
" gold i." With this imaginary wealth the fir.
vessel returning to England was loaded, while
the culture of the land, and every useful occu.
pation, were totally neglected.

Smith un. THIE Cefiets of this fatal delusion were soon
clcrt:ikes a
furvcy of felt. Notwithstanding all the provident acivity
Unl country.

of Smith, in procuring corn froim the natives
by traffic or by force, the colony began to fiiicr
as much as formerly from scarcity of food, and
was wafled by the l tae diflempers. In hopes
of obtaining some relief, Smith proposcd, as
they had not hitherto extended their refclrchcs
beyond the countries contiguous to Jamcs-Rivcr,
to open an intercourie with the more remote
tribes, and to examine into the Rate of culture

Smln;ih'.: Tlavclb, p. ;

(UU»0

and population among them. The execution of n o o K
this arduous design he undertook himself, in a lx.
finall open boat, with a feeble crew, and a very
scanty fRock of provisions. lie began his survey
at Cape Charles, and in two different excursions,
which continued above four months, he ad-
vanced as far as the river Sufquehannah, which
flows into the bottom of the bay. lie visited
all the countries both on the east and weft
fbores; he entered nioif of the considerable
creeks; he failed up many of the great rivers as
far as their falls. He traded with some tribes;
he fought with others; he observed the nature
of the territory which they occupied, their mode
of subsistence, the peculiarities in their manners;
and left among all a wonderful admiration either
of the beneficence or valour of the English.
After failing above three thousand miles in a
paltry vessel, ill fitted for such an extensive navi-
gation, during which the hardships to which he
was exposed, as well as the patience with which
he endured, and the fortitude with which he
unrmounted them, equal whatever is related of
the celebrated Spanish discoverers in their mol:
daring enterprizes, he returned to James-Town ;
he brought with him an account of that large
portion of the Amcrican continent now coin-
)prihenlcd in the two provinces of Virginia ant

Maryland,

Bo o
I Marylandk, so full and exat, that afrer the

IX. progress of information and research for a cen-

tury and a half, his map exhibits no inaccurate
view of both countries, and is the original upon
which all subsequent delineations and descriptions
have been formed'.

BUT whatever pleasing profpecc of future

benefit might open upon this complete discovery
of a country formed by nature to be the feat of
an exclusive commerce, it afforded but little
relief for their present wants. The colony fill
depended for fubfifterce chiefly on supplies from
the natives ; as, after all the efforts of their own
indufiry, hardly thirty acres of ground were
yet cleared so as to be capable of culture ". By
Smith's attention, however, the flores of the
the English were so regularly filled, that for some
time they felt no considerable distress; and at
this jun1ure a change was made in the conftitu-
tion of the company, which seemed to promile
an increase of their security and happincfs.
That supreme direEtion of all the company's
operations, which the king by his charter had
rcterved to hinmlilf, discouraged persons of rank

c Smith's Travels, p. 65, &c. 1 Stithl. p. 83
n" Slitli. 1. 97.

or

or property from becoming members of a society B o o K
so dependant on the arbitrary will of the crown. IX.
Upon a representation of this to James, lie i6c9.
granted them a new charter, with more ample ^,T'2v3
privileges. He enlarged the boundaries of the cil:.ter
colony; he rendered the powers of the com-
pany, as a corporation, more explicit and
complete; he abolifhled the jurifdifiorn of the
council refidcnt in Virginia ; he veted th:e
government entirely in a council reiding ilt
London ; he granted to the proprietors of the
company the right of electing the p wribns who
were to compose this council, by a majority of
voices; he authorized this council to eftabliih
such laws, orders, and forms of government and
magistracy, for the colony and plantation, as
they in their discretion should think to be fittest
for the good of the adventurers and inhabitants
there; he empowered them to nominate a
governor to have the administration of affairs in
the colony, and to carry their orders into exe-
cution ". In consequence of these conceflions,
the company having acquired the power of
regulating all its own tranfacions, the number
of proprietors increased, and among them we
find the molt rcfpedable names in the nation.

" Stith, Append. 8.
VOI. IV. 0 TO E

B o IO THE sirs- deed of the new council was to

IX. appoint Lord Delaware governor and captain-

Lord DI,- general of their colony in Virginia. To a person
wa1rea:p of his rank those high-founding titles could be
pnited governor. no allurement; and by his thorough acquaint-

ance with the progress and ffate of the settlement,
he knew enough of the labour and difliculty
with which an infant colony is reared, to exped
any thing but anxiety and care in difcharginj
the duties of that delicate office. But, from zeal
to promote an establishment which he expeEted
to prove so highly beneficial to his country, lie
was willing to relinquish all the comforts of an
honourable tfation, to undertake a long voyage
to fettle in an uncultivated region defsitute of
every accommodation to which he had been
accustomed, and where he foresaw that toil, and

GaCtesancd trouble, and danger awaited him. But as he
appoint. d could not immediately leave England, the council
t. co'nFniw1~d
tisll tihc'ai- (dispatched Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George
.:,1 of LI,u,1
,'.lr:t,-. Summers, the former of whom had been

appointed lieutenant-general and the latter admi-
ral, with nine ships and five hundred planters.
They carried with them commiflions, by which
they were empowered to supersede the jurii;lic-
tion of the former council, to proclaim lord
l)claware govcrnor, and, until he should ar-ivc,
to take the adminillration of allairs into tlicir

O( \'
W

own hands. A violent hurricane separated the B o o K
veifel in which Gates and Summers had embarked ix.
from the reft of the fleet, and stranded it on the Theirfhip
coast of Bermudas. The other ihips arrived ftrandedon
safely at James-Town. But the fate of their of Ber-

mudas.

commanders was unknown. Their commission Aug. 1.
for new-modelling the government, and all other
public papers, were supposed to be loft, together
with them. The present form of government,
however, was held to be abolished. No legal
warrant could be produced for establishing any
other. Smith was not in a condition at this
juneture to assert his own rights, or to as with
his wonted vigour. By an accidental explosion
of gunpowder, he had been so miserably scorched
and mangled, that he was incapable of moving,
and under the necessity of committing himself
to the guidance of his friends, who carried him
aboard one of the ships returning to England,
in hopes that he might recover by more fkil-
ful treatment than he could meet with in
Virginia °.

AFTER his departure, every thing tended fall Anlachy i
to the wildest anarchy. Faction and discontent
had often risen so high among the old settlers,

PI'mclias, iv. 1734, &c. Smitli's Travels, p 89.
Sllih, p. c12, &c.

o ? that

B O o K that they could hardly be kept within bounds,

Ix. The spirit of the new comers was too ungovcrn.

able to bear any restraint. Several among them
of better rank were such difliTated hopeless
young men, as their friends were glad to fend
out in quest of whatever fortune might betide
theni in a foreign land. Of the lower order
many were so profligate or desperate, that their
country was happy to throw them out as nui.
fances in society. Such persons were little
capable of the regular subordination, the ftrici
economy, and persevering industry, which their
situation required. The Indians, obferviag lthir
mifconldut, and that every precaution for iulle-
nancc or fafery was neglected, not only withhild
the supplies of provisions which they were
accufiomed to furniih, but harassed them wilh

Shccony continual hotliltics. All their fubfillence was
talll. clderived fiom the stores which they had brought

from England ; thefc were soon consumed ; then
the domcftic animals lent out to breed in the
country were dcvoured ; and by this inconlider-
ate waste, they were reduced to such extremity
of famine, as not only to cat the most nlaufeo!u
and unwholesome roots and berries, but to feed
on the bodcis of the Indians whom they flc;,
;ind even on those of tllcir companions \wh
funk under the oppreflion of fucli complicated
dillrc:fs. In !cls than. fix months, of five hun1

dr.1

dred persons whom Smith left in Virginia, only n o o K
sixty remained ; and these so feeble and dejected, Ix.
that they could not have survived for ten days,
if succour had not arrived from a quarter whence
they did not expeci it '.

WI-IeN Gates and Summers were thrown a-tesa.nd

SumIners

ashore on Berinudas, fortunately not a tingle arrive from
person on board their fliip perished. A conri-
derable part of their provisions and stores too
was saved, and in that delightful spot Nature,
with fponraneous bounty, presented to them such
a variety of her productions, that a hundred and
fifty people fubfifled in affluence fcr ten
months on an uninhabited island. Impatient,
however, to escape front a place where they
were cut off from all intercourse with mankind,
they set about building two barks with such tools
and materials as they had, and by amazing
efibrts of perseverance and ingenuity they finished
them. In these they embarked, and steered
direcly towards Virginia, in hopes of finding an
ample conlolation for all their toils and dangers
in the embraces of their companions, and amidfl:
the comforts of a flourifhlii colony. After a
Imore prolperous navigation than they could have
expected in their ill-conflrucecd veflnls, they

p Stili, 1p. II. 'Purcl.is, iv. 17 8,

o $ landed

B o K landed at James-Town. But inifead of that

Ix. joyful interview for which they fondly looked,
May 23. a fpeftacle presented itself which firuck them
Find the with horror. They beheld the miserable re.
colony'in
the utmost mainder of their countrymen emaciated with

si famine and sickness, funk in despair, and in

their figure and looks rather resembling speEres
than human beings. As Gates and Summers,
in full confidence of finding plenty of provisions
in Virginia, had brought with them no larger
flock than was deemed necessary for their own
support during the voyage, their inability to
afford relief to their countrymen, added to the
anguish with which they viewed this unexpected
scene of distress. Nothing now remained but
instantly to abandon a country, where it was
impossible to fubfifl any longer; and though all
that could be found in the stores of the colony,
when added to what remained of the flock
brought from Bermudas, did not amount to more
than was sufficient to support them for fixtecii
days, at the most scanty allowance, they set fail, in
hopes of being able to reaclNewfoundland, where
they expeced to be relieved by their countrynell
employed at that season in the fiflery there 1.

q A minute and curious account of the fliprerl-ek (,t

Gates and Summers, and of their adventures in Bcrmud:,l1,
was comnlpofd by Strachy, a gentleman who accompanicdl

rtllenm and was publinfed by PurclIasi, iv. 1734.

m ....

BUT it was not the will of Heaven that all B o o 1i
the labour of the Englif, in planting this Ax.
colony, as well as all t!,-,ir hopes of benefit Ar.,c ao,
from its future posterity, flh:'ul(l be for ever loft. f'j ''"to
Before Gates, and the melanclholy co mnanionsl ;';::',': '
of his voyage, had reached the mouthl of James- l.i'-..
River, they wvere met by ILold Delaware, with
three ships, that brought a large recruit of pro-
visions, a considerable number of new fttlers,
and every thing requisite for deince or cultiva-
tion. By persuasion and authority he prevailed
on them to return to James .own, where they
found their fort, their nmagazines, and houses
entire, which Sir Thomas Gaies, by olme ihappy
chance, had prelervcd from being ser on si , at
the time of their departure. A ftcicty fr feeble
and disordered in its frame required a tender
snd skilful hand to cherifli it, and reilore its
vi'rour. This it found in Iord I)-etiwalc: lie >v:.,l"l";-
fcarched into the causes of their inisforltIunes, as ' L

, '

far as he could discover them, amnidllt the vio-
lence of their mutual acculations; but inflead
of exerting' his power in puniffling crimes that
were pall, he employed his prudence in healing
their difcntions, and in guarding againiif a
-repetition of the fame Ifatal errors. By uiwea-
ried alliduities, by the relp)c duice to an aniable
and beneficent charaaer, by kunw\illg Ihow to
miingle severity with indulgence, a.nd x 1hcn to

o 4 afiunle

B o o K afiume the dignity of his office, as well as when

Ix. to display the gentleness natural to his own

temper, he gradually reconciied men corrupted
by anarchy to subordination and discipline, he
turned the attention of the idle and profligate to
indufiry, and taught the Indians again to reve.

6,l,, rence and dread the Englifhi name. Under such

Iii hcathi an administration, the colony began once more
obliges him
toniturnto to alfunle a promrifing appearance; 'when,
n1-""a. unhappily for it, a complication of difcafes

brought on by the climate obliged Lord Dela-
ware to quit the country r ; the government of
which he committed to Mr. Percy.

'AT*y '°- HIE was soon supersedcd by the arrival of Sir
11' lihonas
Dal- ap- Thomas Dale; in whom the company had
goc.rnor. veiled more absolute authority than in any of

his predecessors, empowering him to rule by
Martial law martial law ; a short code of which, founded on

tlb d. the pra:tice of the armies in the Low Countries,

the mofi rigid military school at that time in
Europe, they sent out with him. This fvflem
of government is so violent and arbitrary, that
even the Spaniards thelmfelves had not ventured
to introduce it into their fcttlcrnents; for amonil
them, as soon as a plantation began, and lie
arts of peace succeeded to the operations of 'ar,

Sitll, p. 117. Pinch;,,, iv. 17(,.

the

lhe jurifdition of the civil magiltrate was uni- B o o K
fornly established. But however unconflitu- ix.
tional or opprelfive this may appear, it was
adopted by the advice of Sir Francis Bacon, the
most enlightened philosopher, and one of the
molt eminent lawyers of the age ¾. The com-
pany, well acquainted with the inefficacy of
every method which they had hitherto employed
for restraining the unruly mutinous spirits which
they had to govern, eagerly adopted a plan that
had the sanction of such high authority to
recommend it. Happily for the colony, Sir
Thomas Dale, who was entrusted with this
dangerous power, exerciicd it with prudence
and moderation. By the vigour which the
summary mode of military punifhnlent gave to
his adminifrration, he introduced into the colony
more perfecl order than had ever been cftablifhed
:here; and at the famle time he tempered his
vigour with so much dilcretion, that no alarm
seems to have been given by this formidable
innovation'.

'TiE rceular form which the colony now Ml('LT

began to assume, induced the linii, to i'ie a Ni .l11lr-
tew charter for the encouragcment of the tl,..l,,,,Y:

°i O .ll-

, a 15:u(o,, Esay, oln Pl,t,,tktiolns;1, l). 3- .
' Sbili1, I). 122.

ad vcn-

. o o I adventurers, by which he not only confirmed all

Ix. their former privileges, and prolonged the term

of exemption from payment of duties on the
commodities exported by them, but granted
them more extensive property, as well as more
ample jurisdiction. All the islands lying within
three hundred leagues of the coast were annexed
to the Province of Virginia. In consequence of
this, the company took possession of Bermudas,
and the other fmrall islands discovered by Gates
and Summers, and at the fame time prepared to
fend out a considerable reinforcement to the
colony at James-Town. The expence of those
extraordinary cfforts was defrayed by the pro ts
of a lottery, which amounted nearly to thirty
thousand pounds. This expedient they were
authorised to employ by their new charter";
and it is remarkable, as the firfi instance, in the
Englifl history, of any public countenance
given to this pernicious seducing mode of levy-
ing money. But the House of Commons, which
towards the close of this reign began to observe
every mcafure of governmelnt with jealous atten-
tion, having renonftrated against the institution
as unconstitutional and impolitic, James recalled
the licence under the famiNiion of which it had
been efabliflccd .

" Sttll, p. 'ji. Appr'nlix, 23, &c,
/ C bahli '' A n.t in:l:, i. 32.

B v

BY the severe discipline of martial law, the n o o K

ativity of the colonists was forced into a proper Ix.
direftion, and exerted itself in useful industry. cuivaio n
This, aided by a fertile foil and favourable climate, t'1 i1 I'Cnd

o'lromtOeCd.

soon enabled them to raire such a lar-e ltock of
provisions, that they were no longer obliged to
trust for subsistence to the precarious supplies
which they obtained or extorted from the Indians.
In proportion as the English became more inde-
pendent, the natives courted their friendship
upon more equal terms. The happy effiets of
this were quickly felt. Sir Thomas Dale con- Treaty wit
cluded a treaty with one of their motR powerful thenatives.
and warlike tribes, situated on the River Chicka-
liominy, in which they consented to acknowledge
themselves subjects to the king of Gr-at Britain,
to assume henceforth the name of Engli{hmen,
to fend a body of their warriors to the ai;tance
of the English, as olten as they tooi the field
against any enemy, and to dlpofit ainually a
ilipulated quantity of Indian corn in the {torc-
houfcs of the colonyw. An event, ,whlc!h rthe
carly historians of Virginia relate wt l peculiar
fiuisfaition, prepared the way for thi; union.
T'ocahuntas, the favourite daughter of the great
Chief Powhatan, to lwhoe interccflion Captain

H -iamer Sulida Narratio, ap. de Bry. Iars x. p. 33.
tithl, p. 130 .

Smith

B o 0 K Smith was indebted for his life, persevered ir

IX- her partial attachment to the Englili ; and a,

flc frequently visited their lettlements, xwhcre
flie was always re:ived with refpe&fid hofp,.
tality, her admiration of their arts and manners
continued to increase. During this intercoulfe,
her beauty, which is repref!ted as far superior
to that of her countiywomen, made such impref-

Rolfe sion on the heart of Mr. Roise, a young man of
marries the
daughter of rank in the colony, that he warmly solicited her
-n Indian
Chief, to accept of him as a husband. Where manncrs

are limple, courtf-lip is not tedious. Neither
artifice prevents, nor ceremony forbids the heart
from declaring its sentiments. Pocahuntas readily
gave her consent ; Dale encouraged the alliance,
and Powhatan did not disapprove it. The mar-
riage was celebrated with extraordinary pomp;
and from that period a friendly correspondence
fubfif-eed between the colony and all the tribes
subjec: to Powhatan, or that stood in awe of his
power. Rolfe and his Princess (for by that
name the writers of the last age always diflinguifh
her) set out for England, where she was rcccived
by James and his queen with the rcfpelt siltcd
to her birth. Bcing carefully infirutded in the
principles of the Cllrillin fiith, ilic was publlicly
baptizecd, but died a few years1 aler, oln her
return to Anmclrica, lcaving one oiol;

from whO!11
!lrc fprungi iblom of the inufl leli)Ce bl)le iilie::

in Virginia, who boast of their descent from the B o o K
race of the ancient rulers of their country x. IX
But notwithstanding the visible good cfleets of
that alliance, none of Rolfe's countrymen Ieeni
to have imitated the example xwhich he set them,
of intermarrying with the natives. Of all the
Europeans who have lettled in America, the
Englifl have availed th:nrflcvcs least. of this
obvious method of concil;ltii!. ithe aficiLn of
its original inh.:bitants ; ai., either fro.!l the
fliynefs conif')ic.'us ill I.hi nat ial character,
or from the wanL t

ot liu, t fncisiy of man-

ners which aC.co: i'nmi tcs i.lu:i to every fitua-.
tion, they have b'en more avcr!: thlan tle French
and Portuguei', or even trh Si:ilni:.rds, irom
incorporating w>ith the natce ATincrcans. 'he
Indians, courtiing such an ullion, olercd their
daughters in marri:ig:c to their new guels : and
when they did not accept oi tihe ;ii(ilcCLed alli-
ance, they natural!lr imnlputed it to pride and to
their contempt of them as an i!:il.rior order of
beings Y.

DURING the ilntrval of

( ranquillity procurCed rL:, indl

hy the alliance with Powvlatan, an iamportant fir,' 1i-
change was ImaLt: in the ILalte of the colony. ),ity.

x Iaincr Solil. Na;inti o, a1). d1 ':y, 'l;; :.i:. p. 23.

,5iitlh, p. I29. l.l) .
1 h hitl,':, T i'cl, p. l3. l' .

Y l.'vclh 'y's 1 lilL:. ol' \Vi'- I). 5.

1 I lhe:'to

B O K Hitherto no right of private property in land

IX. had been eflablifhed. The fields that were

cleared had been cultivated by the joint labour
of the colonists; their produt was carried te
the common storehouses, and distributed wecklv
to every family, according to its number and
exigencies. A focicty, destitute of the firfi
advantage resulting from social union, was not
sorned to prosper. InduRtry, when not excited
by the idea of property in what was acquired by
its own efforts, made no vigorous exertion.
The head liad no inducement to contrive, nor
the hand to labour. The idle and improvidcnt
trulled entirely to what was issued from the
common tfore; the afiiduity evea of the fober
and attentive relaxed, when they perceived that
others were to reap the fruit of their toil; and
it was computed, that the united indullry of tli1
colony did not accomplish as much work in ;i
week as might have bcen performed in a day, if
each individual had labourcd on his own accounr.
' dvon- In order to renmedy this, Sir 'Thmlrn; D)11e

divided a considerable portion cif tlie lind into
small lots, and granted one of tlieft to each
individual in full property. From the nmomlenl
that induflry had the certain lprofpli of a
reconpence, it advanced with rapid progress,
The articles of primary neccliily were cuii-
vated x itlh io much attentionI as fccurcd tli

elaI

means of fubfiLfence; and such schemes of B o o
improvement were formed as prepared the way Ix.
for the introduEtion of opulence into the
colony .

THE indufrious spirit, which began to rife Culture of

bthacco in.

among the planters was ioon direEted towards a tioduced.
new object ; and they applied to it for some time
with such inconsiderate ardour as was productive
of fatal consequences. The culture of tobacco,
which has since become the staple of Virginia,
and the source of its prosperity, was introduced 1616.
about this time into the colony. As the taste
for that weed continued to increase in England,
notwithstanding the zealous declamations of James
against it, the tobacco imported from Virginia
came to a ready market; and though it was so
much inferior in quality or in estimation to that
raised by the Spaniards in the Weft Indian
ilands, that a pound of the latter fold for eighteen
Ilillings, and of the former for no more than
three shillings, it yielded a confiderablc profit.
Allured by the profpe&t of such a certain and rnd cons'-
quick return, every other species of induilry was :iii"
negleced. The land which ought to have been
rclerved for raising provisions, and even the
fir-ccs of Janes-Town, were planted with

S/ S l ih'5 Travels, p. r
1 l. S;ith, p. l ' '

tobacco,

B o o K tobacco. Various regulations were framed to

Ix. restrain this ill-directed acivity. But, from

eagerness for present gain, the planters difrc.
garded every admonition. The means of sub.
fiftence became so scanty, as forced them to renew
their demands upon the Indians, who, feeing no
end of those exations, their antipathy to the
Englifi name revived with additional rancour,
and they began to form schemes of vengeance,
,with a secrecy and silence peculiar to Ameri
cans a

MEANWrIIILE the colony, notwithftandiny

this error in its operations, and the cloud that
was gathering over its head, continued to wear
an aspec of prosperity. Its numbers increascd
by fucceflive migrations ; the quantity of tobacco
exported became every ,year more considerable,
and several of the planters were not only in an
easy situation, but advancing fart to opulence ';
and by two events, which happened nearlv at
the fame time, both population and indufiry
were greatly promoted. As few women hadl
hitherto ventured to encounter the hardfiiips
which were unavoidable in an unknown and
uncultivated country, Inofl of the colonifis,

a Stl i, p. i.o. 147. 14. 16. S:nitli, p. 130. Pt"-
¢clhas, iv. i 787.

b ri]th,
1p. I 9.

coir.i'ui'

conifrained to live single, confidered themselves B o o K
as no more than sojourners in a land to which ix.
they were not attached by the tender ties of a
family and children. In order to induce them
to fettle there, the company took advantage of
the apparent tranquillity in the country, to fend Y°oug wo.
out a considerable number of young women, of grate from

- Enland to

humble birth indeed, but of unexceptionable Virginia.
character, and encouraged the planters, by
premiums and immunities, to marry themn.
These new companions were received with such
fondness, and many of them so comfortably
established, as invited others to follow their
example; and by degrees thoughtless adven-
turers, assuming the sentiments of virtuous
citizens and of provident fathers of families,
became solicitous about the prosperity of a
country, which they now confidered as their
own. As the colonists began to form more
extensive plans of induflry, they were unexpect-
cdly furnished with means of executing them
wvith greater facility. A Dutch flip from the Ncrror¶1
coast of Guinea, having failed up James-River, duccd.
fold a part of her cargo of negroes to the
plantersd; and as that hardy race was found
more capable of enduring fatigue under a sultry
climate than Europeans, their number has been

cStitll, p. 166. 197d. Bcvcrley, p. 37.
VOL. v. p iincreafcd

n o o ic increased by continual importation; their aid

ix. seems now to be essential to the existence of the

. colony, and the greater part of field-labour in

Virginia is performed by servile hands.

BUT as the condition of the colony improved,

the spirit of its members became more independ.
ent. To Englishmen the summary and severe
decisions of martial law, however tempered by
the mildness of their governors, appeared into-
lerably oppressive; and they longed to recover
the privileges to which they had been accustomcd
under the libcral form of government in th!ir

J6,9. native country. In compliance with this fpiri,
June.

firiisgen- Sir George Yeardley, in the year I619, called
ral aift mbly
,,freprT- the first general assembly that was ever held in
c""tvCs' Virginia; and the numbers of the people were

now so increased, and their settlements fbo (il-
perfel, that eleven corporations appeared b';
their representatives in this convention, where
they were permitted to afume legislative power,
and to exercifc the noblefl funstion of free men.
The laws enacted in it leem neither to have been
many, nor of great importance; but the nmet-
ing wva highly acceptable to the people, as tllIc
now beheld among thenifclves an image of tlie
Englifl contfitutioni, which they reverenced :in
the nilof perlfc model of siee government. Ih1
oc eir to render this reciollblanc e
mor comnlete,

;!lli

and the rights of the planters more certain, the n o o K
company issued a charter or ordinance, which Ix.
gave a legal and permanent form to the govern- uIy 24..
ment of the colony. The supreme legislative Nitution
authority in Virginia, in imitation of that in sgientothe
Great Britain, was divided and lodged partly in
the governor, who held the place of the fove-
reign; partly in a council of state named by
the company, which possessed some of the diftinc-
tions, and exercised some of the funcions
belonging to the peerage; partly in a general
council or assembly composed of the represent-
atives of the people, in which were vested powers
and privileges similar to those of the House of
Commons. In both these councils all questions
were to be determined by the majority of voices,
and a negative was reserved to the governor;
but no law or ordinance, though approved of
by all the three members of the legislature, was
to be of force, until it was ratified in England by
a general court of the company, and returned
under its feal . Thus the constitution of the
colony was fixed, and the members of it are
henceforth to be confidered, not merely as ser-
vants of a commercial company, dependant on
the will and orders of their superior, but as free
men and citizens.

¢ Stith, Appendix, p. 32, &c.

P 2 T'1ir

B o 0 K TrHE natural effeA of that happy change in

IX. their condition was an increase of their industry,

Induiry The product of tobacco in Virginia was nov;
ipclreafcd. equal, not only to the consumption of it in Great

Britain f, but could furnish some quantity for a

Direa trade foreign market. The company opened a trade
of the co-
lonyw"it) for it with Holland, and established warehoufcs
Holland.

in Middleburgh and Flufilng. James, and his
privy council, alarmed at feeing the commerce

cives of a commodity, for which the demand was
offcncc to
Jamn's. daily increasing, turned into a channel that

tended to the diminution of the revenue, by
depriving it of a considerable duty imposed on
the importation of tobacco, interposed v\itl
vigour to check this innovation. Some expe.
dient was found, by which the matter wa;
adjufled for the present ; but it is remarkable as

f It is a matter of fume curlofity to trace the progfrcfi

the confiumption of this iinnLcccfary comrmodity. The lllc
of tobacco fccms to have been first introduced into 1.1gl.di,
atboUt the year s186. Poflibly a few fetafarilng pcrlfon. i. ;
have acquired a relifli for it by ticir illtcti rco' f with tl.c
Spa;niai-idl previous to that period ; but the life of it CitCii(,i
be ldenonminatcd a national habi'i ftonicr thlan the time I li,.'
mentioned. Upon an average of tlih seven years iron: !il
atcly preceding the year 1622, the whlole illport of to!):(' .
iito Engl].nd amiiitotcd to a hundred and forty-tv,'n tli,'.
stand an eiglty-five pound.; wevihl. Stithl, p. 2,f. I"
tiis it iappears, tlha the tafle had fpred sea ith a rI,;i!'"

lwhichl is remarkable. But how ilconfidcrable is tli:il "
tity to wvliat is now conlimiced in (jCreat rilain !

the first initance of a difference in sentiment B o 0 K
between the parent state and the colony, con- 1-.
cerning their refpeEtive rights. The former '-
concluded, that the trade of the colony should
be confined to England, and all its productions
be landed there. The latter claimed, not only the
general privilege of Englishmen to carry their
commodities to the belt market, but pleaded the
particular conceflions in their charter, by which
an unlimited freedom of commerce seemed to
be granted to them'. The time for a more
full difcuflion of this important question was not
yet arrived.

BUT while the colony continued to increase so The colony

ncgicb tlie
fall, that fettlemnents were icattered, not only precautions

necefrAry

along the banks of James and York Rivers, fortsi
but began to extend to the Rapahannock, and dlSfence,,
even to the Potowmack, the English, relying on Indlans.
their own numbers, and deceived by this appear.
ance of prosperity, lived in full security. They
neither attended to the movements of the
Indians, nor fufpefted their machinations, and
though surrounded by a people whom they
might have known from experience to be both
artful and vindictive, they negleded every pre.

E Stitl, p. 200, &c.

r1 -R ~caution

B o o i caution for their own safety that was requisite in

Ix. such a situation. Like the peaceful inhabitants

of a society completely established, they were no
longer soldiers but citizens, and were so intent on
what was subservient to the comfort or embel-
lifhment of civil life, that every martial exercise
began to be laid aside as unnecessary. The
Indians, whom they commonly employed as
hunters, were furnished with fire-arms, and
taught to use them with dexterity. They were
permitted to frequent the habitations of the
English at all hours, and received as innocent
visitants whom there was no reason to dread.
T'his inconsiderate security enabled the Indians
to prepare for the execution of that plan of
vengeance, which they meditated with all the
deliberate forethought which is agreeable to
their temper. Nor did they want a leader
capable of conducting their schemes with address.

General On the death of Powhatan, in the year I61 8,
mJafFicre of
the En:tif Opechancanough succeeded him, not only as
planned by
llte India,. wirowanee, or chief of his own tribe, but in

that extensive influence over all the Indian
nations of Virginia, which induced the Englifl
writers to distinguish them by the name of
Emperor. According to the Indian tradition,
he was not a native of Virginia, but came from a
diltant country to the fouth-welf, pofibly from

fob;

some province of the Mexican Empireh. But B o o K
as he was conspicuous for all the qualities of Ix.
hilghefi estimation among savages, ,a fearless '"'
courage, great strength and agility of body,
and crafty policy, he quickly rose to emin:ence
and power. Soon after his elevation to the
supreme command, a general mafracre of the
English seems to have been resolved upon; and
during four years, the means of perpetrating it
with the greatest facility and fuccels were con-
certed with amazing secrecy. All the tribes
contiguous to the English iettlements were fuc-
ceffively gained, except those on the eastern
filore, from whom, on account of their peculiar
attachment to their new neighbours, every
circumstance that might discover what they
intended was carefully concealed. To each
tribe its station was allotted, and the part it was
to at prescribed. On the morning of the day March 22.
consecrated to vengeance, each was at the place
of rendezvous appointed, while the English were
so little aware of the impending deft ruction,
that they received with unfufpicious hospitality
several persons sent by Opcchancarough, under
pretext of delivering presents of venison and
fruits, but in reality to oblfurve their motions.
Finding them perficlly secure, at mid-day, the oFi;,',',

4il l l. Ill.

ne.ii:.
h1 Bcvc'rlcy, p1. 51.

1 4 moment

B o0 O i moment that was previously fixed for this deed

Ix. of horror, the Indians rushed at once upon

w them in all their different fettlcments, and mur-

dered men, women, and children, with undif.
tinguifhing rage, and that rancorous cruelty
with which savages treat their enemies. In one
hour nearly a fourth part of the whole colony
was cut off, almost without knowing by whose
hands they fell. The ilaughter would have
been universal, if compaflion, or a sense of
duty, had not moved a converted Indian, to
whom the secret was communicated the night
before the massacre, to reveal it to his master in
such time as to save James-Town, and some
adjacent settlements; and if the Englifli in other
diftrics had not run to their arms with refo-
lution prompted by despair, and defended them-
selves so bravely as to repulse their assailants,
who, in the execution of their plan, did not
discover courage equal to the sagacity and art
with which they had concerted it.

BUT though the blow was thus prevented

from defccnding with its full effect, it proved
very grievous to an infant colony. In some
fettiemnelts not a single Englilnlman escapcd.
Many perlols of plrinle note in the colony, alid

i Slii'll ,

p r.
2o8, ' ;c. rnrcli'h . iv. ?7 , &c.

amon[r

among these several members of the council, B oo I
were slain. The survivors, overwhelmed with IX.
grief, afloniuiment, and terror, abandoned all
their remote settlements, and, crowding together
for safety to james-Town, did not occupy a
territory of greater extent than had been planted
soon after the arrival of their countrymen in
Virginia. Confined within those narrow bound-
aries, they were iefs intent on schemes of industry
than on thoughts of revenge. Every man took
arms. A bl)oody war against the Indians corn- Bloodywas

witl Lilt

menced; and, bent on exterminating the whole Indias.
race, neither old nor young were spared. The
conduct of the Spaniards in the southern regions
of America was openly proposed as the most
proper model to imitate ; and regardless, like
them, of those principles of faith, honour, and
humanity, which regulate hostility among civi-
liled nations and set bounds to its rage, the
Eniglif 1 decmed every thin' allowable that tended
to accomplilh their design. lThey hunted the
Indians like wild beafls, rather than enemies
and as the p!ir-fit of them to their places of
retreat in the woods, which coveredl their
country, was both ldificult and dangerous, they
endeavoured t, allure them from their inacce-

1t Stitlb, P. 233.

ril,h-

B o o K fible faflneffes by offers of peace and promiics

ix of oblivion, made with such an artful appear-
1623. ance of sincerity as deceived their crafty leader,

and induced them to return to their former
settlements, and resume their usual peaceful
occupations. The behaviour of the two people
seemed now to be perfecLly reversed. The
Indians, like men acquainted witl the principles
of integrity and good faith, on which the inter.
course between nations is founded, confided in
the reconciliation, and lived in absolute security
without suspicion of danger ; while the English,
with perfidious craft, were preparing to imitate
savages in their revenge and cruelt). On the
approach of harvest, when they knew an hoflile
attack would be most formidable and fatal, they
fell suddenly upon all the Indian plantations,
murdered every person. on whom they could lay
hold, and drove the reft to the woods, where
ls many perified with hunger, that some of the
tribes nearest to the Englifl were totally extir-
pated. This atrocious deed, which the perpe-
trators laboured to represent as a necessary ad
of retaliation, was followed by some happy
cflecEs. It delivered the colony so entirely
fronm any dread of the Indians, that its fettlc-
ments began again to extend, and its induflry to
revive.

Blrti'

BuT unfortunately at this junEure the ftatcs s o K
of the company in England, in which the pro- Ix.
perty of Virginia and the government of the copany
colony fettled there were vested, prevented it at o'c'lb
from seconding the efforts of the planters, by fa'io':.
fich a reinforcement of men, and iuch a supply
of necessaries, as were requisite to replace what
they had loft. The company was originally
compeoed of many adventurers, and increased so
fast by the junEion of new members, allured
by the profpeca of gain, or the desire of pro-
moting a cfheme of public utility, that its
general courts formed a numerous assembly'.
The operation of every political principle and
paflion, that spread through the kingdom, was
felt in thoie popular meetings, and influenced
their decisions. As towards the close of James's
reign more just and enlarged sentiments with
refpeet to constitutional liberty were diffused
among the people, they came to understand
their rights better, and to assert them with
greater boldness; a distinction formerly little
known, but now familiar in Englifl policy,
began to be eflablifhed between the court and
country parties, and the leaders of each endea-
voured to derive power and consequence from
every quarter. Both exerted themselves with

Stith, p. 272. 276.

emulation,

B o o K emulation, in order to obtain the direEtion of a

" body so numerous and refpedtable as the corn.

pany of Virginian adventurers. In consequence
of this, business had been conduEted in every
general court for some years, not with the tem.
perate spirit of merchants deliberating concern.
ing their mutual interelt, but with the animonity
and violence natural to numlerous assemblies,
by which rival factions contend for fuperi.
ority .

Janes in- As the king did not often aflemble the great
ititutes an
inquiry into council of the nation in parliament, the general
their con-
dur. courts of the company became a theatre, on

which popular orators displayed their talents;
the proclamations of the crown, and ats of the
privy council, with refpec to the commerce and
police of the colony, were canvassed there with
freedom, and censured with severity, ill-fuitcd
to the lofty ideas which James entertained of his
own wifldom, and the cxtent of hi.; prerogativc.
In order to check this growing fiirit of difcullion,
the minifiers employed all their address and
influence to gain as many nmen!,crs of the coin-
pany as nmight give theml the diredtion of their
deliberations. But so unfucccefsful were they in
this attemlpt, that every meafilre proposed by

n ;titb 22, &c. C2jlanc,
p. . l59

theCn

them was reprobated by a vas: majority, and B Oo oc
foinetimes without any reason, but becauie chey Ix.
were the proposers of it. James, little favour-
able to the power of any popular aflimbly, and
weary of contending with one over which he
had laboured in vain to obtain an ascendant,
began to entertain thoughts of liffolving the
company, and of new-modelling its con aitution.
Pretexts, neither unplaufiblc, nor destitute of
onme foundation, feemeed to juflify this meafureo
The flow progrels of the colony, the large fums
of money expended, and great number of men
who had perified in attempting to plant it, the
late massacre by the Indians, and every disaster
that had befallen the Engilifh from their firfl
migration to America, were imputed sold-i to
the inability of a numlerlus com1pany to conduL&
ian enterprite so complex anml arduous. The
nation felt sensibly its difippci;rintlc't in a scheme
in which it had engad

eg vith fla;uiln expec-

ations of advantage, and wilhcd impatiently for
Inch an impartial Icruliily iwto lolincr lpoceed-
inlgs as might fugg{e' more fIautarry mnca!ircs in
the future adminiitra-tion of the colony. 'I'he
prefcnt state of its aillirs, a; well as 'lle \wifle
of the people, feciled to call ;i-r hile ilnerlpo-
fnion of the crown ; and t

J:l;:: , e:llcr to dilpliay

the luperiority of his r',, \i.:;i ,

v , in corr:cti11

tlio1: errors ilto which t!::
o c,:p'.y hlit l)ecl

l"l !'il\icd

B o o K betrayed by inexperience in the arts of governr

Ix. ment, boldly undertook the work of reform.
,ó3., ation. Without regarding the rights conveyed to
IMy s. the company by their charter, and without th:

formality of any judicial proceeding for annulling
it, he, by virtue of his prerogative, issued a
conmiflion, empowering some of the judges,
and other persons of note, to examine into all
the transactions of the company from its firit
efablifhment, and to lay the result of their
inquiries, together with their opinion concerning
the most effetual means of rendering the colony
more prosperous ", before the privy council. At
the fame time, by a firain of authority fill
higher, he ordered all the records and papers of
the company to be seized, and two of its pri.-
cipal officers to be arrested. Violent and arbi-
trary as these ads of authority may now appear,
the commissioners carried on their inquiry with-
out any obfirutdion, but what arose from fon:c
feeble and ineffectual remonflrances of tlhe
company. The coiniilioincrs, though they
conducted their scrutiny with much activity arid
vigour°, did not conimunicate any of their
proceedings to the company ; but their report,
with reli)pec to its operations, fiemris to have been
very unLrivourablc, as the king, in confcquencce

" Stith, p. 2;. 0 Snith';, Trlavels, p. 165, &c.

of

of it, signified to the company his intention of B o o K
vesting the supreme government of the company ix.
in a governor and twelve affiflants, to be refi- o .
dent in England, and the executive power in a COrpany
council of twelve, which should reside in Vir- rurrender

its charter.

ginia. The governor and afiitants were to be
originally appointed by the king. Future
vacancies were to be supplied by the governor
and his assistants, but their nomination was not
to take effeit until it should be ratified by the
privy council. The twelve counsellors in Vir-
ginia were to be chosen by the governor and
afliftants; and this choice was likewise subjected
to the review of the privy council. With an
intention to quiet the minds of the colonifs, it
was declared that private property should be
deemed sacred; and for the more efletual
t;curity of it, all grants of lands from the
former company were to be confirmed by the
Iew one. In order to facilitate the execution
of this plan, the king required the company
inflantly to surrender its charter into Iis
hands ".

BUr here James and his miniflers encoun- Co"riy

tcred a spirit, of which they flciu not to have
been aware. They found tlhe incoib:rS of the

' Stlih, p. (n, 'i-pa
'

company

B o O K company unwilling tamely to relinquish rights o,

Ix. franchises, conveyed to them with such legal

formality, that upon faith in their validity they
had expended considerable fumsq ; and still
more averse to the abolition of a popular form
of government, in which every proprietor had
a voice, in order to subjeóc a colony, in iwhich
they were deeply interested, to the dominion of
a fimall junto absolutely dependent on the crown.
Neither promises nor threats could induce them
oa. 0o. to depart from these sentiments; and in a general

court the king's proposal was alrnoft unaniinouflv
rejected, and a resolution taken to defend to the
utmost their chartered rights, if these should be
called in question in any court of jufiice. James,
highly offended at their presumption in dnrin;
Nov. 1o. to oppose his will, direc(ed a writ of quo warrrnt,;

to be iiTlcd against the company, that the vali-
dity of its charter might be tried in the Coiurt (i
King's Bench; and in order to aggravate tlih
charge, by collecting additional proofs of mi!.
administration, he appointed iumnc t)cfoiis, ii
whoom he could conlide, to repair to V irginio!
to infpee thie slate of the colony, and inqlll;'-
into the conduct of the company, and of it'
officers there.

1 ChahiuIrcrs, p. C,'.

'T ,f

THE law-suit in the King's Bench did not B o O K

hang long in suspense. It terminated, as was Ix-
usual in that reign, in a decision perfectly con- Tri:l in t.e
sonant to the wishes of the monarch. The Ki,"'s

Bench, and
charter was forfeited, the company was diflblved, dissolution

-of the Con--

and all the rights and privileges conferred pany-
upon it returned to the king, from whom they J624.
flowed r

SOME writers, particularly Stith, the mofl: Dlefatt;in
intelligent and beft-informed historian of Vir- coniitution

of the colo-

ginia, mention the dissolution of the company as nics.
amoft disastrous event to the colony. Animated
with liberal sentiments, imbibed in an age when
the principles of liberty were more fully un-
folded than under the reign of James, they
viewed his violent and arbitrary proceedings on
this occasion with such indignation, that their
abhorrence of the means which he employed to
accomplish his design seems to have rendered
them incapable of contemplating its effects with
discernment and candour. There is not perhaps
any mode of governing an infant colony less
friendly to its liberty, than the dominion of an
exclusive corporation, poficffed of all the powers
which James had conferred upon the company
of adventurers in Virginia. During several

' Rymcr, vol. xvii. p. 61 8, &c. Chlilincis, p. 6z.
VOL. 1V. Q years

B O O K years the colonists can hardly be confidered in

lx' any other light than as servants to the company,

nourished out of its flores, bound implicitly to
obey its orders, and fubjetced to the most rigor.
ous of all forms of government, that of martial
law. Even after the native spirit of Engliflmen
began to route under opprefion, and had ex-
torted from their superiors the right of enacling
laws for the government of that community of
wvhich they were members, as no ac, though
approved of by all the branches of the provincial
legislature, was held to be of legal force, until
it was ratified by a general court in England,
the company still retained the paramount autho-
rity in its own hands. Nor was the power of
the company more favourable to the prosperity
of the colony than to its freedom. A nunie
rous body of merchants, as long as its opera-
tions are purely commercial, may carry them on
with difccrnmcnt and success. But the mier-
cantile spirit tLemsn ill adapted to coiiduct an
enlarged and liberal plan of civil policy, a;dl
colonies have feldon grown up to maturity and
vigour under its narrow and interested regu-li-
tipns. To the unavoidable defects in adlinii-
firation lwh!ich tlls occasioned, were ;lddc
errors arising froml inexperienlce. 'The i lilli
mtrchllants of that age lad not tholi cx

ex fii
views which a general commerce opens to liiit

as have the direction of it. When they first B o o K
began to venture out of the beaten track, they lx.
groped their way with timidity and hesitation.
Unacquainted with the climate and Ibil of
America, and ignorant of the produCtions best
suited to them, they seem to have had no fettled
plan of improvement, and their schemes were
continually varying. Their system of govern-
ment was equally fluctuating. In the course of
eighteen years ten different persons presided
over the province as chief governors. No
wonder that, under such adminiflration, all the
efforts to give vigour and flability to the colony
Should prove abortive, or produce only slender
effeEts. These efforts, however, when eili-
mated according to the ideas of that age, either
with refpet to commerce or to policy, were very
considerable, and conduted with aflonifhing
perseverance.

ABOVE an hundred and fifty thousand pounds w.:,C

were expended in this first attempt to plant an o01.,
Englifl colony in America'; and more than
nine thousand perlbns were lent out from the
mother country to people this new fettlemeift.
At the dissolution of the company, the nation,
in return for this wane of trcalure and of people.

Sinitlh'i Travcls, p. 42. 167.

Q ? ,lid

B o
o did not receive foom Virginia an annual import.

Ix. ation of commodities exceeding twenty thousand

pounds in value; and the colony was so far
from having added strength to the state by an
increase of population, that, in the year one
thousand fix hundred and twenty-four, scarcely
two thousand persons survived": a wretched
remnant of the numerous emigrants who had
flocked thither with sanguine expectations of a
very different fate.

Temporary T-IHE company, like all unprofperous societies,
appointd fell unpitied. The violent hand with which
for thie go. prerogative had invaded its rights was forgotten,
vernment
of vilsinia. and new profpeas of success opened, under a

form of government exempt from all the defects
to which past disasters were imputed. The king
and the nation concurred with equal ardour in
resolving to encourage the colony. Soon after
the final judgment in the Court of King's Bench
against the company, James appointed a council
of twelve persons to take the temporary direction
of affairs in Virginia, that he might have leisure
Aug. 26. to frame with deliberate consideration proper

regulations for the permanent government of
the colony ". Pleased with such an opportunity
of exercising his talents as a legillator, he began
" Chalmers' Annals, p. 69. ' Rymer, xvii. 618, &c.

to

to turn his attention towards the subje&t; but n o o K
death prevented him from completing his plan. ix.

CHARLES I. on his accession to the throne, 1625.

March 27.

adopted all his father's maxims with refped to AcceMflon
the colony in Virginia. lie declared it to be a Hi, arbi-
part of the empire annexed to the crown, and t.'nYm,
immediately subordinate to its jurifdicion: he °01ft'
conferred the title of Governor on Sir George
Yardely, and appointed him, in conjunction
with a council of twelve, and a secretary, to
exercise supreme authority there, and enjoined
them to conform, in every point, to such
inftruEtions as from time to time they might
receive from him". From the tenor of the
king's commifioon, as well as from the known
spirit of his policy, it is apparent, that he
intended to vest every power of government,
both legislative and executive, in the governor
and council, without recourse to the represent-
atives of the people, as pofilefing a right to
enact laws for the community, or to impose
taxes upon it. Yardely and his council, who
seem to have been fit infiruments for carrying
this fyfteni of arbitrary rule into execution, did
not fail to put such a conftrudion on the words
of their commiflion as was mofi favourable to

w Ryllcr, xviii. 72. 311.

Qo3 their

s o o K their own jurifdicion. During a great part of

lx. Charles's reign, Virginia knew no other law
°'" than the will of the sovereign. Statutes were

publifled, and taxes imposed, without once
calling the representatives of the people to
authorise them by their fancion. At the fame
time that the colonitls were bereaved of political
rights, which they deemed efflntial to freemen
and citizens, their private property was violently

,I'.ont and invaded. A proclamation was issued, by whicl,
,i to'acco. under pretexts equally absurd and frivolous,

they were prohibited from felling tobacco to any
person but certain conmmiioners appointed by
the king to purchase it on his account"; and
they had the cruel mortification to behold the
sovereign, who fiould have afforded them pro-
teAtion, engross all the profits of their induflry,
by seizing the only valuable commodity which
they had to vend, and retaining the monopoly of
it in his own hands. While the flaple of the
colony in Virginia funk in value under the
oppreflion and restraints of a monopoly, pro-
perty in land was rendered insecure by various
grants of it, which Charles ilconfideratld
beflowed upon his favourites. Thefl wuere not
only of such exorbitant extent as to be unfavmor-
able to the progrcfs of cultivation; but fron

X lRymin, xviii. 19.

iiiattcniion

inattention, or imperfec acquaintance with the Bo o K
geography of the country, their boundaries lx'
were so inaccurately defined, that large trats
already occupied and planted were often included
ill them.

Ti-iE murmurs and complaints which such

a s)ystem of administration excited, were aug-
mented by the rigour with which Sir John
Harvey, who succeeded Yardely in the govern-
ment of the colony Y, enforced every aa of
power. Rapacious, unfceling, and haughty, 16:g7
he added insolence to opprefion, and neither
regarded the sentiments, nor liflened to the
reinonflrances of the people under his command.
The colonifls, far from the feat of govclrnment,
and overawed by authority derived from a royal
commiliion, submitted long to his tyranny and
exadtions. Their patience was a;t last elxaufled; I ii
and in a tranflort of pl,)ular r;age and indigna- 1t1..t7
tion, they seized their governor, and sent hlimn ,or, ,.il

f xid1 h i

a prisoner to England, accompanied by two of pii'oirro
their number, whoin they deputed to prefer el.";'
their accusations againfi him to the king. But
this attempt to redress tlieir own wrongs, by a
proceeding so fuin ulry and violent as is hardly
confiflcnt witli any idea of regular governlment,

Y Ryi) cr, xviii. 980.

Q14 A and

B o o K and can be justified only in cafes of such urgent

Ix. necessity as rarely occur in civil society, was
''~J altogether repugnant to every notion which

Charles entertained with refped to the obedience
due by fubjeas to their sovereign. To him the
conduEt of the colonists appeared to be not
only an usurpation of his right to judge and to
punish one of his own officers, but an open and
audacious aft of rebellion against his authority.
Without deigning to admit their deputies into
his presence, or to hear one article of their

l is re- charge against H-arvey, the king instantly sent
Icafcd by
tie king, him back to his former station, with an ample
intlecl;,his renewal of all the powers belonging to it. But
so,'~t.~ though Charles deemed this vigorous ftep necef-

fary in order to assert his own authority, and to
tectify his displeasure with those who had prc-
fumed to offer such an insult to it, he seems to
have been tb sensible of the grievances under
which the colonists groaned, and of the chief
1639. source from which they flowed, that soon after

he not only removed a governor so justly odious
to them, but named as a successor Sir VWilliam
Berkcley, a person far superior to Itarvey in
rank and abilities, and still more distinguished
by poffefling all the popular virtues to which the
other was a ltlangcr'.

z Bt'vc'l)y''b Ilii. of Virg. p. 50. Clidalmcr,' Afl ;a,
i. 118, &c.

UNDER

UNDER his government the colony in Virginia B o o K

remained, with some short intervals of interrup- Ix.
tion, almost forty years; and to his mild and sirw.
prudent administration its increase and prosperity ppolkted
is in a great measure to be ascribed. It was ,.vetnnor.

His mild
indebted, however, to the king himself for such andmwife

: .dminiflra-

a reform of its constitution and policy, as gave tion.
a different aspect to the colony, and animated
all its operations with new spirit. Though the
tenor of Sir William Berkeley's commiflion was
the fame with that of his predecessor, he received
inftruEions under the great feal, by which he
was empowered to declare, that in all its con-
cerns, civil as well as ecclesiastical, the colony
was to be governed according to the laws of
England: he was directed to issue writs for New pri-
elecding representatives of the people, who, in granti(l hy
conjunction with the governor and council, were C'r'"'".
to form a general assembly, and to poflcfs
supreme legislative authority in the community:
he was ordered to eftablifi courts of justice, in
-which all queflions, whether civil or criminal,
were to be decided agreeably to the forms of
judicial procedure in the mother country. It is
not cafy to discover what were the motives which
induced a monarch tenacious in adhering to any
opinion or fyftcm which he had once adopted,
jealous to excess of his own rights, and adverse

on

B o o x on every occasion to any extension of the plni.

ix. leges claimed by his people, to relinquish his

original plan of adminifiration in the colony,
and to grant such immunities to his uibjeeL
fettled there. From the historians of Virginia,
no less superficial than ill-informed, no liiht

Motiores can be derived'with refpet to this point. It is
that appear
to have most probable, the dread of the spirit then
influenced
the king. rising in Great Britain extorted from Chiarle

conceflions so favourable to Virginia. After an
intermission of almost twelve years, the slate of
his affairs compelled him to have recourse to the
great council of the nation. There his tiubji<
would find a jurifdidtion independent of the
crown, and able to control its authority. Thcre
they hoped for legal redress of all their griev-
ances. As the colonists in Virginia had applied
for relief to a former parliament, it might be
expected with certainty, that they would l;iv
their cafe before the firil meeting of an aflembly,
in which they were secure of a favourable audi-
ence. Charles knew, that if the spirit of hi,
adminiflration in Virginia were to be tried by
the maxims of the Englifl confitution, it mufi
be severely reprehended. IIe was aware that
many measures of greater moment in his govcrn-
rnent wouldl be rought under a flrie review il
larliamcnt; and unwilling to give mnll-contillnt

(h,,

the advantage of adding a charge of oppression B o o K
in the remote part of his dominions to a catalogue ix.
of domeflic grievances, he artfully endeavoured
to take the merit of having granted voluntarily
to his people in Virginia such privileges as he
foresaw would be extorted from him.

BUT though Charles erfablifhed the internal v;rgint

government of Virginia on a model similar to u C, .
that of the Engliflh constitution, and conferred Vw ii..
on his fubjets there all the rights of freemen
and citizens, he was extremely solicitous to
maintain its conneEtion with the parent itate.
With this view he inftruced Sir William Bcrke-
ley ftridly to prohibit any commerce of the
colony with foreign nations; and in order more
certainly to secure exclusive pofliefion of all the
advantages arising from the sale of its produc-
tions, he was required to take a bond from the
master of each vcfi'l that failed from Virginia,
to land his cargo in fume part of the king's
dominions in Europe a. Even under this
restraint, fucll is the kindly inlluence of free
government on focicty, the colony advanced io
rapidly in indufiry and populiition, that at the
beginning of the civil war the l English fettlcd in
it exceeded twenty thoullnd ".

' Clilalmlei-' Annals, p. 219. 232. 1 IM. p. 12

G(R .VI'ITU 1'£J

B o o K GRATITUDE towards a monarch, from whos:

Ix. hands they had received immunities which

Remains they had long wished, but hardly expected to
tieryaldt enjoy, the influence and example of a popular
cause. governor, passionately devoted to the interests

of his master, concurred in preserving inviolated
loyalty among the colonifrs. Even after mo-
narchy was abolished, after one king had been
beheaded, and another driven into exile, the
authority of the crown continued to be acknow.
J650. ledged and revered in Virginia. Irritated at this

open defiance of its power, the parliament issued
an ordinance, declaring, that as the settlement
in Virginia had been made at the cost and by the
people of England, it ought to be subordinate
to and dependant upon the Engliff common.
wealth, and subjeQ to such laws and regulations
as are or shall be made in parliament: that,
instead of this dutiful fubmifilon, the colonisf
had disclaimed the authority of the fiate, and
audaciously rebelled againfl it; that on this
account they were denounced notorious traitors,
and not only all vessels belonging to natives of
England, but those of foreign nations, were
prohibited to enter their ports, or to carry on
any commerce with them.

p:rlanmnt I ' was not the mode of that age to wage a

nimaks
n ar war of words alone. The efforts of an high-
onVirglnina. spiritcd

spirited government in asserting its own dignity B o o K
were prompt and vigorous. A powerful fqua- ix.
dron, with a considerable body of land-forces, '~'"
was dispatched to reduce the Virginians to obe-
dience. After compelling the colonies in Bar-
badoes and the other islands to submit to the
commonwealth, the squadron entered the Bay Gs11.
of Chefapeak. Berkeley, with more courage
than prudence, took arms to oppose this formi-
dable armament; but he could not long main-
tain such an unequal contest. His gallant resist-
ance, however, procured favourable terms to
the people under his government. A general Virginia i

orced to ac-
indemnity for all past offences was granted; knowledgc

the corn-

they acknowledged the authority of the corn- monwaltli.
monwealth, and were admitted to a participa-
tion of all the rights enjoyed by citizens .
Berkeley, firm to his principles of loyalty, dif-
dained to make any stipulation for himself; and
choofing to pass his days far removed from the
feat of a government which he detested, conti-
nued to reside in Virginia as a private man,
beloved and refpe&ed by all over whom he had
formerly presided.

NoT satisfied with taking measures to fubje& Renfraints

on the trade
the colonies, the commonwealth turned its or tie co-

lony.

Thurlow's State Papers, i. 197. Chalmers' Aiinals,
p. 122. Bcvcrlcy's Hilt. p. 53.

attention

B o o
I attention towards the most effecual mode of

Ix. retaining them in dependance on the parent

state, and of securing to it the benefit of their
increasing commerce. With this view the
parliament framed two laws, one of which
expressly prohibited all mercantile intercourse
between the colonies and foreign states, and the
other ordained, that no production of Asia,
Africa, or America, should be imported into the
dominions of the commonwealth, but in veflel
belonging to Englifl owners, or to the people
of the colonies fettled there, and navigated by
an Englifl commander d, and by crews of which
the greater part must be Engliflimen. But
while the wifdoml of the commonwealth pre.
icribed the channel in which the trade of the
colonies was to be carried on, it was foicitous
to encourage the cultivation of the staple com-
modity of Virginia by an aft of parliament,
1651. which gave legal force to all the injunccions ot

James and Charles againf: planting tobacco in
England c.

UNDER governors appointed by the comnilon.

wealth, or by Cromwell, when he uftirpll tili
ilp'reml power, Virginlia remained alinot l iniI
years in pcrfct iraiiqulill y. Durinig that pcioJ1

*
, 1',cl .i': X ,6t ., p). 132. 176. 1 i'. p1. 11 7

1: L[ '.V

many adherents to the royal party, and among B o o K
these some gentlemen of good families, in order Ix.
to avoid danger and oppreflion, to which they
were exposed in England, or in hopes of repair-
ing their ruined fortunes, resorted thither.
Warmly attached to the cause for which they Thiccolo-

hilts difta-

had fought and suffered, and animated with all tificd ,with
the paflions natural to men recently engaged in lr..int=.
a fierce and long-protracted civil war, they, by
their intercourse with the colonists, confirmed
them in principles of loyalty, and added to their
impatience and indignation under the rellraints
imposed on their commerce by their new imaRers.
On the death of Mathews, the last governor
named by Cromwell, the sentiments and inclin-
ation of the people, no longer under the control
of authority, burlt out with violence. They
forced Sir tWilliam Berkeley to quit his rciire-
ment; they unanimously elcudd hilm r overnor
of the colony: and as he rciufccd to act under
ain uflirpled authority, they boldly erected the
royal (tandard, and acknowledging C'harles II.

Arc tic

to be their lawful fovereig-, proclaimind himi with ll

.. -

;ill his titles; and the Virginians lonp; boufl:d, ei.'J,, .i.
tlint 'ts they were tie lalt oi the king''s fubjecds
v\11 ren.ounced lliir alllegia;nc, they were tlih
silt \[iwho i-turnli ed to tlh ir duty '.

t lB vcvlt ., p. ;;. C!'. ::, .., p. 12.-..

II ) i)'l L

B o O 1 HAPPILY for the people of Virginia, a revolu.

Ix. tion in England, no less sudden and unexpected,

Thir oy- feated Charles on the throne of his ancestor,
alty ill and saved them from the severe chastisement to
rewarded.

which their premature declaration in his favour
must have exposed them. On receiving the first
account of this event, the joy and exultation of
the colony were universal and unbounded. These,
however, were not of long continuance. Gra.
cious but unproductive professions of esteem and
good-will were the only return made by Charles
to loyalty and services, which in their own efti-
mation were so distinguished that no recompence
was beyond what they might claim. If the king's
neglec and ingratitude disappointed all the fan-
guine hopes which their vanity had founded on
the merit of their past conduct, the spirit which
influenced parliament in its commercial delibera-
tions opened a profped that alarmed them with
refpet to their future situation. In framing
regulations for the encouragement of trade,
which, during the convulsions of civil war, and
amidst continual flutuations in government,
had met with such obftrution that it declined in
every quarter; the House of Commons, instead
of granting the colonies that relief which they
expeced from the reitraints in their commerce
inlpold by the commonwealth and Cromwell,
not only adopted all their ideas concerning this

branch

branch of legislation, but extended them farther. B o IK
This produced the acn of navigation, the most Ix.
important and memorable of any in the statute- Navig'tio
book with refpea to the history of English al.
commerce. By it, besides several momentous
articles foreign to the fubjeEt of this work, it
was enaced, that no commodities should be
imported into any settlement in Asia, Africa,
or America, or exported from them, but il
vessels of English or plantation built, whereof
the matter and three-fourths of the mariners
shall be English fubjeds, under pain of forfeiting
{hip and goods; that none but natural-born
subjects, or such as have been naturalized, shall
exercise the occupation of merchant or factor in
any Englifli settlement, under pain of forfeiting
their goods and chattels; that no sugar, tobacco,
cotton, wool, indigo, ginger, or woods used in
liying, of the growth or manLufaltulre of the
colonies, shall be shipped from them to any
other country but England; and in order to
lecure the performance of this, a l'tfiiicnit bond,
with one surety, flall be given bclurc Liiling by
the owners, for a specific iful proportional to
the rate of the veflel employed by theii t'. The
productions fubjeEted to this rcftritkiun are

g 12 Ciar. f. c. I
VOL, IV. n dili.n-

B o o x distinguished, in the language of commerce

IX. and finance, by the name of cnuinzrated comws-,,

dities; and as industry in its progress furniflied
new articles of value, these have been fuccefiivcv;
added to the roll, and fubjeeted to the fanme
1663. restraint. Soon after, the ad of navigation Wv,:

extended, and additional refiraints were impofi,
by a new law, which prohibited the importatinnn
of any European commodity into the colonils,
bat what was laden in England in vefcls navi-
gated and manned as the ac of navingai,!n
required. More offectual provision was ma(de
by this law for exacting the penalties to which
the tranfgrencors of the adt of navigation were
fubje&ed ; and the principles of policy, on which
the various regulations contained in both fratutes
are founded, were openly avowed in a declara-
tion, that as the plantations beyond seas are inha-
bited and peopled by subjects of England, thec
may be kept in a firmer dependance upon it.
and rendered yet more beneficial and advantage-
ous unto it, in the further employment and
increase of English fiipping and seamen, as well
as in the vent of Englilh woollen and ether
manufacturcs and commodities; and in making
England a (taple, not only of the commodities
of thole plantations, but also of the commodlities
of olher countries and places, for the fulpl)yin'

Vi

of them ; and it being the usage of other nations n o o l
to keep the trade of their plantations to them- Ix.
felvesh. In prosecution of those favourite
maxims, the Englinh legislature proceeded a
ftep farther. As the act of navigation had left
the people of the colonies at liberty to export
the enumerated commodities from one plantation
to another without paying any duty, it fubjeded i67z.
them to a tax equivalent to what was paid by
the consumers of these commodities in Eng-
land '.

BY these fuccefiive regulations, the plan of EFrcels ,i
Lecuring to England a monopoly of the com-
merce with its colonies, and of shutting un
every other channel into which it might be
diverted, was perfeced and reduced into com-
plete fyfenm. On one fide of the Atlantic these
rcgulations have been extolled as an extraordi-
rary efiort of political lhgacity, and have been
confidered as the great charter of national com-
merce, to which the preclnt llatc i i indebted for
11 its opulence and power. On the other, they
hlave been execrated as a code of opprcfiion,
ilore suited to the illiberality of mercantile
i.leas, than to extenrfive views of legiilative wis-
do(, Which of thelf opinions is bcfl founded,

15 Car. 1I. c. . 7. '5 C;:. 1I. c. 7.

Rn I lii:l l

. o o iC I shall examine at large in another part of this

Ix. work. But in writing the history of the English

settlements in America, it was necessary to trace
the progress of those reitraining laws with accu.
racy, as in every subsequent tranfa&ion we may
observe a perpetual exertion, on the part of the
mother country, to enforce and extend them;
and on the part of the colonies, endeavours no
less unremitting, to elude or to obftrucl their
operation.

Colonills HARDLY was the aft of navigation known ii
renoltr.te . .
;aainlt tie Virginia, and its efftcs begun to be felt, uvhL:

the colony remonstrated against it as a grievance,
and petitioned earnestly for relief. But the
commercial ideas of Charles and his minister,
coincided so perfecAly with those of parliament,
that, instead of listening with a favourable ear
to their applications, they laboured assiduously
to carry the aCt into firict execution. For this
purpose, inftruCions were issucd to the governor,
forts were built on the banks of the principal
rivers, and small veflels appointed to cruise on
the coast. The Virginians, feeing no profpec&
of obtaining exemption from the act, let thici-
selves to evade it, and found means, notvwili-
Itanding the vigilance with which they 'wcri
watched, of carrying on a confidrlclile clain-
deltine trade with torcigncrs, particularly \itll

lthe

Ihe Dutch fettled on Hudson's River. Embold- B o o K
ened by observing difafiection spread through Ix.
ihe colony, some veteran soldiers who had ~~
served under Cromwell, and had been banished
to Virginia, formed a design of rendering them- G66.
selves maiters of the country, and of asserting
its independence on England. This rash project
was discovered by one of their associates, and
cifconcerted by the vigorous exertions of Sir
William Berkeley. But the spirit of difeontent,
Though repressed, was not extinguished. Every
d3'a lmniething occurred to revive and to nourifl

i As it is with extreme difficulty that corn-
nerce can be turned into a new channel,
tobacco, the staple of the colony, funk prodi-
iouifly in value, when they were compelled to
end it all to one market. It was some time
efore lngland could furnish them regularly
full afibrtmcnts of those necessary articles, with-
cut which the induflry of the colony could not
be carried on, or its prosperity secured. Encou- Colony
raged by the symptoms of general languor and ithcl:i.,L.
delpondency which this declining state of the
colony occasioned, the Indians ieated towards
;he heads of the rivers ventured first to attack the
temote settlements, and then to make incursions
inlo the interior parts of the country. Unex.
pited as thele hostilities were, fiom a people
'ho during a long period had lived in friendship

I 3 witll

B O O K with the English, a measure taken by the kil:

Ix. seems to have excited tfill greater terror anioim

rir.fcot-nts the monl opulent people of the colony. Charl-
ivy,',! had imprudently imitated the example of hi
.'a7l'iyc father, by granting such large tracts of land in

Xi iVirgilia to lveral of his courtiers, as tcndled to
unsettle the distribution of property in the
country, and to render the title of the mo!t
o%-5- ancient planters to their eflates precarious an(!

quefionable. From those various causes, which
in a greater or lefFcr degree affeCted every indivi-
dual in the colony, the indignation of the pcopl)
became general, and was worked up to filch.
pitch, that nothing was wanting to precipitate
them into the inofl desperate acts but some leader
qualified to unite and to direC their operations'.

A.n inil - Sucii a leader they found in Nathaniel Bacrn,
vl,'...j.' a colonel of militia, who, though he had been
,r'i chy fettled in Virginia only three years, had acquired,

by popular manners, an insinuating addilei,
and the consideration derived from having been
regularly trained in England to the profcflon ol
law, such general elteem, that lie had been
admitted into the council, and was regarded a.
one of the Inol reIp)citable persons in the

k (')IHlilncl''j ,t' lliiE)l, c11. . 13, 14, ])a;fi i, B]cvc i.'),
p. 5S, &c,.

colon'v.

colony. Bacon was ambitious, eloquent, daring, B o0 K
and, prompted either by honest zeal to redress IX.
the public wrongs, or allured by hopes of
raising himself to diStinCtion and power, he
mingled with the mal-contents, and by his
bold harangues and confident promises of re-
moving all their grievances, he inflamed them
almost to madness. As the devastations com-
mitted by the Indians was the calamity most
sensibly felt by the people, he accused the
governor of having neglected the proper mea-
fures for repelling the invasions of the savages,
and exhorted them to take arms in their own
defence, and to exterminate that odious race.
Great numbers assembled, and chose Bacon to
be their general. He applied to the governor
for a commiflion, confirming this election of the
people, and offered to march instantly against
the common enemy. Berkeley, accustomed
by long pofleflion of fuprcme command to
high ideas of the refpec due to his fiation,
confidercd this tumultuary armament as an open
iiiFlt to his authority, and fufpe&ed that, under
specious appearances, Bacon concealed most
ldangerous dtlfigns. Unwilling, however, to
give farther provocation to an incensed multi-
ttlde, by a dirc~t retlfilal of what they demandcd,
he thought it prudent to le'gociate, in order to

R 4 gain

c o o K gain time; and it was not until he found all

Ix. endeavours to soothe them ineffectual, that he

issued a proclamation, requiring them, in the
king's name, under the pain of being denounced
rebels, to disperse.

Br;T Bacon, sensible that he had now ad.

vanced so far as rendered it impoflible to recede
with honour or safety, inflantly took the
only rcfolution that remained in his fituationo
At the head of a chosen body of his followers,
he marched rapidly to James-Town, and fur-
rounding the house where the governor ani
council were aflembled, demanded the conm-
mifiion for which he had formerly applied.
Berkeley, with the proud indignant spirit of a
cavalier, disdaining the requilitions of a rebel,
peremptorily refuted to comply, and calmly
presented his naked breast to the weaponm
which were pointed against it. The council,
however, foreleeing the fatal consequences of
driving an enraged multitude, in whole power
they were, to the last extremities of violence,
prepared a commiflion, conflituting Bacon
general of all the forces in Virginia, and by
their intreaties prevailed on the governor to sign
it. Bacon with his troops retired in triunpll.
Hardly was the council delivered by his depar-

tUl'r

ture from the dread of present danger, when, B o o K
bl, a transition not unusual in feeble minds, ix.
prefunlptiuous boldlefs succeeded to excessive '
tCar. 'The commillion granted to Bacon was
leclared to be null, having been extorted by
torce; he was proclaimed a rebel, his fol-
iowers were required to abandon his standard,
cnd the militia ordered to arm, and to join the
.'(w-ernor.
E.NRAG.ED at conduet which lie branded with r.,.;ou

s'ot ; Sir

tl'e name of base and treacherous, Bacon, t-.: i.re:,,
instead of continuing his march towards the a,~tz,,
Indian country, instantly wheeled about, and fly
advanced with all his forces to James-Town.
The governor, unable to resist such a numerous
body, made his escape, and fled across the
bay to Acomack on the eastern flore. Some of
the counsellors accompanied him thither, others
retired to their own plantations. Upon tile
tlight of Sir William Berkeley, and dispersion
of the council, the frame of civil governmenr
;a the colony fecrned to be diflilvcd, and
Bacon became polilUlicd of supreme and uncon-
trolled power. But as he was fcnfible that
his countrymen would not long iubinit with
patience to authority acquired and held merely
by force of arms, he endeavoured to found it
on a more conititutional bafi, by obtaining the

B o oK sanction of the people's approbation. With

Ix. this view he called together the most confider"
"-"-" able gentlemen in the colony, and having

prevailed on them to bind themselves by oath
to maintain his authority, and to refiil every
enemy that should oppose it, he from that
time confidered his jurifdicion as legally efla-
blifhed.

Sir w. BLRi,:LL¥, meanwhile, having collected
2pplieb: for lme forces, made inroads into different parts
IUcU,, o of the colony, where Bacon's authority was

recognizc(. Several fliarp conflits happened
with various success. Jamcs-Towxn was reduced
to aflies, and the best cultivated diftriis in the
province wcrc laid wa.te, sometimes by one
party, and sometimes by the other. But it
was not by his own exertions that the governor
hoped to terminate the contest. I-Ie had early
tranfinitted an account of the transactions in
Virgini; to the king, and demanded such a
body of soldiers as would enable him to
quell the in urgents, whom le represented as
so cxaiperated by the rellraints imnpolCd on
their trade, that they were impatient to Ilake
ofl all dcpendancc on the parent state. Charles,
alarmed at a commotion no lels dangerous th;an
uncxpectecl, and solicitous to maintain lii;
aulthorily over a colony, the value of wllic

w\as

w aas daily increasing and more fully underflood, n o o K
speedily dispatched a i'mall squadron, with fLuch Ix
a number of regular troop s Bas erkeley had
required. Bacon and his followers received
i.formation cf this armainent, but wec-e not
intimidated at its approach. Thcy bolly deteir-
mined to oppose it with open force, and
declared it to be conuifienlt with their (indu and
allegiance, to treat all vh11) shoud aid Sir
William Berkeley as enemies, until th)ey fih-ul
have an opportunity of layinl their grievances
before their loverein '.

Bu-r while both parti:s .r,

Ic,nrcl , vi'h ciual , -n-

n.limofity, to involve their country ill the I,,loo :-
horrors of civil war, an event iha;ppened, wviich 'lb'I,,
quieted the commotion al!noft as suddenly as
it had been excited. Bacon, when ready to
take the field, lickencd and died. Ilnmc of his
ftlloecrs poffeCIid flch talents, or welre lo much
objecds of the people's confidence, as cntitled
thlcn to aspire to the supreme command. Defli-
tute of a leadcr to colndluct an a animmate them,
their languine hopes of Iftccclis fublidetld ; mutual.
diltruLft accompanied this univirflid dlcljondency;
all beran to willh lor all accommodation; and
after a short negociation with Sir William Berk,-'

3eveilcy)'s . lld. p. 75, 76.

Icy,

B o o iK ley, they laid down their arms, and submitted

' to his government, on obtaining a promise of

general pardon.

Ti-us terminated an insurrection, which, in

the annals of Virginia, is diltinguifhed by the
name of Bacon's rebellion. During seven months
this daring leader was marter of the colony,
while the royal governor was shut up in a remote
and ill-peopled corner of it. What were the
real motives that prompted him to take arms,
and to what length he intended to carry his
plans of reformation, either in commerce or
government, it is not easy to discover, in the
scanty materials from which we derive our
information with refpe&t to this tranfac&ion.
It is probable, that his conduct, like that of
other adventurers in facion, would have been
regulated chiefly by events; and accordingly as
these proved favourable or adverse, his views
and requisitions would have been extended ot
circumscribed.

An :lTin- SIR WVlLr ,IAL, BERKI.ELY, as soon as he vwa
i, yllu ,; rcinflated in his office, called together the repre-
tJ'"". ( iintativcs of the people, that by their advice an'

authority public tranqullillily andl order might be
perlehlly c(la)bl;lhcd. T'llhough this assembly ImeC
a ser weeks after the death of Bacon, while thte

nicnlo t ',

memory of reciprocal injuries was still recent, B o o IK
and vwhen the pailions excited by such a fierce Ix.
contest had but little time to subside, its proceed-
ings were conduuted with a moderation seldom
exercised by the successful party in a civil war.
No man suffered capitally; a small number
were subjected to fines; others were declared
incapable of holding any office of trust; and
with those exceptions, the promise of general
indemnity was confirmed by law. Soon after,
Berkeley was recalled, and Colonel Jefferys was
appointed his successor.

FROM that period to the Revolution in t688, sitc ot ti,:

there is scarcely any memorable occurrence in tI°c,"llo-
the history of Virginia. A peace was concluded l',on in
with the Indians. Under several lucceffive
governors, administration was carried on in the
colony with the fame arbitrary spirit that diftin-
guifhled the latter years of Charles II. and the
precipitate counsels of James 1. The Virginians,
with a conllitution which, in form, relfmbled
that of Elngland, enjoyed hardly any portion of
the liberty which that admirable fyftcin of policy
is framed to secure. They were deprived even
of the last consolation of the opprcffed, the
power of complaining, by a law which, under
ecvcre penalties, prohibited them from speaking
diifeflicctfully of the governor, or defaming,

cither

B o o K either by words or writing, the adminiftrationof

Ix. the colony '. Still, however, the laws restrain.

~ inng their commerce were felt as an intolerable

grievance, and nourified in secret a spirit of
discontent, which, from the necessity of conceal.
ing it, acquired a greater degree of acrimony.
But notwitliflanding those unfavourable circur-
fiances, the colony continued to increase. The
use of tobacco was now become general in
Europe; and though it had fallen confidcrably
in price, the extent of demand coimpcnfated that
diminution, and by giving conflant employment
to the indullry of the planiers diffused wealth
among them. At the Revolution the number of
inhabitants in the colony exceeded sixty tthou-
sand ", and in the course of twenty-eight vcar-
irs population had been more than doubled .

m Bcvcrlcy , p. fr. Clialmcrs, p. 341.
,1 Cl imtl 'r' Anlnals, p. 56. 6 lid. p. lzj.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK X.

T El E
THE
H I S T 0 RY

OF
A T E R I C A.

BOOK X.
W'jirHE James I., in the year one thousand £fx B3 o o

hundred and fix, made tlat magnificent x.
partition, which has been mentioned, of a vast ' .-ro'

IHiftory of
region in North America, extending from the tii nortlheri

tolony, and
thirty-fourth to the forty-fifth degree of latitude, of til

P'lymnouth

between two trading companies of his fubjeds, company.
he eftablifled the residence of the one in Lon-
don, and of the other in Plymouth. The
former was authorized to fettle in the southern,
and the latter in the northern part of this terni-
tory, then diftinguifhled by the general name of
Virginia. This arrangement Icems to hlave been
fo)rlled upon the idea of obme speculative refiner,
lwlo aimed at ditliifing the lirili of inlnflry,
by fixing the feat of one blranch of tlic Ir.tIleI

B o o ic that was now to be opened, on the east coalt or

x. the illand, and the other on the weft. But
'.-v.. London possesses such advantages of situation,

that the commercial wealth and adtivity of Enrr.
land have always centered in the capital. At thl
beginning of the last century, the superiority of
the metropolis in both there refpets was so great,
that though the powers and privileges conferred
by the king on the two trading companies were
precisely the fame, the adventurers fettled in
Plymouth fell far short of those in London, in
the vigour and success of their eflorts toward,
accomplishing the purpose of their institution.
Though the operations of the Plymouth com-
pany were animated by the public-fpirited zeal
of Sir John Popham, chief juflice of England,
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and tome other gentle-
men of the weft, all its exertions were feebl
and unfortunate.

,,,;. Tll'; lirll veflel fitted out by the coinp;ii))

,'' tO- was t bkl.n by the Spaniards. In the ye;ir one
,,,, it, i thlotlifand fix hundred and seven, a feeble iciile-

eJ.In. It was made at Sagahadoc; but, on account

of the rigour of the climate, was soon rclin-
quifled, and for tome time nothing fulrtlhr \;' \
attempted than a few fiffling voyages to (C:1
Cod, or a pitiful traffic with the natives lor
skins and oil. One of the v clltls cquiplicd lo:

tlii.

this purpose was commanded by Captain Smith, B o o K
whose name has been so often mentioned with X.
diftination in the History of Virginia. The Smitlh ur-
adventure was prosperous and lucrative. But vey that,
his ardent enterprising mind could not confine callsitNCw

England.

its attention to objects so unequal to it as the x164.
petty details of a trading voyage. He employed
a part of his time in exploring the coast, and in
delineating its bays and harbours. On his
return, he laid a map of it before Prince Charles,
and, with the usual exaggeration of discoverers,
painted the beauty and excellence of the country
in such glowing colours, that the young prince,
in the warmth of admiration, declared, that it
should be called New England a: a name which
effaced that of Virginia, and by which it is still
distinguished.

TIE- favourable accounts of the country by Fnft a-

Smith, as well as the success of his voyage, feemr fetti un-
to have encouraged private adventurers to prose- fuccCltui
cute the trade on the coast of New England with
greater briskness; but did not inspire the lan-
guiflhing company of Plymouth with such vigour
as to make any new attempt towards establishing
a permanent colony there. Something more

Smith's Trav. Book vi. p. 203, &c. Purchas, iv;
P 1837.

VOL i. IV. than

B o o IK than the profpe& of distant gain to themselves,

x. or of future advantages to their country, was

requisite, in order to induce men to abandon
the place of their nativity, to migrate to another
quarter of the globe, and endure innumerable
hardflips under an untried climate, and in an
uncultivated land, covered with woods, or occu-
pied by fierce and holtile tribes of savages. But
what mere attention to private emolument or to
national utility could not elled, was accomplished
c!.s by the operation of an higher principle. Rli-

g','t ion had gradually excited among a great body

L of the people a spirit that fitted them remark-
iu. ably for encountering the dangers, and fur-

mounting the obstacles, which had hitherto
rendered abortive the fchcmes of colonization
in that part of America allotted to the company
of Plymouth. As the various settlements in
New England are indebted for their origin to
this spirit, as in the course of our narrative we
lhall dilcern its influence mingling in all their
tranlactions, and giving a peculiar tincture to
the characer of the people, as well as to their
inititutions, both civil and ecclefiaflical, it be-
comes necessary to trace its rile and progrcel
with attention and accuracy.

isf.,C1,, \WVIII N the fuperfitiionsl and corruptions (,'

I'llI jul Ilts
i.lct,,,ii; the Ruoiifh church prompted dillercnt nationl;

ci

of Europe to throw ofF its yoke, and to wuit- C o o K
draw from its commlunion, the mode as well as x.
degree of their separation was various. Where- L.dlurh -.
cver reformation was fuidden, and carried on by t'"it'
the people without authority from their rulers, ..,':;1tc
or in opposition to it, the rupture was violent '-.,'
and total. Every part of the ancient fabric was
overturncd, and a difierent fyfRem, not only
with respect to doctrine, but to church govern-
ment, and the external rites of worlhip, was
eflablified. Calvin, who, by his abilities,
learning, and austerity of manners, had acquired
high reputation and authority in the Proteflant
churches, was a zealous advocate for this plan
of thorough reformation. He exhibited a model.
of that pure form of ecclefiaflical policy, which
he approved in the constitution of the church of
Geneva. The simplicity of its inflitutions, and
flill more their repugnancy to those of the
Popish church, were so much admired by all the
fiiEter reformers, that it was copied, with to;me
fnall variations, in Scotland, in the Republic
of the United Provinces, in the dominions of
lle IIoule of Brandenburgh, in thofi of the
]Elelcor Palatine, and in the churches of the
Ilugonots in Si ance.

BuTr in those countrics wher e the flps of
leparture from the church of Rome were takcen

:; 2 with

B o o It wih greater deliberation, and regulated by the

x. wisdom or policy of the supreme magistrate, the
"'"" separation was not so wide. Of all the reformed

churches, that of England has deviated least
from the ancient institutions. The violent but
capricious spirit of Henry VIII. who, though he
disclaimed the supremacy, revered the tenets of
the Papal fee, checked innovations in doctrine
or worship during his reign. When his son
aCcended the throne, and the Protestant religion
was established by law, the cautious prudence
of Archbishop Cranmer moderated the zeal of
those who had espoused the new opinions.
Though the articles to be recognised as the
system of national faith were framed conform-
ably to the doctrines of Calvin, his notions with
respect to church government and the mode of
worship were not adopted. As the hierarchy in
England was incorporated with the civil policy
of the kingdom, and conflituted a member of
the legislature, archbishops and biflops, with all
the subordinate ranks of ecclefialtics 'ubjice to
them, were continued according to ancient
form, and with the fame dignity and jurildiClio!.
'he peculiar veltnents in which the clerfy)
)perfonmed their sacred functions, bowing at the
r.ame oft Jlcius, kneeling at receiving the Sacrl-
nlmet of the Lord's Supper, the sign of h:c
C(rolf in baptifin, the ule of the Ring in mir-

'i;l c,

riage, with several other rites to which long B o o K
usage had accustomed the people, and which x.
time had rendered venerable, were still retained. ~
But though Parliament enjoined the observance
of these ceremonies under very revere penalties b,
several of the more zealous clergy entertained
scruples with refpea to the lawfulness of com-
plying with this injunction: and the vigilance
and authority of Cranmer and Ridley with
difficulty saved their infant church from the
disgrace of a schism on this account.

ON the acceflion of Mary, the furious zeal Rcligious

pcrfcutilor

twith which she persecuted all who had adopted by Mary.
the tenets of the reformers forced many eminent
proteflants, laymen as well as ecclesiastics, to
seek an asylum on the continent. Francfort,
Geneva, Basil, and Strafburgh, received them
with affecionate hospitality as sufferers in the
cause of truth, and the magistrates permitted
them to assemble by themfslves for religious
worship. The exiles who took up their refi-
dence in the two former cities modelled their
little congregations according to the ideas of
Calvin, and, with a spirit natural to men in
their situation, eagerly adopted inltitutions
which appeared to be farther removed from the

b 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. i.

s 3 super.

B o o K fuperf{itions of popery than those of their own

X. church. They returned to England as soon as
' "El-'l Eiizabeth re-eftak!;fled the proteltant religion,

not only with more violent aniipalhy to ihe
opinions and pracdices of that ch';rch, by whiCl
they had been olprefne, but w ith a fironl
attachnient to that -node of worllip to ,iiici
they had 'een for fnme years accuf milcd. As
they were received by theri counti )-men wnrlh the
veneration due to confessors, they exerted all the
influence derived from that opinin(,, in order to
obtain such a reformation in the En-l;fl ritual
as might bring it nearer to the flandard of purity
in foreign churches. Some of the queen's moif
confidential ministers were warnmly diifioficl to
Quc, .ii. co-operate with them in this mcalfre. IBu

Elizabeth paid little regard to the inclinations
of the one, or the fentilnents of the other,
Fond of pomp and ceremony, accufilomeid,
according to the mode of that age, to Iludy
religious controversy, and poffcfiing, like her
ilther, such confidence in her own underflanil-
ing, that flle never doubted her capacity to
jdlge and decide with rcli)et to every point in
dilputc between contending scats , she chole to

ad

e Of th(e l',hI ii ;

wh lichli Elizallc ilh .cf trr;it (l ";)!,

rls[)C uI ItI.To ()\\Ul tlpClii(li l i i ll t hlol . y, ;(i \\ll .t1: I
t:! it% ty t.0Lu c ill wlhiclh Ilc (litittlcd to lher fl.ijt's \liJlt il,

at according to her own ideas, which led her B o o K.
rather to approach nearer to the church of Rome, x-
in the parade of external worship, than to widen
the breach by abolishing ally rite already efta-
blifhed . An ad of parliament, in the firit
year of her reign, not only required al exact

ouiglt to believe, we have a ih:iking pi;cure in her fpccrlh at
the close of the parliament, A. D. IS5.-- " One ithiin' I
may not overikip. Religion, tile ground on which all other
matters ought to take root, and being corrupted, may mar
all the tree. And that there be fune fantlt-linders with tlle
order of the clergy, whlich so may mIake 3a slander to umyf!f,
a:!:l to the clihurch , whole o;->r-rulcr (od hath made mie,
whose negligencc cannot be cxcifecd, if an-v fclifins or errors
heretical were fiffered. Tlus muchl I mnil lay, that fomile
faults and negligences mult gIrow and he, as in all otller
great clhages it happeneth ; andl \vlat \ooatioll w\ithout
All which, if you my lords of tile clergy do not alrincd, I
mnan to depoif you. Iook ye, tlilcrfolc, \wdll to ylour
ciarges. This may be amencded \witlhout nccdlefs or open
txclamations. I am fulpolfl to have imany fludies, but
sloil pliilolfplhical. 1 lilill yiell tllis to l)e true, tliat 1
tll ppofc few (that be not prose{ lli,) iave read I-ure. Ai1d
I led not tell you, tlihat I alil llot IO s11tile thlat I 1ulder-
laild not, nor so loi-gctfuil that 1 Ireim1(embe-r mit ; anld yet,
amidfll y many manvolumcs, I holpe God's book lhath nit I con
tmy feldomllt leitul'res, iln whlicli we liitd that w\\ich by re1iss
all ought to believe. I siec lmny o\sr-bold witli (God
Almighty, mllakitl too many fib' fIlle. (;ii.i ofl Ilis hlC.lic

''ll. The pref1imption is 1so greact tIt I nm)a not flffer it,"

ce. l)'Ew;c,'s Jolurnlal, p. 32 '.
1 Neal's 1 ii. of the Puritans, i. 13";. 176.

s , co[nforit y

B o o K conformity to the mode of worship prescribed in

x. the fervice-book, under molt rigorous penalties,

but empowered the queen to enjoin the obferv.
ance of such additional ceremonies as might
tend, in her opinion, to render the public
exercises of devotion more decent and edify-
ing C.
Furitans. THE advocates for a farther reformation,

notwithstanding this cruel disappointment of
the sanguine hopes with which they returned to
their native country, did not relinquifih their
design. They disseminated their opinions wxith
great industry among the people. They extolled
the purity of foreign churches, and enveighed
againit the superstitious practices with which
religion was defiled in their own church. In
vain did the defenders of the eftabliflled system
represent that these forms and ceremonies were
in themselves things perfeEtly indifferent, which,
from long usage, were viewed with reverence;
and, by their impression upon the senses and
imagination, tended not only to fix the atten-
tion, but to affeEt the heart, and to warm it
with devout and worthy sentiments. The Puri-
tans (for by that name such as scrupled to
comply with what was enjoined by the al of

L Eliz. c. z.

uniformity

uniformity were distinguished) maintained, that B o o K
the rites in question were inventions of men, x.
superadded to the simple and reasonable service
required in the word of God; that from the
excessive solicitude with which conformity to
them was exated, the multitude must conceive
such an high opinion of their value and import-
ance, as might induce them to reft satisfied with
the mere form and shadow of religion, and to
imagine that external observances may compen-
fate for the want of inward fanstity; that cere-
monies which had been long employed by a
society manifestly corrupt, to veil its own defects,
and to seduce and falcinate mankind, ought
now to be rejected as relics of fuperflition un-
worthy of a place in a church which gloried in
the name of Rcfor7med.

THE people, to whomi in every.religious con- Intolrant

troverfy the final appeal is made, liltened to the ,l, hL ti
arguments of the contending parties; and it is
obvious to which of them, men who had lately
beheld the superstitious spirit of popery, and felt
its persecuting rage, would lend the most favo-r-
able ear. The defite of a farther fepalraion
from the church of Rome lircad wide tlirough
the nation. The preachers who contended for
this, and who refused to wear the furLplicc, and
other vellmcnets peculiar to their order, or to

obfcrvc

;o o o observe the ceremonies enjoined by law, were

x. followed and admired, while the miniftrv of
~"^'"a-~ the zealous advocates for conformity was deserted,

and their persons often exposed to insult. For
some time the non-conformists were connived
at; but as their number and boldnels increased,
the interposition both of spiritual and civil autho.
rity was deemed necessary in order to check
their progress. To the disgrace of Christians,
the sacred rights of conscience and private judg.
ment, as well as the charity and mutual forbear-
ance suitable to the mild spirit of the religion
which they profefled, were in that age little
understood. Not only the idea of toleration,
but even the word itself in the sense now affixed
to it, was then unknown. Every church
claimed a right to employ the hand of power
for the protection of truth and the extirpation of
error. The laws of her kingdom armed Eliza-
beth with ample authority for this purpole, and
she was abundantly disposed to cxercife it viwhh
full vigour. Many of the most eminent among
the Puritan clergy were deprived of their bene-
sices, others were imprisoned, fevcral were
fined, and some put to death. But persecution,
as ufially happens, inltead of extinguiflhing,
inflamed their zeal to such a height, that the
jurildicdlion of the ordinary courts of law was
deemed infuflicient to fupprcfs it, and a nlew

tribunal

tribunal- was established under the title of the B o o KI
,igh com)ifjiion for ccclcn/ical ajfairs, whose X.
powers and mode of procedure were hardly
Lehs odious or less hoitile to the principles of
jufice than tholfe of the Spanish inquilition.
Several attempts were made in the lloufe of
Commons to check these arbitrary proceedings,
and to moderate the rage of persecution; but
the queen always imposed silence upon those
who presumed to deliver any opinion with refpei
to a matter appertaining solely to her preroga-
tive, in a tone as imperious and arrogant as was
ever used by IHenry VIII. in addressing his parlia-
ments; and so tamely obsequious were the
guardians of the people's rights, that they not
only obeyed those unconfiitutional commands,
but consented to an aCt, by which every person
who should absent himself from church during
a month was fubjccled to punishment by fine
and inmprilolllllcnt; and if after conviction lie
did not, within thlree nionths, renounce his
erroneous opinions and conform to the laws, lie
was then obliged to abjure the realm ; but if he
either refulfed to comply with tils condition, or
returned from banifinlenit, he fiould be put to
dcath as a feloln xxilhout benefit of clergy '

f 35 l.li, . L.

13

B O O K By this iniquitous statute, equally repugnant

x. to ideas of civil and of religious liberty, the

Entircfepa- Puritans were cut off from any hope of obtain.
Pritnoiol ing either reformation in the church or indul-
so.n the ence to themselves. Exasperated by this rigor-
chlurclh.

ous treatment, their antipathy to the eftablified
religion increased, and, with the progress natu-
ral to violent passions, carried them far beyond
what was their original aim. The first Puritans
did not entertain any scruples with relpeet to the
lawfulness of episcopal government, and seem to
have been very unwilling to withdraw from
communion with the church of which they were
members. But when they were thrown out of
her bolbm, and constrained to hold separate
assemblies for the worship of God, their followers
no longer viewed a society by which they were
oppressed with reverence or affecion. Her
government, her discipline, her ritual, were
examined with minute attention. Every error
was pointed out, and every defect mnagnified.
The more boldly any teacher inveighed against
the corruptions of the church, he was listened
to with greater approbation ; and the farther he
urged his disciples to depart from such an im-
pure community, the more eagerly did they
follow him. By degrees, ideas of ccclcfiaftical
polic, altogether repugnant to thole of the

cflabliflcd

etablifhed church, gained footing in the nation. B o o i
The more fober and learned Puritans inclined to x.
that form which is known by the name of
Presbyterian. Such as were more thoroughly
possessed with the spirit of innovation, however
much they might approve the equality of pastors
which that system establishes, reprobated the
authority which it veils in various judicatories,
descending from one to another in regular
subordination, as inconsistent with Chriltian
liberty.

THESE wild notions floated for some time in

the minds of the people, and amused them with
many ideal fchemcs of ecclesiastical policy. At rrowni;!s.
length Robert Brown, a popular declaimer in ,'s'C
high eltimation, reduced them to a system, on
.which he modelled his own congregation. He
taught, that the church of England was corrupt,
and antichriftians, its ministers not lawfully
ordained, its ordinances and sacraments invalid;
and therelfre lce prohibited his people to hold
communion with it in any religious flynliol.
lie maintained, that a fb icty ol Cliriffians,
uniting together to worfiilp (God, conilititcd a
church, poficlld of comlplete jurildiictiun in the
conducS of it:; o\wn all'ir, iltndependent of any
.rllhr focic(y, aind ul; accoL('tablc to any fupe-
lior; that tlic priiclilhocd was nicitlicr a dlilinLt

order

B o o K order in the church, nor conferred an indelibic

x. characer; but that every man qualified to teach
"-'~"~~ might be set apart for that office by the election

of the brethren, and by imposition of their
hands; in like manner, by their authority, he
might be discharged from that funaion, and
reduced to the rank of a private christian; that
every person, when admitted a member of a
church, ought to make a public confeflion of
his faith, and give evidence of his being in a
state of favour with God; and that all tile ailairs
of a church were to be regulated by the decision
of the majority of its members.

Brownifts THIIS democratical form of government, which
t.''c refuge abolifled all diftinAtion of ranks in the church,

and conferred an equal portion of power on
every individual, accorded so perfectly witl the
levelling genius of fanaticifin, that it was fondly
adopted by many as a complete model of chrillian
policy. From their founder, they were deno-
minatexd Brownins; and as their tenets were
more hostile to the eflablifhed religion tlihn
those of other feparatifis, the ficrceft itorin ol
pcrlecution fell upon their Ileads. Many u
thern were fined or imprifobncd, ai:d flme pit to'>
deat-h; and though Brown, with a lecvity ol
which there are few examples among ciihutlillal
lwhole vanily ha.; been f.olh,.d 1)v bclnll rcio': -

r·iil

nifed as heads of a party, abandoned his difiples, B o o iK
conformed to the eftabliflied religion, and ac- x.
cepted of a benefice in the church, the fed not
only fubiflted, but continued to spread, especially
among persons in the middle and lower ranks of
life. But as all their motions were carefully
watched, both by the ecclefiaflical and civil
courts, which, as often as they were detected,
punished them with the utmost rigour, a body
of them, weary of living in a state of continual
danger and alarm, fled to Holland, and fettled
in Leyden under the care of Mr. John Robinson,
their paitor. There they rcfided for several
)'ears unmolested and oblcure. But many of
their aged members dyiing, and fonc of the
younger marrying into Dutch families, while
their church received no increase, either by
recruits from England, or by prolllytecs gained
in the country, they began to be afraid, that all
their high attainments in l')iritual knovledge
would be lofl, and that perfec fabric of policy,
which they had eretcd, woulld le diiFolved,
and conlignccd to oblivion, if they remained
longer in a Itrange land.

DEEPLY afUlted with the Iproficct of an 'itl.:

event, which to them appeared fatal to the ,1,,,.,i;.
interelts of truth, they thlou glht tIhcmnfles
called, in order to prevent it, to remove to

sollmc

B o o s frome other place, where they might profess and

X. propagate their opinions with greater success.

America, in which their countrymen were at
that time intent on planting colonies, presented
itself to their thoughts. They flattered them-
selves with hopes of being permitted, in that
remote region, to follow their own ideas in
religion without disturbance. The dangers and
hardships to which all former emigrants to
America had been exposed, did not deter
them. " They were well weaned (according
to their own description) from the delicate milk
of their mother country, and inured to the
difficulties of a strange land. They were knit
together in a strict and sacred band, by virtue
of which they held themselves obliged to take
care of the good of each other, and of the
whole. It was not with them, as with other
men, whom small things could discourage, or
small discontents cause to wifl themselves at
16,I. home again I." The first objec of their folici-

tude was to secure the free exercise of their
religion. For this purpose they applied to the
king; and though James refut:d to give them
any explicit assurance of toleration, they fecni
to have obtained from him some promile of hi5
connivance, as long as they continued to

g I-utcliinfoii'; Hlilt. of Marl. il, p. 4.

demean

demean themselves quietly. So eager were B o o i:
they to accomplish their favourite fchieme, that, x-
relying on this precarious security, they began
to negociate with the Virginian ccmpany for a
tract of land within the limits of their patent.
This they easily procured from a society dcfirous
of encouraging migration to a vast country, of
which they had hitherto occupied only a few
spots.

AFTER. the utmoi efforts, their preparations Gr-,.

fell far short of what was requisite for beg'ininig Frt' it-
the settlement of a new colony. A hliicred t;i :.,
and twenty persons failed from IFnland in a ;lir.Lal.
tingle ship on this arduous undertaking. Thie
place of their defltinaion was Iiudfln' l' Rivcr,
where they intended to fettl ; but their c:lra;ii
having been bribed, as is said, by the Dutch,
who had then formed a fchemne, which they
atherwards accomplifled, of planting a co(iny
there, carried them to far towards the north,
that the first land in America; which they made
was Cape Cod. 'I'hey werCe now not only : .i , ,.
beyond the precincts of the terril(or y which had
been granted to them, but beyond thole of the
company from which llthy derived their right.
Thie lealbn, however, vwas lo far adlvmccd, adt
licknels raged so viOlcntlly aronl g men ulln:-
rcfitoied to the hiardfiips of a long voy:;ag',

vol,. IV. T that

13 o o K that it became necessary to take up their abode

x. there. After exploring the coast, they chole

Scttie ,t for thtir station a place now belonging to tlhe
rolltlh province of MaiFachufets Bay, to which they

gave the name of New Plymouth, probably out
of refpea to that company, within whoso jurii-
diction they now found themselves situated '.

No season could be more unfavourable to

settlement than tlat in which the colony landed.
The winter, which, from the predominance ol
cold in America, is rigorous to a degree un.
known in parallel latitudes of our hemiiphere,
was already let in; and they were fienderl!!
provided with what was requisite for comfort.
able fubfifiecnce, under a climate confiderabiv
more severe than that for which they had made
preparation. Above one half of them was cut
off before the return of iring, by diseases, o,
by Inuininc: tlie ftirvivols, instead of liavinw
lcilurc to attiend to the supply of their OWii
wants, were co (i:cllcdl to take arms agatinr tlic

f'l.-.n.' go. ial.vae in tleisir iighbourhood. lappily f,r
... "'""'"' thl Englifl, Ia peflilence, v.liich raged in iAnic-

rica the )ear before lley Ilanded, had 1\vcpt oll
b great a Lnumber of the inatives, that they) n'

'' }ii': ,b J's l'tle'. Still, p.. Cotton's Mil;ild;l, p.
i I hsllltllilll l', I. IIill" ) 3, :, '.

q uicl, I';

quickly repulsed and humbled. The privilege o o
of profelling their own opinions, and of being X
governed by laws of their own framing, afforded
consolation to the colonilis amidfl all their dangers
and hardships. 'The constitution of their church
was the fame with that which they had eilablifled
in H1olland. Their fyflem of civil government
was founded on those ideas of the natural equa.
]ity among men, to which their eccleCfaftical
policy had accuftoimed them. Every free man,
who was a member of the church, was admitted
into the supreme legislative body. The laws of
England were adopted as the basis of their jurif-
prudence, though with some diversity in the
punihmnents infliEted upon crimes, borrowed
from the Mosaic inflitutions. The executive
power was veiled in a governor and some aflifl-
ants, who were elected annually by the members
of the legislative afiembly '. So far their infli-
tutions appear to be founded on the ordinary
maxims of human prudence. But it was ;i
favourite opinion with all the enthufiallts of that
age, that the scriptures contained a complete
lyftem, not only of spiritual inftruclion, but of
civil wifdoin and polity; and withoit attendingl
to the peculiar circumftanccs or situation ol the
people whos hiflory is there recorded, theC)' (,le

Chialcr's' A\iimals, p,. 87.

'r 2 deduced

B o o K deduced general rules for their own conduc,

x. from what happened among men in a vcry

'
different slate. Under the influence of this

wild notion, tile colonifIs of New PlymoLtl,

Conriln:tyin imnitation of the primitive chriitians, threw all
.rA1 . H'l,.

their property into a common flock, and, like
members of one family, carried on every work
of induliry by their joint labour for public
behoof k. But, however this resolution mi;'iht
evidence the sincerity of their faith, it retarded
the progress of their colony. The fame fatal
lecfls ilowed from this community of good1s,
and of labour, which had formerly been expe-

ThIs infl- rienced in Virginia; and it soon became necef-
tUtiul hui t..
ui to the. fary to relinquifi what was too refined to bc
tonoly. capable of being accommodated to the affairs ot

men. But though they built a small town,
and surrounded it with such a fence as afforded
sufficient security againit the assaults of Indians,
the foil around it was so poor, their religious
principles were so unsocial, and the supply Ilnt
them by their friends io scanty, that at the end
of ten years, the nuimber of people belonling
to the fcttlclment did not excced three hundredt
D)uring fnle years they appear not to h:tv:
acquired right by any legal conveyance to tl,~:

i: ClIlIIcr11, I' I

, .1111 ls1S, 11. ). ) glas's S lllllll;iil,

.

p. "-o.
P' 3z °'

; ^kl slntc -lC . \ :t'l:e: , I" lol.

territory

territory which they had occupied. At length r o o x
they obtained a grant of property fiom the x.
council of the TNcwv Plymouth company, but ,6;,,
were never incorporated as a body politic by T cic!.nny
royal charter"'. Unlike all the other fettle- .,,,rl,, ii
ments in America, this colony muit be confi- ";'
cdered merely as a voluntary association, held
together by the t;cit consent of its members to
recognize the authority of laws, and submit to
the jurifdiEtion of magistrates framed and chosen
by themselves. In this fate it remained an
independent but feeble community, until it vas
united to its more powerful neighbour, the
colony of MafflacihufLts Bay, the origin and
progress of which I now proceed to rclate.

rTHE original company of Plymouth having crnnm

done nothing effetual towards eftal)lifhing an) yl,',h
permanent fettlemcnt in America, Janecs I., in :'i""d
lhie year one thousand fix hundred and twenty,
iilued a new charter to the duke of Lenox, the
ira(qllis of Buckinglham, and fveral othler
pcrlons of diflinction in his court, by which he
colnveyed to tlhec a right to a territory il Amne-
rica, fill more extensive than what. lad becln
granted to the formler patentee:s, illcorporlatinig
licrin as a body politic, in order to plant colonies

'" Chl nhl,;' An,,I;L:h., p1) . <,7. i'7.

s ~^ there.~lleCr,

B o o K there, wvith powers and jurifdicions finiillar t

x. those contained in his charters to the comnpalie
t'" of South and North Virginia. This society ,a

diftinguiihed by the name of the Grand Counci
of Plymouth for planting and governing l\ee
England. What considerations of public utilii'
could induce the king to commit such an unllder.
taking to persons apparently so ill qualifield f1
conducting it, or vwhat profpecl of priva;:
advantage prompted them to engage in it, thl
information we receive irom conternporari
writers does not enable us to determlie. C':.
tain it is, that the expectations of both wcx
disappointed ; and after many 'chel:cs and
arrangements, all the attempts of the rew
afibciates towards colonization -proved unirc-
cefsful.

Proj-.,.a NEW England must have remained u::c.
,lLCl.c0 ay. cupied, if the fame causes which occafionled tie

emigration of the Browniris had not continiud
to operate. Notwithstanding the violent perl..
cution to which Puritans of every dclion:il;in
were still exposed, their number and zeal d!.il
increasebd. As they now defpaiiedc oi ,lbt:niil tn
in their own countrv any r,:iaxation oi h1i p1)tn;!
laitC es cilnactd aginfilt iheir sect, many begnsll r.'
turn their eyes towards fomle oilier Ipla;c' e1
retr-ear, \v hiere they might proficl their
,,(o;

l.1,i. !-

opinions with impunity. From the tranquillity B o o K
which their brethren had hitherto enjoyed in x.
New Plymouth, they hoped to find this desired "" "
afyluin in New England; and by the activity
of Mr. Wrhite, a non-conformif: minilli-e at
Dorchefler, an afibciation was formed by several
gentlemen who had imbibed puritanical notions,
in order to conduc a colony - thirher. They
purchased fiom the council of Plymouth all lhe
territory, extendiin- in lenthi from three miles
north of the River lIcrimack, to three miles
south of Charles River, and in breadth, from
the Atlantic to the Southern (cean. 'eaclous A;,6',
as these proprietors were to accompliff their
hlvourite purpose, they quickly perceivedl their
own inability to attempt the population of iuch
an irnmenfe region, and deemed it neceilary to
call in the aid of more opulent co-partners".

OF thefi they found, without difficulty, a

fufiicient number, chiefly in the capital, and
among perlfns in the commercial and other
indultrious walks of liii, who had openly jo)ined
the leJt of tlle Puritan;, or secretly fvjaourced
their opinions. These new advenlcllrer:C, witl
thle caution natural to men converlfcat in bil finel;,
entertained doubts concerning tle plropriety o'

" NcI'; I-lill. or New 1io;l. i. p. 122.

' 4 n;i din dijii

30 o o K founding a colony on the basis of a grant 1fonim

x. a private company of patentecs, 'who iniiht

convey a right of propc.-t' ill the foil, but could
not confer jurifdiclion, or the privilcre of
governing that society wlich they had in contem-
plation to eitablifh. As ir was only from roval
authority that such powers coi:l be derived,
they applied for these ; and Charles graintd thiir
rcquefi, with a facility which appears afioniffling,
when we confider the principles al'd viewcs of the
men who were suitors for the favour,

CIltrtl to TIMiE lhas been confidered as the parent of
rile new
:o!ony of political wifdoin, Lut its inifru&ions are coiinmu-
;ta iLay. nicated fiowly. Although the experience of

above twenty years might have taught the lin;-
lifli the impropriety of committing the govern-
mncut of fcttlements in America to exclusive
corporations resident in Europe, ncit!cr tlhe ki!!
nor his fubjcds had profited lb much by 1hiat
paflcd before their eyes, as to have cx:tenndc
their ideas beyond those adopted by Jatics., 1:1
his first attemlpts towards colonizi:tioll. '1i '
chartcr of Charles I. to the adventurers afl;,
siated for planting the provilce o(f Mafacicilkiu.
Biay, was peifLcctly iinilar to those granteJ lby
his lather to Ili two Virginian comlpallics andI 1)
tIle coullcil of I'lymouth. TIhe new adventLurers
V/cre incorporated as a body politic, and their

ri 11.1

right to the territory, which they had purchased B o o K
from the council of Plymouth, being confirmed x.
by the king, they were empowered to dispose of '"
the lands, and to govern the people who flould
fettle upon th-cii. The sirs governor of the
company, and his afliflants, were named by the
crown: the right of eleting their ficceflbrs was
vcfted in the members of the corporation. T'he
executive power was committed to the governor
and aiifallts ; that of Icgillation to the body of
proprietors, x ho ligeht make statutes and orders
for the good of the community, not inconsistent
with the laws of England, and enforce the
observance of them, according to the course of
other corporations within the realm. Their
lands were to be held by the fame liberal tenure
with those granted to the Virginian company.
They obtained the fame temporary exemptiol
from internal taxes, and from duties on goods
exported or imported; and notwithflanding their
migration to America, they and their defccnd-
ants were declared to be entitled to all the rights
,f natural-born fubjecds .

'1'rE manifeilft objed of this charter was to

ionlscr on the adventurers who undertook to
people the territory on MaIafIachulets Bay, all

o1i n lmchh,!';: ; ( C osi O'.g. Ppof
O r, p. , &c.

the

o o the corporate rights poeiffed by tlhe council of

Plymouth, from which they had purchased it,
and to form them into a public body, refembliilr
other great trading companies, which the fpirii
of monarchy had at that time multiplied in tle
kingdom. The king seems not to have forefecn,
or to have fufpeCcd, the secret intentions o1
those who projefted the measure; for Io far vwas
lie from alluring emigrants, by any hopes of
indulgence with respect to their religious scruples,
or from promising any relaxation from the
ligour of the penal itatutes againfL non-con.
bforifts, that he exprcfsly provides for haviln
the oath of supremacy adminiflered to every
person who shall pals to the colony, or inlabit
there P.

P HIitcliefo' s

Coi llc. of Orig. Paper., p. l ;.-I i;

surprising that Mr. Ncial, n in(l(Ulriiouis and gecral)ly '.l-
informeid writer, lhoild affirm, that " frce liberty of oll-
science wais granted by tli;s charter to all who should felt;l
in tliofe part:, to wortlilp God ill tlheir own wiy." IIil.
New En. . 12. hi.
124. 'is Ilh rcpi)cats ill Ihis iiloly of tie

luritIans, ii. 210; and fllbfqin(lt lt 1lillo iani; l; liavte co i l

hirn implicitly. No plermnilTion of that kind, lonWL'., i,
contained in the charter ; ;nd s{uch ;iln nidlnc't. \\,'i
i1avC hbcci illconfiilent with il ll the maxims ol Clo;rl; ;:;,l
llis linillers duringl the comrfe of his reign. At the tilne
whliei (CIhatils ifi]cd llt cIart er, thei infl ne ot r -ilitid ou 'r
lli colinicils wav; at it:, height, the IPr'it;ils weLrL jrofccutrd
with the griatell itvr;ty, and t1lhe kin;gldom wa< t,1ll

t:Ill5

BUT whatever were the intentions of the B o0 K

king, the adventurers kept their own objedt x.
iteadily in view. Soon after their powers to ,6;9.
eflablifh a colony were rendered complete by the s'ttl:,l"t
royal charte-, they fitted out five ihips for New ~lcc o
England ; on board of which embarked upwards
of three hundred pafiengers, with a view of
fettling there. Thcfe were mostly zealous puri-
tans, whose chief inducement to relinquifl their
narive land was the hope of enjoying religious
liberty, in a country far removed from the feat
of governmlent and the opprelion of ecclesiastical
courts. Some eminent non-conformist ministers
accompanied them as their fpihitual inftrudors.
On their arrival in New England, they found
the wiretched remainder of a finall body of emi-
grants, who had left England the preceding year, Junc 29.
under the conduc of Endicott, a deep enthu-
fials, whom, prior to their incorporation by the
royal charter, the associates had appointed deputy
governor. They were fettled at a place called
by the Indians Naunckeag, and to which lEndi-
cott, with the fond affectation of tfnatics of
that: age to employ the language and alpellations

citiicly Ly pr 'rogative. I'hlii is not in 'ra in \v.li li ne
C;ill (ij)tL to ICL \with OIill fhvoilirl of' 'lio1-
,''lmlImill;h, froln ia priicc oi' Cla']ci':, chlar0a.cr a;n(' prin-

Of

B o K of fcripturc in the afiairs of common life, haid

x. given tile name of Salem.

Begin wth T-HE emigrants under Eindicctt, and such as
citahlisiung , . . , .
a church. now joined them, coincided pcr.ictiy in religious

principles. They were puritans of the flitceft
form ; and to men of this charaCter the inffitu-
tion of a church was naturally of such interefling
concern as to take place of every other objett.
In this firit tranfcaion, they displayed at once
the extent of the reformation at which thev
aimed. Without regard to the sentiments of that
monarch under the fanftion of whose authoiity
they fettled in America, and from whom they de-
rived right to a as a body politic, and in conteLipt
of the laws of England, with which the charter
required that none of their ads or ordinances
should be inconsistent, they adopted in their
infant church that form of policy which lias
since been diftinguifed by the rname of Iiicc-
tis. 6. pendent. They united together in religious

sbciety, by a solemn covenant with God, andi
with one another, and in frilC conformity, as
they iinagined, to the rules of fcripturc. 'l'hy
elc:ced a pastor, a teacher, and an elder, whomn
they let apart for their relpdcitiv ofiiccs, by
iinpofition of the hands of tlie breliren. Al\
who were that day lad(itted Illembers of tlec
ch'urch fl] ificcd I lcir afi'nt to a confeliion ot

ltilth

faith drawn up by their teacher, and gave an n o o K
account of the foundation of their own hopes as x.
christians; and it was declared, that no person
flould hereafter be received into communion
until he gave fatisfaEcion to the church with
refpel to his faith and faincirv. The form of
public worflip which they inflituted was wilhout
a liturgy, disencumbered of every superfluous
ceremony, and reduced to the lowc?: flandard of
Calviniftic finplici'y q'

IT was with the utnoft complacence that Inttlcance

o;' ril news

men, paiflonarely attached to their own notions, ;iurcij.
and who had long been restrained from avowing
them, employed thcnmflves in framing tlis
model of a pure church. But in the first
moment that they began to tafe of christian
liberty theiifelcls, thlly torgot that other men
had an equal title to (l.i()y it. )lome of tlhir
number, rctaiiiiii all high \cnerI;Lion toi- tlit
ritual of the ]i.nglifh chutIrchl, w'-rc tb mucI
oflended at llic t,.,ta abol,!iioll oi il, lIlat tlhey
withdrew flrol c(,InIIlUIm;ln \v illi the newly-
inflituted church, and :ailihllcd fclpraLtcly for
the worship of Cio. l\\ ilI :m i, c ('flel cy of
whllich there airc flch l:Ii,r;:nt intianccs t0on1',

M aulh ;. ;..,l:,l. K. I:. N1 l'.

l ill. ¢,!' N. '.:'/. !
126. CIiliih.'Ci, p. l 1

B O o K chriffians of every denomination that it cannoi

X. be imputed as a reproach peculiar to any fe:,
'"'"" the very men who had themselves fled from

pcrfecution became persecutors ; and had re-
course, in order to enforce their own opinions,
to the fame unhallowed weapons, againfi the
employment of which they had lately remnon-
ftrated with so much violence. Endicott called
the two chief malcontents before him ; and
though they were men of note, and among the
number of original patentees, lie expelled them
from the society, and fcnt them home in the
ships whiclh \w'r returning to England r. The
colonilts were now united in sentiments ; bur,
on the approach of winter, they fuiifered co
much from difeales, which carried off almoll
one half of their numbeLr, that they made little
progress in occupying the country.

MEIANWHILE tlie directors of tle conmpally

in England exerted their utniolt endcavours in
order to reinforce the colony with a an1unerous

Ymigra- body of new settlers ; and a: the iitolicr.it
tciO S i I io's
nialltd in- Ipirit of Lau ed cxat consllorlmlity to all the
t,.'';io.lY injunctions of the church witlh greater rigour
1:,d.cos than ever, the condition of such as had ally
L.iud.

fcrullcs with rcfpecl to this became lb intole..

r Mathcr, p. 19. Ncal, p. 129.

nibi1)C,

rable, that many accepted of their invitation to B o o 0K
a secure retreat in New England. Several of x.
these were persons of greater opulence and of
better condition than any who had hitherto
migrated to that country. But as they intended
to employ their fortunes, as well as to hazard
their persons, in eftablilhing a permanent colony
there, and foresaw many inconveniences from
their fubjedion to laws made without their own
content, and framed by a iociety which must
always be imperf:tly acquainted with their
fituatior, they insisted that the corporate powers
of the company fiould be transferred from
England to America, and the government of
the colony be vefteel entirely in those who, by
fettling in the latter country, becaine members
of it . The company had already expended
considerable fums in prosecuting the design of
their infiitution, without having received altio!.
any return, and had no prolpec of

' ;in, or

even of rcilmurlfemn nt, but what was too rellotc
andu uncertain to lbe ftiit;ble to tthe ideas of
me-rchants, the most nullmerous clafis of itr
members. They ihct'itated, however, with r--
fiecto to e

ll egaliry of grantig the d ciiand

of the intended emnii;,.lll. PIL I'nch was their
eigecrnels to be dic Iil,!,'(' l I ior an un laromniftin

' I-Itiutli so,),':
_ '\,!! cA' l",p : , i, ?'.

a.J ;vent ur%

Bo o I 2cadventure, that, " by general consent it vwr

x. determined, that the charter ihould be trans-

chatt-oft ficrrel, and the government be fettled in New
the nycol England'." To the members of the corpora.
pany trans-
letced to lie tion who chose to remain at home was reserved a
celoni ts.

share in the trading flock and profits of the
company during seven years.

IN this singular tranfaclion, to which there is

nothing similar in the history of Engliflh coloni-
zation, two circumRfances merit particular atten-
tion: one is, the power of the company to make
this transference; the other is, the silent acqui.
elcence with which the king permitted it to take
place. If the validity of this determination of
the company be tried by the charter which confli-
tuted it a body politic, and conveyed to it all
the corporate powers with which it was invested,
it is evident that it could neither exercise those
powers in any mode ldiflerent from xvwhat the
charter preScribed, nor alienate them in such a
manner as to convert the jurillic'lion of a trading
corporation in England into a provincial govern-
ment in America. But from the firif iiiftitution
of the company of Mafiachlufets Bay, its mem-
bers fe'Cr to have been animated with a spirit ot

c Matller, p. 20. Ilt(hil foil's I-iil. p. 1z. ('hal-
imcrs, p. 150.

innovation

innovation in civil policy, as well as in religion; B o o K
and by the habit of rejecting established usages in x.
the one, they were prepared for deviating from
them in the other. They had applied for a royal
charter, in order to give legal effec to their
operations in England, as acts of a body politic;
but the persons whom they sent out to Ame-
rica, as soon as they landed there, confidered
themselves as individuals, united together by
voluntary association, possessing the natural
right of men who form a society, to adopt what
mode of government, and to enad what laws
they deemed most conducive to general felicity.
Upon this principle of being entitled to judge
and to decide for themselves, they established
their church in Salem, without regard to the
institutions of the church of England, of which
the charter supposed them to be members, and
bound of consequence to conformity with its
ritual. Suitably to the lihne ideas, we shall
observe them framing all their future plans of
civil and ecclefiaflical policy. The king, though
abundantly vigilant in observing and checking
Ilighter encroachments on his prerogative, was
either lb much occupied at that time with other
cares, occasioned by his fatal breach with his
parliament, that he could not attend to the pro-
ceedings of the company ; or he was so much
pleased with the profpedt of removing a body of

VOL.. iv. u turbulent

n o o K turbulent fubjeds to a distant country, where

x. they might be useful, and could not prove

dangerous, that he was disposed to connive at
the irregularity of a mcafure which facilitated
their departure.

colony WITHOUT interruption from the crown, the
CxteCnlil, *

adventurers proceeded to carry their scheme into
execution, In a general court, John Winthrop
was appointed governor, and Thomas Dudley
deputy-governor, and eighteen afliftants were
chofecn; in whom, together with the body of
freemen who should fettle in New England,
were vefled all the corporate rights of the
cnmpan-y. With such zeal and activity did
they prepare for emigration, that in the course of
the ensuing year seventeen ships failed for New
England, and aboard these above fifteen hundred
persons, among whom were several of refpedtable
families, and in easy circumfiances. On their
arrival in New England, many were so ill satis-
sied witli the situation of Salem, that they
explored the country in quest of some better
fiation; and fettling in different places around
the Bay, according to their various fancies,
laid the ftundations of Boflon, Cllarles-town,
)'rchllcfer, lRoxborough, and other towns,
\which have iilcce become considerable in the
province. In each of thcle a church was clta-

bliflicl

blifhed on the fame model with that of Salem. B o o i
This, together with the care of making provi- X.
sion for their subsistence during winter, occupied
them entirely during some months. But in the oa.,9.
firfl general court, their disposition to confider
thenifelves as members of an independent
society, unconfined by the regulations in their
charter, began to appear. The election of the
governor and deputy-governor, the appointment
of all other officers, and even the power of
making laws, all which were granted by the
charter to the freemen, were taken from them,
and vested in the council of assistants. But the
ariftocratical spirit of this resolution did not
accord with the ideas of equality prevalent
among the people, who had been surprised into
an approbation of it. Next year the freemen, 163t.
whose numbers had been greatly augmented by
tie admiflion of new members, refurnd their
former rights.

BU', at the fame time, they ventured to None hut

I,. iiil.,'. of

dcviate from the charter in a Imatter of greater tIccil.irc
moment, which deeply asseted all the future si.crien.
operations of the colony, and contributed greatly
to form that peculiar charact'ter by which the
peo)ple of New lngland have been diflinguilhed.
A law wva paficd, declaring tlht tnone (hall
lhcrcaftcr be admitted freemen, or be entitled to

U 2 any

B o o K any (hare in the government, or be capable of

x- being chosen magistrates, or even of serving as

jurymen, but such as have been received into the
church as members u" By this resolution, every
person who did not hold the favourite opinions
concerning the doctrines of religion, the difci.
pline of the church, or the rites of worship,
was at once cast out of the society, and firippei
of all the privileges of a citizen. An uncon-
trolled power of approving or rejecting the
claims of those who applied for admission into
communion with the church being vetted in the
ministers and leading men of each congregation,
the molt valuable of all civil rights was made to
depend on their decision with refpec to quallfi.

'ernicious cations purely ecclesiastical. As in examining
qicnccs of into there, they proceeded not by any known or

uhItls. established rules, but exercised a difcretionarv

judgment, the clergy rose gradually to a degree
of influence and authority, from which the
levelling spirit of the independent church-policy
was calculated to exclude them. As by their
determination the political condition of every
citizen was fixed, all paid court to men poffcffed
of such an important power, by afiuming tholf
aultcre and :antiimonious manners which wer
known to be the moll certain recommnicndatio,

' IIilcl;,l fl, p. 26. (JlCalllcs, p. 153.

to

to their favour. In consequence of this ascend- E o o i
ant, which was acquired chiefly by the wildest x.
enthusiasts among the clergy, their notions
became a standard to which all studied to con-
form, and the singularities characteristic of the
Puritans in that age increased, of which many
remarkable instances will occur in the course of
our narrative.

T'lOUGH a considerable number of planters inianll,-
was cut off by the diseases prevalent in a country ritr"'Sd

populated

ib imperfectly cultivated by its original inhabit- by tlhe fIal
ants as to be still almost one continued forest,
and several, discouraged by the hardships to
which they were exposed, returned to England., ,63,
recruits sufficient to replace them arrived. At
the fame time the fniall-pox, a distemper fatal
to the people of the New World, Ifvept away
such multitudes of the natives that omen whole
iribes disappeared; and -leaven, by thus evacu-
ating a country in which the English might
fettle without molcftation, as supposed to
declare its intention that they flould occupy it.

As several of the vacant Indian stations were suttlerenr

Cl tIlkc do-

well chosen, such was the eagerness of the Inil, ix.
l'liglifl to take poficffion of them, that their ttId.
eIttlements became morle numerous and more
widely difperfdl than suited the condition of an

u 3 infant

B o o infant colony. This led to an innovation whichl

X. totally altered the nature and constitution of the
i634. government. When a general court was to be
rmctnby held in the year one thousand fix hundred and
prfue5t- thirty-four, the freemen, infead of attending it

in person, as the charter prescribed, elected
representatives in their different diftriEts, autho-
rizing them to appear in their name, with full
power to deliberate and decide concerning every
point that fell under the cognizance of the
general court. Whether this measure was
suggested by tome designing leaders, or whether
they found it prudent to soothe the people by
complying with their inclination, is uncertain,
The representatives were admitted, and conii-
dered themselves, in conjunction with the gover.
nor and aiftlants, as the supreme legillativc

xtent of assembly of the colony. In assertion of thir
political
liherty own rights they enated, that no law should be
tl.;'irm.- passed, no tax should be imposed, and no public
Lly. lofficer thould be appointed, but in the general

aftlmbly. The pretexts for making this new
arrangement were plaufiblc. The number nl
freemen was greatly incrcaltd ; many rcfidcl ;e
a dillancc from the places where the fuprCllic
courts were held ; personal attendance becanll:
inconvenient ; the sorn of government in thiii
own country had rendered familiar the idea ()t
delegating their rights, and conmmitting tll:

guardialN hlli

guardianihip of their liberties to representatives n o o K;
of their own choice, and the experience of ages X.
had taught them that this important trust might
with safety be lodged in their hands. Thus did
the company of Massachusets Bay, in less than
fix years from its incorporation by the king,
mature and perfet a scheme which, I have
already observed, tome of its more artful and
aspiring leaders seem to have had in view when
the afibciation for peopling New England was
tirft formed. The colony must henceforward
be confidered, not as a corporation whose powers
were defined, and its mode of procedure regu-
lated by its charter, but as a society, which,
having acquired or assumed political liberty, had,
by its own voluntary deed, adopted a confittu-
tion or government framed on the model of that
in England.

BUT however liberal their fvyfem of civil sp;i:t or

policy might be, as their religious opinions i,,,i,.
were no longer under any refltaint of authority,
the spirit of fanaticifin continued to spread, and
became every day wilder and more extravagant.
Williams, a iniifter of Salem, in high efijiia-
tion, having conceived an antipathy to the cross
of St. George in the standard of England,
declaimed against it with so much vehemence,
as a relic of fupcrllition and idolatry which

u /i ought

n o o K ought not to be retained among a people so pure

x. and fantified, that Endicott, one of the mem-

bers of the court of assistants, in a transport of
zeal, publicly cut out the cross from the ensign
displayed before the governor's gate. This
frivolous matter interested and divided the
colony. Some of the militia scrupled to follow
colours in which there was a cross, left they
should do honour to an idol: others refused to
serve under a mutilated banner, left they should
be fufpeded of having renounced their allegi.
ance to the crown of England. After a long
controversy, carried on by both parties with
that heat and zeal which in trivial disputes supply
the want of argument, the contest was termi-
nated by a compromise. The cross was retained
in the ensigns of forts and flips, but erasid
from the colours of the militia. Williams, on
account of this, as well as of some other doc-
trines deemed unsound, was baniflled out of the
colony "v
New fct. THE prosperous itate of New England was

now so highly extolled, and the simple frame of
its ecclefialtic policy was so much admired by all
whole affecions were estranged from the church

v Ncal' lTill, of N. Eng. p. 140, &c. Hutclinfcn,
p- 37. Chalmers, p. 156.

0o

of England, that crowds of new settlers flocked B o o K
thither. Among these were two persons, whose x.
names have been rendered memorable by the '-"1
appearance which they afterwards made on a
more conspicuous theatre: one was Hugh Peters,
the enthusiastic and intriguing chaplain of Oliver
Cromwell; the other Mr. Henry Vane, son of
Sir Henry Vane, a privy counsellor, high in
office, and of great credit with the king; a
young man of a noble family, animated with
such zeal for pure religion and such love of
liberty as induced him to relinquish all his hopes
in England, and to fettle in a colony hitherto
no farther advanced in improvement than barely
to afford subsistence to its members, was received
with the fondefl admiration. His mortitied
appearance, his demure look, and rigid manners,
carried even beyond the standard of preciseness
in that society which he joined, feeined to indi-
cate a man of high spiritual attainments, while
his abilities and address in business pointed him
out as worthy of the highest station in the com-
munity. With universal consent, and high 1636.
expetations of advantage from his adminiftra-
tion, he was eleted governor in the year fubfe-
quent to his arrival. But as the afftairs of an
infant colony afforded not objects adequate to
the talents of Vane, his bury pragmatical tpirit

occupied

Bo o i occupied itself with theological fubtilties and

x. speculations unworthy of his attention. These

were excited by a woman, whose reveries pro-
duced such effects both . ithin the colony and
beyond its precincRs, that, frivolous as they
may now appear, they muff be mentioned as an
occurrence of importance in its hifltory.

Arntno- IT was the custom at that time in New IEn'.
miln fed. *

land, among the chief men in every congrega-
tion, to meet once a week, in order to repeat
the sermons which they had heard, and to hold
religious conference with respect to the docarile
contained in them. Mrs. Hutchinson, whose
husband was among the most refpeEtable mem-
bers of the colony, regretting that pcrfons of
her sex were excluded from the benefit of those
meetings, assembled fiatedly in her house a
number of women, who employed themfelvcs
in pious exercises similar to those of the incn.
At firit she satisfied herself with repeating wlhat
she could recollect of the lifcourlfes delivercd byh
their teachers. She began afterwards to add
illustrations, and at length proceeded to cenfulre
bome of the clergy as unsound, and to vent opi-
nions and fancies of her own. These were all
founded on the fyfltem which is denominated
Antinomian by divines, and tinged with thl

dIccluc L

deepest enthusiasm. She taught, that fantity of n o o K
life is no evidence of juflification, or of a state x.
of favour with God; and that such as inculcated '~~"
the necessity of manifesting the reality of our
faith by obedience, preached only a covenant
of works: fie contended that the spirit of God
dwelt personally in good men, and by inward
revelations and impressions they received the
fullest discoveries of the divine will. The
fluency and confidence with which file delivered
these notions gained her many admirers and
proselytes, not only among the vulgar, but
among the principal inhabitants. The whole
colony was interested and agitated. Vane, whose
sagacity and acuteness seemed to foifake him
whenever they were turned towards religion,
espoused and defended her wildest tenets.
Many conferences were held, days of falling l637.

Their (Ioc-
and humiliation were appointed, a general fynod trincs con-

de i(mned by

was called, and, after dilfentions so violent as a.gc,,,'
threatened the dilTolution of the colony, Mrs. lynud.
IIutchinfon's opinions were condemned as erro-
neous, and she herself banished. Several of her
disciples withdrew from the province of their
own accord. Vane quitted America in difguff,
unlamented even by those who had lately
admired him ; fonue of whom now regarded him
as a mere visionary, and others as one of thole

dark

B o o K dark turbulent spirits doomed to embroil every

x. society into which they enter w

The fcaea- HOWEVER much there theological contests
ries fettle in
l'rovidcenc might disquiet the colony of MaIfachufets Bay,
and Rhode
Ihand. they contributed to the more speedy population

of America. When Williams was banished
from Salem in the year one thousand fix hundred
and thirty-four, such was the attachment of hi,
hearers to a paflor whose piety they revered,
that a good number of them voluntarily accom.
panied him in his exile. They direEted their
march towards the south; and having purchased
from the natives a considerable tra&t of land, to
which Williams gave the name of Providence,
they fettled there. They were joined soon after
by some of those to whom the proceedings
against Mrs. Hutchinson gave disgust; and by
a tranfation with the Indians they obtained a
right to a fertile island in Naraganfet Bay, which
acquired the name of Rhode Island. Williams
remained among them upwards of forty years,
refpeted as the father and the guide of the
colony which he had planted. His spirit differed
from that of the Puritans in Massachusets; it

w Mather, book vii. c. 3. Hutcliinfoti, p. 53. 74
Neal, p. I. 144. 165, &c. Chalincrs, p. 163.

was

was mild and tolerating; and having.ventured B o o K;
himself to rejeel eftabliflled opinions, he endea- x.
voured to secure the fame liberty to other men, Theiro
by maintaining, that the exercise of private dcrat;on.
judgment was a natural and sacred right; that
the civil magistrate has no compulsive jurisdiction
in the concerns of religion; that the punifhi
ment of any person on account of his opinions
was an encroachment on conscience, and an at
of perfecutionX. These humane principles he
intfilled into his followers; and all who felt or
dreaded oppression in other tettlements, resorted.
to a commniuity in which universal toleration
was known to be a fundamental maxim. In
the plantations of Providence and Rhode Island,
political union was established by voluntary afro-
ciation, and the equality of condition among
the members, as well as their religious opinions;
their form of government was purely demo-
cratical, the supreme power being lodged in
the freemen perlonally ailt'ebled. In this state
they remained until they were incorporated by
charter '.

To flinilar causes the colony of Connecticut Colony of
i, indebted for its origin. The rivalfiip between Cont'tt''

x N'ca; : !Iiil. ' N. I'l'. p. i. i.

I cit lllt iihstI, pI. 'l . N e' ll, ii. I.2)'. l)( . Sllu . ii.
*, 6, ac. ('hi!incr, t l. ii.

Mr.

o o o Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker, two favourite
x. ministers in the settlement of Massachusets ivy,

disposed the latter, who was least successful in
this contest for fame and power, to wilh for
some settlement at a diitance firom a competitor
by whom his reputation was eclipsed. A good
number of those who had imbibed Mrs. Hutchin.
son's notions, and were oflended at such as
combated them, offered to accompany him.
Having employed proper persons to explore the
country, they pitched upon the weft fide of the
great river Connecicut as the most inviting
itation; and in the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and thirty-fix, about an hundred persons,
with their wives and families, after a fatiguing
march of many days through woods and swamps,
arrived there, and laid the foundation of the
towns of Hartford, Springfield, and Weather.
field. This settlement was attended with pecu.
liar irregularities. Part of the district now
occupied lay beyond the limits of the territory
granted to the colony of Maflachulfets Bay, and
yet the emigrants took a comiilion from the
governor and court of aiilltants, empowering
them to exercile juriuliction in that country.
The Dutch from Manhados or New York, ha'-
ing dilcovercd the river Conneciicur, and cita-
blifhed some trading houses upon it, had acquired
all the right that prior polnilion confcis. Lord

,tay

Say and Sele and Lord Brook, the heads of two B o o I;
illustrious families, were so much alarmed at the x.
arbitrary measures of Charles I. both in his civil
and ecclefiaflical adnininifiration, that they took a
resolution, not unbecoming young men of noble
birth and liberal fentinments, of retiring to the
Newv World, in order to enjoy such a form of
religion as they approved of, and those liberties
which they deemed eifential to the well-being of
society. They too fixed on the banks of the
(Connecticut as their place of settlement, and had
taken poflbtion, by building a fort at the mouth of
the river, which, from their united names, was
called Say Brook. The emigrants from Mafia-
chufets, without regarding either the defects in
iheir own right or the pretensions of other
claimants, kept pofiefion, and proceeded with
vigour to clear and cultivate the country. By
legrecs they got rid of every competitor. The
Dutch, recently lettled in America, and too
feeble to cngage in a war, peaceably withdrew
i'oin Connt. .icut. Lord Say and Sele and Lord
Biroolk made over to the colony whatever title
thly might have to any lands in that region.
Society was established by a voluntary compact of
the freelmen ; and thoughl they soon disclaimed
all dependence on the colony of Maffachufcts
itly, thcy retaincd luclh veneration for its legifla-
tive v. ililoim as to adopt a form of government

nearly

B o o K nearly resembling its inflitutions, with refped

x. both to civil and ecclefiallical policy. At a

subsequent period, the colony of Conneticut
was likewise incorporated by royal charter z.

of New THE history of the first attempts to people
aindiMai the provinces of New Hampshire and Main,

which form the fourth and most extensive divi.
sion in New England, is obscure and perplexed,
by the interfering claims of various proprietors.
The company of Plymouth had inconsiderately
parcelled out the northern part of the territory
contained in its grant among different persons:
of these only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain
Mason seem to have had any serious intention
to occupy the lands allotted to them. Their
efforts to accomplish this were meritorious and
persevering, but unsuccessful. The expence of
fettling colonies in an uncultivated country
must necessarily be great and immediate; the
prolpect of a rrcurn is often uncertain and
always remote. The funds of two private
adventurers were not adequate to such an under-
taking. Nor did the planters whom they sent
out poflels that principle of enthufiafh, which
animated their neighbours of Nalalachulets with

z lilitclillronl, p. 4 &c., <. i

,17. Doug;l, i.

.
15',, &c. C'lah m'r'' Aim hl;i,~ oh. 12.

i'.[; ir,

Vigour, to struggle through all the hardships B o o K
and dangers to which society, in its infancy, is x.
exposed in a savage land. Gorges and Mason,
it is probable, muff have abandoned their design,
if, from the fame motives that settlements had
been made in Rhode Island and Connecticut,
colonifs had not unexpecedly migrated into
New Hampshire and Main. Mr. Wheelwright,
a miniser of some note, nearly related to Mrs.
iHutchinfon, and one of her most fervent admi-
rers and partisans, had on this account been
banished from the province of Maffach ufets Bay 3.
In quest of a new station, he took a course oppo-
site to the other exiles; and advancing towards
the north, founded the town of Exeter, on a
small river flowing into Pifkataqua Bay. His
followers, few in number, but firmly united,
were of such rigid principles, that even the
churches of Massachusets did not appear to them
sufficiently pure. From time to time they
received tome recruits, whom love of novelty,
or diffatisfaftion with the ecclesiastical institutions
of the other colonies, prompted to join them.
Their plantations were widely difpcrfed, but the
country was thinly peopled, and its political state
extremely unsettled. The colony of Maffachu-
sets Bay claimed jurifdidtion over them, as occu-

IHutcllinfon, p. 7s.
VOL. IV. X pying

..B o K pying lands situated within the limits of their

x. grant. Gorges and Mason asserted the rights

conveyed to them as proprietors by their charter.
In several diftrits the planters, without regarding
the pretensions of either party, governed them.
selves by maxims and laws copied from those of
their brethren in the adjacent colonies b. The
first reduction of the political conflitution in the
provinces of New Hampshire and Main into a
regular and permanent form, was subsequent to
the Revolution.

BY extending their settlements, the Englilf

became exposcd to new danger. The tribes of
Indians around Massachusets Bay were feeble
and unwarlike; yet from regard to justice, as
well as motives of prudence, the first colonifis
were studious to obtain the content of the natives
before they ventured to occupy any of their
lands; and though in such tranfadtions tIrc
consideration given was often very inadequate to
the value of the territory acquired, it was ufili.
cient to satisfy the demands of the proprietors.
'rl I.!,FT- lihe Ilnglifih toolk quiet poiffflion of the laindsi

.,, thus conveyed to thlemn, and no open ofloiliiy

,liil¢ 1i i' broke out between theml and the ancient polL'!-

I ]li,- ;ti
', j,..,

I Iltttiiiii.ifi, p. In3, &c. 176. Doughli:;'s Som. ;

2., c,.. C.lIimci' Ania;l,
ci. 17.

futr'

fors. But the colonies of Providence and Con- n o o iK
neticut soon found that they were surrounded x
by more powerful and martial nations. Among " '~
these the most considerable were the Naraganfets
and Pequods; the former feated on the Bay
which bears their name, and the latter occupy-
ing the territory which stretches from the river
Pequod along the banks of the Connecticut.
The Pequods were a formidable people, who
could bring into the field a thousand warriors,
not inferior in courage to any in the New World.
They foresaw, not only that the extermination
of the Indian race must be the consequence of
permitting the English to spread over the contie
nent of America, but that if measures were not
speedily concerted to prevent it, the calamity
would be unavoidable. With this view they
applied to the Naraganfets, requesting them to
forget ancient animofities for a moment, and to
co-operate with them in expelling a common
enemy who threatened both with derruCtioin.
They represented that, when those firangers first
landed, the object of their visit was not fuliflced,
and no proper precautions were taken to check
their progress; that now, by fending out colo-
nies in one year towards three diflerent quarters,
their intentions were manifict, and the people of
America muff abandon their native fears to make
way for unjust intruders.

x z Br'?

B o K BUT the Naraganfets and Pequods, like mofi

x. of the contiguous tribes in America, were rivals,
*""' and there subsisted between them an hereditary

and implacable enmity. Revenge is the darlinr
pafion of savages; in order to secure the indulg.
ence of which there is no present advantage that
they will not sacrifice, and no future consequence

War with which they do not totally disregard. The Nara-
the Pequod

it. ganfets, instead of closing with the prudent pro.

pofal of their neighbours, discovered their hostile
intentions to the governor of Mafiachufets Bay;
and, eager to lay hold on such a favourable
opportunity of wreaking their vengeance on their
ancient foes, entered into an alliance with the
Englifl against them. The Pequods, more
exasperated than discouraged by the imprudence
and treachery of their countrymen, took the
field, and carried on the war in the usual mode
of Americans. They surprised stragglers, and
scalped then ; they plundered and burnt remote
ettl]einntS ; they attacked Fort Say Brook
without success, though garrisoned only by
twenty men ; and when the English began tc
act ofinrfively, they retired to fafineffes which
they deemed inacceflible. The different colonies
had agreed to unite against the common enelmy
cach furnishing a quota of men in proportion t
its numbers. The troops of Conneticut, whicI
lay molt cxpofld to danger, were Ibon afiembled

TIno

The march of those from Massachusets, which n o o K
formed the most considerable body, was retarded x-
by the most singular cause tlat ever influenced
the operations of a military force. When they Purification

of thc aD'y

were mustered previous to their departure, it
was found that omen of the officers, as well as
of the private ioidiers, were lill under a cove-
nant of works; and that the blessing of God
could not be implored or expected to crown the
arms of such unhallowed men with success.
The alarm was general, and many ar angements
necefary in order to cast out the unclean, and to
rentler this little band fufriciently pure to fight the
battles of a people who entertained high ideas of
their own fanldity '.

MEANWHILE the Connecticut troops, rein- Defeat of
forced by a finall detachment from Say Brook, t'c nd'a.S.
found it neccffary to advance towards the enemy.
They were posted on a rising ground, in the
iiddle of a swamp towards the head of the river
Milftick, which they had surrounded with pali-
[adoes, the best defence that their ilender fIcill
n the art of fortification had dilcovered. Though
hey knew that the English were in motion, yet,
,ith the usual improvidence and iecurity of
iarages, they took no measures either to observe

c Neal, i. 163.

x 3 their

3 o o K their progress, or to guard against being fur.

x. prifed themselves. The enemy, unperceived,
May20. reached the palifadoes; and if a dog had not

given the alarm by barking, the Indians muff
have been massacred without reiftance. In a
moment, however, they started to arms, and
raising the war-cry, prepared to repel the .flail.
ants. But at that early period of their inter.
course with the Europeans, the Americans were
little acquainted with the use of gunpowder,
and dreaded its effeds extremely. While ibme
of the Englifl galled them with an incessant fire
through the intervals between the palildoes,
others forced their way by the entries into the
fort, filled only with branches of trees; and
letting fire to the huts which were covered with
reeds, the confusion and terror quickly became
general. Many of the women and children
perished in the flames; and the warriors, in
endeavouring to escape, were either slain by tle
Englifhl, or falling into the hands of their
Indian allies, who surrounded the fort at a
distance, were reserved for a more cruel tfle,
After the juntion of the troops frolm Maflh.
chufets, the English resolved to pursue their
victory; and hunting the Indians from one
place of retreat to another, lomne fibfeqlucnt
encountcrs were hardly les fatal to them tlhn
thc actiun on the Miflick. In less than tlircL

moln'.

months the tribe of Pequods was extirpated: a B o o K
few miserable fugitives, who took refuge among sx
the neighbouring Indians, being incorporated by
them, loft their name as a diftint people.
In this firit essay of their arms, the colonifis of Cru'eltie

c xer rcied
New England seem to have been conduced by naginft tll

Indians,

skilful and enterprising officers, and displayed
both courage and perseverance as soldiers. But
they stained their laurels by the use which they
made of victory. Instead of treating the Pequods
as an independent people, who made a gallant
effort to defend the property, the rights, and
the freedom of their nation, they retaliated upon
them all the barbarities of American war. Some
they massacred in cold blood, others they gave
up to be tortured by their Indian allies, a confi-
derable number they fold as slaves in Bermudas,
the reft were reduced to servitude among them.
selves '.

BUT reprehensible as this condud of the Emigrations

English muff be deemed, their vigorous efforts land.
in this decisive campaign filled all the surround-
ing tribes of Indians with such an high opinion
of their valour as fccured a long tranquillity to

(' IIutchinfon, p. 58. 76, &c. Mathicr, Magnalia,
b. vii. ch, 6. Hubbard's Stati of N. Eng. p. 5. 16, &c.

x 4 all

B3 o O K all their settlements. At the fame time the

x. violence of administration in England continued

to increase their population and strength, by
forcing many refpeEable fubjers to tear them,
selves from all the tender connections that bind
men to their native country, and to fly for
refuge to a region of the New World, which
hitherto presented to them nothing that could
allure them thither but exemption from oppref.

Prohibited sion. The number of those emigrants drew
by royal
proclama- the attention of government, and appeared so
tion' formidable, that a proclamation was issued,

prohibiting masters of ships from carrying pas.
fengers to New England without special per.
mission. On many occasions this injunction
was eluded or disregarded, Fatally for the
king, it operated with full effect in one instance.
Sir Arthur Haflerig, John Hampden, Oliver
Cromwell, and some other persons whose prin.
ciples and views coincided with theirs, impatient
to enjoy those civil and religious liberties which
they struggled in vain to obtain in Great Britain,
hired some ships to carry them and their attend-
ants to New England. By order of council, an
embargo was laid on there when on the point of
failing ; and Charles, far from fufpeding that
the future revolutions in his kingdoms were to
bc excited and direded by persons in such all

humble

humble sphere of life, forcibly detained the men B o o K
destined to overturn his throne, and to terminate x
his days by a violent death .

BUT, in spite of all the efforts of government

to check this spirit of migration, the measures
of the king and his ministers were confidered by
a great body of the people as so hostile to those
rights which they deemed most valuable, that in
the course of the year one thousand fix hundred
and thirty-eight, above three thousand persons
embarked for New England, choofing rather
to expose thenilelves to all the consequences of
disregarding the royal proclamation, than to
remain longer under opprefion. Exasperated
at this contempt of his authority, Charles had
recourse to a violent but effe&tual mode of
accomplishing what he had in view. A writ of
quo warralto was issued againfi the corporation of
Massachusets Bay. The colonists had conformed Colony of

Mafiaclhu-

so little to the terms of their charter, that ftts Biy
judgment was given against them without dimi- antcl'ft
culty. They were found to have forfeited all to^hav,':r
their rights as a corporation, which of course lmst1.
returned to the crown, and Charles began to
take measures for new-modelling the political

e Mather, Magnalia, b. i. ch. 5. p. 23. Neal's Hilt.
pfN. Eng. i. 15X. Challrner' Annlils, i. 155. 16o, &c.

frame

B o o K frame of the colony, and vefling the admiinfira,

x. tion of its affairs in other hands. But his plans

were never carried into execution. In every
corner of his dominions, the storm now began
to gather, which soon burst out with such fatal
violence, that Charles, during the remainder of
his unfortunate reign, occupied with domestic
and more interesting cares, had not leisure to
bestow any attention upon a remote and incon.
fiderable province f.

ON the meeting of the Long Parliament,

such a revolution took place in England, that
all the motives for migrating to the New World
ceased. The maxims of the Puritans with refpecd
to the government both of church and state,
became predominant in the nation, and were
enforced by the hand of power. Their oppref-
fors were humbled; that perfect system of
reformed polity, which had long been the object
of their admiration and desire, was established
by law ; and amidst the intrigues and conflicts of
an obstinate civil war, turbulent and aspiring
spirits found such full occupation, that they had
no inducement to quit a busy theatre, on which
they had risen to ad a most conspicuous parts

r IIutclinfon, p. 86. 502, &c. Clialmcr' Annals,

From

From the year one thousand fix hundred and B o o K
twenty, when the firfi feeble colony was con- x.
du&ted to New England by the Brownifs, to of te
the year one thousand fix hundred and forty, it colones at

thlislpcliod.

has been computed, that twenty-one thousand
two hundred British fubjefts had fettled there.
The money expended by various adventurers
during that period, in fitting out flips, in pur-
chafing ftock,and transporting fettlers,amounted,
on a moderate calculation, nearly to two hun-
dred thousand pounds g: a vail fumr in that age,
and which no principles, inferior in force to
those wherewith the Puritans were animated,
could have persuaded men to lay out, on the
uncertain profpec of obtaining an eftablifhiment
in a remote uncultivated region, which, from its
situation and climate, could allure them with no
hope but that of finingi subsistence and enjoying
freedom. For some years, even subsistence was
procured with difficulty ; and it was towards the
close of the period to which our narrative is
arrived, before the produC of the settlement
yielded the planters any return for their flock.
About that time they began to export corn in
finall quantities to the Weft Indies, and made
tbme feeble attempts to extend the fiflery,

c Mather, b ..

i .

c . .

4l. P. p.

. 23. I-Iitclhinl-
ioln, 1. I93 Chalmicrs' Annal;, p. 65.

and

B o o IK and to open the trade in lumber, which have

x. since proved the flaple articles of commerce

in the colony h. Since the year one thou-snd
fix hundred and forty, the number of people
with which New England has recruited the popu-
lation of the parent ltate, is supposed at least to
equal what may have been drained from it by
occasional migrations thither.

BUT though the sudden change of system in

Great Britain flopped entirely the influx of
settlers into New England, the principles of the
colonifls coincided so perfectly with those of the
popular leaders in parliament, that they were
tbon distinguished by peculiar marks of their

E:emption brotherly affetion. By a vote of the House of
t'"i' ('- Commons in the year one thousand fix hundred
g.thd too- and forty-two, the people in all the different

plantations of New England were exempted
from payment of any duties, either upon goods
exported thither, or upon those which they im-
ported into the mother country, until the House
I6.i6. ihall take farther order to the contrary. This was

afterwards confirmed by the authority of both
Houses. Encouraged by such an extraordinary
privilege, industry made rapid progress in all the
dillrifs of New England, and population in-

h iHutchlinfon, p. 9I, 92.

crcafed

creased along with it. In return for those B o o K
favours, the colonists applauded the measures of x.
parliament, celebrated its generous efforts to
vindicate the rights and liberties of the nation,
prayed for the success of its arms, and framed
regulations in order to prevent any exertion
in favour of the king on the other fide of the
Atlantic .

RELYING on the indulgent partiality with

which all their proceedings were viewed by men
thus closely united with them in sentiments and
swifles, the people of New England ventured on
a measure, which not only increased their fecu;-
rity and power, but may be regarded as a
considerable ftep towards independence. Under
the imprefiion or pretext of the danger to which
they were exposed from the surrounding tribes
of Indians, the four colonies of Maflachufets, ,c
Plymouth, ConneEticut, and Newhaven, entered cr,, l','
into a league of perpetual confederacy, oflenfive "racy'' e
and dcfenfive ; an idea familiar to several leading ,ind I1::'.
men in the colonies, as it was framed in imitation
of the famous bond of union among the 1)utch
provinces, in whose dominions the Brownifts had
long rcfided. It was flipulated, that the consei-
deratcs lhould henceforth be difLi1guinhed by

i IIultchilfoi, p r. Iq.. App. 51',. ('},ti,;i.-r *A,' n l';,
i. 174.. 176.

the

n o o I the name of the United Colonies of New Eng.

X. land; that each colony shall remain separate

and diftinc&, and have exclusive jurifdiclion
within its own territory; that in every war,
offensive or defensive, each of the confederates
shall furnish its quota of men, provisions, and
money, at a rate to be fixed from time to time,
in proportion to the number of people in each
settlement; that an assembly composed of two
commiflioners from each colony llall be held
annually, with power to deliberate and decide
in all points of common concern to the confede.
racy ; and every determination, in which fix of
.their number concur, {hail be binding on the
whole k. In this tranfa&ion the colonies of N\ew
England seem to have confidered themselves as
independent societies, poffefling all the rights of
sovereignty, and free from the control of any
superior power. The governing party in Eng-
land, occupied with affairs of more urgent
concern, and no wife iifpofed to observe the
conduc& of their brethren in America with any
jealous attention, suffered the measure to pals
without animadvcrfion.

MTMnOI.D1:NrI1n by this connivance, the spirit
of inidel)cndcnce gathered itrcngth, and soon

[I NcI1 il':1;1 . of N. F ,.

K. iiC. I

2 5 :c. Iulttlifon
p. l:4A. (Cilt:".' A ,. p. 17 7.

displaycd

displayed itself more openly: some persons of B o o K
note in the colony of Massachusets, averse to the x.
system of ecclesiastical polity established there,
and preferring to it the government and difci-
pline of the churches of England or Scotland,
having remonstrated to the general court against
the injustice of depriving them of their rights as 1646.
freemen, and of their privileges as Christians,
because they could not join as members with
any of the congregational churches, petitioned
that they might no longer be bound to obey
laws to which they, had not aflented, nor be
fubjeEt to taxes imposed by an assembly in
which they were not represented. Their de- Icetit:on of

-h~
t )ifs.nt-

mands were not only rejected, but they were CldbicaLdI
imprisoned and fined as disturbers of the public
peace; and when they appointed some of their
number to lay their grievances before parliament,
the annual court, in order to prevent this appeal
to the supreme power, attempted first to {cize
their papers, and then to obstruct their embark-
ation for England. But though neither of thcfe
could be accompliflied, such was the addrc.fs
and influence of the colonies' agents in England,
that no inquiry seems to have been made into
this tranfaclion . This w.ias followed by an

i Nc;l's HI- id. of N. F.g. i 213. Itiichi.'i,,n',. TIili.

145, &c. CollctM. iS', . Clia.

C Ain. Ain. 79. Matllicr

Iag'n;l, b ii;. .
. i; . . 30.

indication,

B o O K indication, fill less ambiguous, of the aspiring

x. fpilit prevalent among the people of Maffachu.
''c ~ sets. Under every form of government the right

of coining money has been confidered as a
prerogative peculiar to sovereignty, and which
no subordinate member in any'itate is entitled to

R65z. claim. Regardless of this established maxim,

Right of
coining the general court ordered a coinage of silver
aftumed by
tile coo-. money at BofRon, stamped with the name of

the colony, and a tree as an apt symbol of its
progrefiive vigourm. Even this usurpation
escaped without notice. The Independents,
having now humbled all rival feEts, engrossed
the whole direEtion of affairs in Great Britain ,
and long accuflomed to admire the government
of New England, framed agreeably to those
principles which they had adopted as the mofl
perfect model of civil and ecclesiastical polity,
they were unwilling to stain its reputation, by
censuring any part of its conduct.
Cromwell WHEN Cromwell usurped the supreme power,

'the Ne the colonies of New England continued to itand
ingland as high in his estimation. As he had deeply

imbibed all the fanatical notions of the Independ-
ents, and was perpetually surrounded by the

m Hutchinson's I-lit. 177, 178. Chlimlncrs' Annalils
p. 181.

nmoc

most eminent and artful teachers of that fed, B o o K
he kept a conflant correspondence with the lead- x.
ing men in the American settlements, who seem
to have looked up to him as a zealous patron".
He in return confidered them as his most devoted
adherents, attached to him no less by affetion
than by principle. He soon gave a striking
proof of this. On the conquest of Jamaica, he Pxoporcs to
formed a scheme for the security and improve- tt'lcco -
ment of the acquisition made by his vicorious 'jiaita
arms, suited to the ardour of an impetuous spirit
that delighted in accomplishing its ends by
extraordinary means. He propoled to transport
the people of New England to that island, and
employed every argument calculated to make
impreiflon upon them, in order to obtain their
consent. He endeavoured to rouse their reli-
gious zeal by representing what a fatal blow it
would be to the man of fin, if a colony of the
faithful were fettled in the inidr: of his territories
in the New World. lIe allured them with pro-
i)eds of immense wealth in a fertile region,
which would reward the industry of thole vwho
cultivated it, with all the precious produ&cions
of the torrid zone, and cxpreffed his fervent
wifli that they might take poleflion of it, in
order to fulfil God's promise of making his

IIutciiiifol, App. 520, &c. Collkct. p. 233.
VOL. Iv, Y people

B o o K people the head and not the tail. He affurei

x. them of being supported by the whole force of
'""''~ his authority, and of vesting all the powers no

colonies government entirely in their hands. But by
accpting this time the colonists were attached to a country
this offr in which they had resided for many years, and

where, though they did not attain opulence,
they enjoyed the comforts of life in great abund.
ance; and they dreaded so much the noxious
climate of the Weft Indies, which had proved
fatal to a great number of the English who first
fettled in Jamaica, that they declined, though in
the most refpeaful terms, closing with the
ProteEtor's proposition °.

Hutchinson, p. 9go, &c. Chalmers, p. 188.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'

~\ ' -' ~
/\ o'óI

Leo:.ó

i1'"',:'I I'i9

o - (^ '~-:: ~ s-» ""

"~'~

) 'f',-t'- -'-^"^'1"

,.k ,',,:

,x

~~~~~~-.:.......^ ~A &^^ ' 7<'.'

,>,
-. l- l ~ IC7

^ nr. ,,j^''-S^ , .- -P

.}--' .Pj' ,)_

_ _.'

^n^~~~~ ~~, 2L-7::. ^ , _,, ,iV ,^ , -

"''-'. ,, , , "
r'y^A^ ^^ ~/-..-,./ . x., C',- .i ._\ :-., //,I, ' , ' ___^A^=^

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,4^ LA^,

' - '*IJ"~,1 ~ -('!,

.,~ ~ ~ ~ ~

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~/

r-~i IX

,- . _ ../-,\(^

7^^- --~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,'y-,. .^*.... . '/
' ,^ ., _ , (Jr-^

1 '} r" *' ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'-'

,0^X

-' (

, p,

-

,,v,, ,,,,u,,

* \\] , ' ,,,

-J / \ \ ~~ ~~

~~~~~~~~~~ //..j-- L /.,X.. ',t" ,

i N ' ,^ i.P/ C

-, D

, ..,c/77-T

J,/ t,,, - r I ,//; ,',,//

..

,. .,,'

.,, k-- ,;,

"^~ ~ ~~~~~~C;u%

/~

''* ^ /r ^"*i" -^ Ss

L -- --

^,^

_ ^ ^,,,,^ ,,/ , ^ ^ ^
__ ________.»7. ..^

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S
NOTES

AND
I L L UST RATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 5.

P. TORRnIB1O dc Bcnevente, or Motolinca, has cnu-
omerated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of
Iexico, to which he gives the name of the Ten
Plagues. Many of these arc not peculiar to that pro-
\ilnce. i. The introduction of the finall-pox. This
disease was first brought into New Spain in the year
1520, by a negro-flave who attcnded Narvaez in his
cxpedition against Cortes. Torribio afirnis, that one
half of the people in the provinces visited with this
ditllcmper died. To this mortality occasioned by the
fiaall-pox, Torquecilaa adds the tldcfruclive efsccts of
two contagious diflempers which raged in the year
1545 and 1576. In the former, 800,ooo; in the
l.tter, above two millions perilhctd, according to an
exad account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon.

i. iu .

i. 42. The finll-pox was not introduccd into

Peru for several years after the invalion of the Spa-
niards, but there too that difteniper proved very fatal
to the n;atives. Garcia Origen, p. 88. 2. '.1'h
numbers wilo were killed or died of famine in thiiir

Y 2 war

war with the Spaniards, particularly during the isclr'
of Mexico. 3. The great famine that followed after
the reduction of Mexico, as all the people engaged,
either on one fide or other, had neglcctcd the culti-
vation of their lands. Something similar to this hap-
pened in all the other countries conquered by the
Spaniards. 4. The grievous talks inmpofcd by the
Spaniards upon the people belonging to their Reparti-
mientos. 5. The oppressive burden of taxes which
they were unable to pay, and from which they could
hope for no exemption. 6. The numbers employed in
collecting the gold carried down by the torrents from
the mountains, who were forced from their own habit-
ations, without any provision made for their subsist-
ence, and fulbjcced to all the rigour of cold in those
elevated regions. 7. The immense labour of rebuild-
ing Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such precipi-
tate ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of
people. 8. The number of people condemned to
servitude, under various pretexts, and employed in
working the silver mines. These, marked by ench
proprietor with a hot iron, like his cattle, were driven
in herds to the mountains. The nature of the labour
to which they were fubjeded there, the noxious
vapours of the mines, the coldness of the climate, and
scarcity of food, were so fatal, that Torribio aflirnls,
the country round fcveral of those mines, particularly
near Guaxago, was covered with dead bodies, the air
corrupted with their flench, and so man;y vultures, and
other voracious birds, hovered about for their prey,
that the lfun was darkened with their flight. 1o. The
Spaniards, in the different expeditions which they
unle'took, and by the civil wars which they carried (1o

6 d ct roy,'

dcftroyed many of the natives whom they compelled to
serve them as Tamnelnes, or carriers of burdens. Thli;
last mode of oppreflion was particularly ruinous to the
Peruvians. From the number of Indians who periflced
in Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to
the east of the Andes, one may form some idea of
what they fufftred in similar services, and how fast they
were wafted by them. Torribio, MS. Corita in his
Breve y Summaria Relacion, illustrates and confirms
several of Torribio's observations, to which he refers.
MS. peIes m1.

NOTE II. p. 6.

EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii.

c. 18. But the passion of that great man for systen
sometimes rendered him inattentive to research ; and
from his capacity to refine, he was apt, in some
instances, to overlook obvious and just causes.

NOTE III. p. 6.

1A STRONr proof of tliis occurs in the tcfiament oi
l;itbella, where lhe discovers tli milot tender concern
lor the humanel and mild ulage of tle Indians. Those
htldable fentiinints of the quCen Ihave been adopted
iLto the public law of Spain, and serve as the intro-
(duilion to the regulations conltailld und.er the title of'
l/', g')o[(l r' ,! tl r: ,/' / / I.'t' Il/ i/i, . IRe upil. lib. vi.
tit. x.

NOTE IV. p. 9.

TN the ficunth itle of the firfr book of the Reccpi-

lacri:, which contains thc laws concerning the power.
and fundtions of archbifilops and bishops, almorf a
third pn-t of them rcl:its to what is incumbent upon
them, as guardia.ns of the Indians, and points out tli
various methods in which it is their duty to interpofi',
in order to defend them from opprefflon, either with
respect to their persons or property. Not only do thc
laws commit to them this honourable and humane
office, but the ceclefiatlics of America actually exercifl
it.

INXcUMrAlABI.E proofs of this might be producc'

from Spanifl authors. But I rather refer to Gage, aq
lie was not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popifli
clergy, to which thev were not fully entitled. Survey,
p. 142. 192, &c. Henry I-awks, an English mer-
chant, who resided five years in New Spain, previous
to the year I 52, gives the fame favourable account of
tile popilh clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466. By a law of
Charles V. not only bishops, but other ecclesiastics, arc
empowered toinform and admonish the civil Inagiflra;tcs,
if any Indian is deprived of his just liberty and rights,
Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley 14 : and thus were con-
iituted lcgul protect-ors of the Indians. Some of the
Spanlilh ecelefiall-ics refused to grant absolution to ulil
ufi tliiir countrymen as lpoflefld Eliomiectils, andl
confidered the Indians as slaves, or employed them in
workinl their mines. Conz. Davil. Teatro Eccl'.
i, 157.

NOTE V. p. Io.

ACCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains

4000 families; and he mentions it only as one of the
largest Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE VI. p. io.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of

the state of population in those kingdoms of Europe
where the police is most perseet, and where fcicnce
has made the greatest progress. In Spanish America,
where knowledge is still in its infancy, and few men
have leisure to engage in researches merely speculative,
little attention has been paid to this curious inquiry.
But in the year 1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys
and governors of the several provinces in America, to
make an actual furvcy of the people under their jurif-
diftion, and to transmit a report concerning their
number and occupations. In confequlnce of this
Crrdcr, the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain,
appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Viila Scgnor y Sanchcz,
to execute that commiflion in New Spain. From the
reports of the magistrates in tle fcvcral dilric-is, as
well as from his own observations, and long acquaint-
ance with moss of the provinces, Villa Scgnor publified
the result of his inquiries in his Ticaeto A.fi:r.'no. Iis
report, however, is imperfred. Of the nine diocetcs,
into which the Mexican cempire has been divided, lie
f[as publiflicd all account of live only, viz. the arch-
lbinlopric of' Me\xco, the bl)ilioplics of Puebla de los

I 4, AngL,:js,

Angeles, Mecchoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galie.l.
The bishoprics of Yucatan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and
Guatimala; , are cntircly omitted, tlough the twvo
latter comprehend countries in which tiie Indian race
is more nulllmrous tlhanl in any part of New Spain. In
his furvcv of the cxtnllive diocefc of Nova Galicia,
the situation of the dififrent Indian villiges is dcfcrihcel,
but lhe fpecilies the number of people only in a filnal
part of it. The Indians of that extensive province, ii;
whiich the Spanifil dominion is imperfecity eftabliflied,
are not regittercd witlh tlhe faime accuracy as in other
parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, tlih
actual state of population in the five diocese,. above
mentioned is, of Spaniards, negrocs, mulattoes, ami
mcltizos, in the diocefcs of

Fanili:i..

Mexico - - - 105,2c:
Los Angeles - - - 30,62o
Mechoacan - -- 30, 8tc,
Oaxaca - - - 7,296
Nova Galicia - - - 16,770

190,708
At the rate of five to a family, the total

tnumber is - - - 93,540

Intia;n families in the dioccfe of Mexico i r9,( I
Los Angeles - - - 88,2|')
Mcclioac:a - - - 36, 96
Oaxac: - - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - - 6, 22

29.1,3A

At

At the rate of five to a family, the total number i..
1,471,955. We may rely with greater certaintv on
this computation of the number of Indians, as it is
n.ken from the lfl;ir-icul, or regifler, accordinlg to
which thi, tribute paid by them is collected. As four
,dioceses of nine are totally omitted, and in tlhat of
Nova Gilicia the nlmbers are imperfel-ly recorded,
we mav conclude, that the number of indians in the
Mexican empirc exceeds two miiions.

TIEr account of tlie number of Sp:aniard:;, &c.

seems not to be equal!y complete. Cf m aiv places,
Villa S enor obfcrves in general terms, that several
Spaniards, negrocs, and people of mixed race, rcfide
there, without specifying their number. If, therefore,
we make allowance for these, and for all whlo resile in
ihe four dioceses omitted, the number of Spani.rds,
and of those of a mixed race, may probably amount to
a million and a half. In `ome places, Villa Segrior
diftinguiflies between Spaniards and the three inferior
races of negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, and marks
their number fcp.iratcly. But he generally blends
rlhem together. But from tlhe proportion obfcrvable
in tliofe places, where the nlumber of each is marked,
as well as froln the account of the itate of population
in New Spain by other authors, it is anifellt that the
1number of negroes and persons of a mixed race fir
exceeds that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought
not to be reckoned above 5oo0,o0 to a million of the
former.

Dl rl:c \vi~. as tliis :a counlt lma y be, I have not been

B'Il .
to pro. flire Iue iitcl!igcn'I CL(ICCernIlillg the Inulm er

of

of people in Peru, as might enable me to form anv
conjecture equally satisfying with refpe& to the degree
of its population. I have been informed, that in the
year 1761, the protecor of the Indians in the vice.
royalty of Peru computed that 1i2,780 paid tribute
to the king. As all femalks, a,.d persons under age,
are exempted from this tax mii P.iu, the total number
of Indians ought by that account to be 2,449,120.
MS. pel es ine.

I SHAIL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess, concerning the state
of population in New Spain and Peru. According to
an account which I have reason to confider as accurate,
the number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported
to Peru on each new publication, is 1,171,953; to
New Spain, 2,649,326. I am informed, that but
few Indians purchase bulls, and that they are fold
chiefly to the Spanif-l inhabitants, and those of mixed
race ; so that the number of Spaniards, and people of a
mixed race, will anmount, by this mode of computation,
to at Icaf tlhcc millions.

Ti:. number of inhabitants in many of the towns

in Spanili America may give us some idea of the
extent of population, and correct the inaccurate, but
popular notion entertained in Great Britain, concern-
inr the we.iL :aid dlefolate slate of their colonies. Th'
city of viexico contains at Iafl 15o0,000 people. It
is r,:m.lrkAl.l ; that Torquemlada, wh o wrote Ins
Illiisllniqi l],.i ,rta about the year 1612, reckons the
inlll;biti.in; Us I\cxico at that time to be only 7000
Sp.uinilr.il. anid Scoo idLiauns. Lib. iii. c. 26. 1.Pucbia

. 1c:

de los Angeles contains above 6o,ooo Spaniards, and
people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247. Gua-
dalaxara contains above 30,000, exclusive of Indian;.
I3. ii. 206. Lima contains 54,000. D. Cofinc Bueno
Defcr. de Peru, 1764. Carthagena contains 2 ,000ooo.
Potofi contains 25,000. Bueno, 1767. Popayan con-
tains above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns of a second
class are still more numerous. The cities in tlhe mol
rhriving settlements of other European nations in
America cannot be compared with these.

SUCH are the detached accounts of the number of

people in several towns, which1 I found scattered in
authors whom I thought worthy of credit. But I
have obtained an enumeration of the inhabitants of the
towns in the province of Q nito, on the accuracy of
which I can rely; and I communic;te it to the Paublic,
both to gratify curiosity, and to retlify the mifiaken
notion which I have mentioned. St. Francisco de
Quito contains bctween so and 6o,ooo people of all
the different races. Besides the city, there are in the
C(rrenimiento 29 curas or parifles etlablilhed in the
principal villages, each of which has fimaller hamlets
depending upon it. The inhabitants (F, thelf arc
mofily Indians and MIclkliyos. St. .Ju1l de P:.flo has
between 6 and 8000 inhabitants, belides 27 dp!ce)nnt
villages. St. Miguel de Ibarra 7000 citizens, and tel!
villages. 'I'lh diltriil of Ilavala between i S and
20,0oo people. Tle dilfrijt of TIau ina betweec
10 and 12,ooo. 'he dilli(ri. of An,l):o between
8 anld 10,Go0 , l lides 16 dcpenlii ;. vill:T.'es. The
(ity of Riobail,:l ll ('t'e (i .T1d Ol ".,Q oilallitants,
. )nl (i &L'p ll'li l i' ll i.'c ' I lh c illli l nil C liiltn o

between 6 and 8000. The city of Guyaquil from ir
to 2o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. The
diftric of Atuafi between 5 and 6000 inhabitants,
and 4 depcnding villages. The city of Cucnza be-
tween 25 and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9 populous
depending villages. The town of Laxa from 8 to
Io,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. Tlhii
degree of population, though slender, if we confider
the vast extent of the country, is far beyond what is
commonly supposed. I have omitted to mention, in
its proper place, that Quito is the only province in
Spanifli America that can be denominated a manufac-
turing country ; hats, cotton stuffs, and coarse woollen
cloths, are made there in such quantities, as to be
fuflicient not only for the consumption of the province,
but to furniih a considerable article for exportation
into other parts of Spanirli America. I know not
whether the uncommon industry of this province
flould be confidered as the cause or the effect of its
populousness. But among the ostentatious inhabit-
ants of the New World, the passion for everything
that comes from IEurox: is so violent, that I am
informed the malnufaclurcs of Qtito are so much
undecrvaluc(ld as to be on the decline.

NOTE VII. p. I6.

''ilrlsi:. are eclallified at the following places. Sr.

)Doningo in the illl ml of Hilfpaniolla, SMxico in Newv
Spain, ,ima in Peru, Panamla in Tierra lirme, Sain-
tiago in ((;:itim:la,, Ciuadalax:lra in New Galici:t,
Salnta Vc iln tl New Kinrlu(tiii of (;iraniadl, La Il.it.
in the cmuitry of Lo.; Clharcas, St. Francisco de Q3!ito,

St. Jago dc Chili, Buenos Ayres. To cach of these
are fulbjc :eel fcvcral large provinces, and tome so far
removed from the cities where the courts are fixed,
thit tl;: ' can ','rive little benefit from their jurifdic-
tion. 'h.: Spanifli writers commonly reckon up twelve
conrts of Audience, but thcy include that of Manila in
the Philippine Islands.

NOTE VIII. p. 25.

ON account of the distance of Peru and Chili from

Spain, and the dlificultv of carrying commodities of
such bulk as wiln- and oil across t',:. iftlhinus of Pnanma,
tle Spaniards in those provincc;, ';ave been permitted
to plant vines and olives. But they are ftrrtly prohi-
bited from cxporting wine or oil to any of the provinces
on the Pacific Ocean, wlicih are il such a situ-. tion
as to receive them from Spain. Recop. lib. i. tit. xvii.
1. i5-I8.

NOTE IX. p. 27.

THIS computation was made by Bcn7oni, A.I).

1550, fifty-cight years after thle (difetvey of America.
Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. .1ut as lici oni wrolt
with the spirit of a m;alcolintent, (ifpofeli to dctralEt
from the Spaniards ill every particular, it is probable
thait his calculation is confidcrabilly too lorw.

NOTE X. p. 28.

iMlY information with refpec to the division arn:'

transmission of property in the Spaniflh colonies is im-
perses-. The Spanish authors do not explain tlis
fully, and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to the
effeCts of their own institutions and laws. Solorzano
de Jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. 16. explains in fomemca-
sure the introduCtion of the tenure of Mlayorafgo, an,'
mentions some of its effeCts. Villa Segnor takes notice
of a singular consequence of it. He observes, that in
some of the belt situations in the city of Mexico, ;
good deal of ground is unoccupied, or covered only
with the ruins of the hloufes once erected upon it; anl.
adds, that as this ground is held by right of Ayn!:r-
.fgo, and cannot be alienated, that desolation anm(
those ruins become perpetual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i.
P. 34-

NOTE XI. p. 31.

TI-IRE is no law that excludes Creoles froni olsicc

cither civil or ecclcfiaftic. On the contrary, there arc
many (Cedulas which recommicnd the conferring places
of trult indiscriminately on the natives of Spain and
America. Betancurt y Figucroa Derecho, &c. p. 5,
6. But notwithi:liiding such repeated reconmmcndl-
ations, preferment in almo{l every line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is pro-
ducel by the author lafl quoted. From the discovery
of A inerie. to thie year 1637 , three hundred and sixty-
nine bilil, p:, or arrclbifliop, have been anppointed to

ib-

rte different dioceses in that country, and of all that
number only twelve were Creoles, p. 40. This predi-
letion for Europeans seems still to continue. By a
royal mandate, issued in I7/76, the chapter of the
cathedral of Mexico is dire&cd to nominate European
ecclefaflics of known merit and abilities, that the king
may appoint them to supply vacant benefices. MS.
penes me.

NOTE XII. p. 37.

MODERATE as this tribute may appear, fucl is the

extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces of
America, that the exacting of it is intolerably oppref-
five. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE XIII. p. 38.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit

and services of the first conquerors, as well as the imall
revenue arising from the country previous to the disco-
very of the mines of Sacatecas, the ecoi'nilrdas were
granted for three, and foinetimes for four lives. Rcco-
pil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE XIV. p. 40.

D. ANT. ULLOA contends, that working in mines is

not noxious, and as a protof of this informs us, that
manly Mestizos and llwli:;ll, wlho do not belong to any
Rcpartimiento, voluntarily hire themiflves as minlers;
and several of the Inili:is, when the legal term of
their service expires, co'ltill te to work in the mines of

choice.

choice. Entrlelel. p. 265. But his opinion conccrning,
the wholesomeness of this occupation is contrlarv t,
the experience of all ages; and wherever nicii anr
allured by high wages, they will engalge in any fpecic,
of labour, however fatiguing or pernicious it may be.
D. Hern. Carillo Altemirano relates a curious fact
incompatible with this opinion. Wherever mines ar:
wrought, fays he, the number of Indians deercafes;
but in the province of Campeachy, where there are no
mines, the number of Indians has incrcafed more than
a third fincc the conquest of America, though neither
the foil nor climate be so favourable as in Peru or
I\'Icxico. Colbcrt Collec. In another memorial pre-
sented to Philip III. in the year I609, Captain Juan
Gonzalez de Azevedo afierts, that in every (tiflrict of
Peru, where the Indians arc compelled to labour il
the mines, their numbers were reduced to the half,
and in some places to tle third, of what it was undtcr
tile viccroyalty of Don Fran. Toledo iln I 8. Colb.
Collec.

NOTE XV. p. 40.

As labour of tlis kind cannot be prc frilbcd v:i:i

legal accuracy, the talks fCcm to be in a great ,n._:-
firc arbitrary, land like the services exadled by feuii,
fuipcriors, in , 'inea pra/o aunt inffi', fronl their vafi>l.,
are extremely burdensome, and often wantonly opprlll-
fivc. PegIla Itiner. par Parochos dc Ildlios.

NOTE XVI. p. 41.

'HE turn of fcrvice known in Peru by the name of
lita, is callel ilanlri in New Spain. There it con-
tinues no longer than a week at a time. No person is
called to serve at a greater distance from his habitation
than 24 miles. This arrangement is less oppreflive to
the Indians than that eftablifled in Pert. Merno;-ial
of I-Icrn. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Colledt.

NOTE XVII. p. 44.

THr. strongest proof of this may be deduced from
the laws thcmfelves. By the multitude and variety of
regulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
the number of abuses that prevail. Though the laws
have wifely provided that no Indian flmall be obliged to
serve in any mine at a greater distance from his place
cf residence than thirty miles; we are informed, in a
nmemorial of 1). Hlrnan Carillo Altamirano prefclnted
to the king', that the Indians of Peru are often com-
pelled to serve in mines at the dliitance of a hundred,
a hiundred and lifty, anld evcml tw o ihuindred leagues
from their Ihaitation. Colbe:rt CoIllet. Manv minell
:!r( f.iu:itcd ill parts of the country so barrenl, and I
dilllant from the ordinary hmbitation., of the J Itdi;ms,
thalt thle nieell y of procuirinll lahnourcrs to work there
lh, onlh'llrgd thie Spiitiih mo;iarlcs to difpeni-l with their
own regulat ioni i n fvecral ilif:liae ;, aind to permit the
;i.croys; to compel tie pop,'U of o101 remote pIrvillnceC
1i rIrl'rt to thole minel:. 1le;alona Gazophlyl. Perub.

\ o, . :v,.. lib.

lib. i. c. i6. But in juflice to them it fliould ce
obfcrvcd, that they have been studious to alleviate tii;
opprcerion as nmuch as polliblc, by enjoining the viccrov.
to employ ever mcthlli)d, ill o:dcr to i(iuce the I(ndi -
to flttlc in fin :i paart of the country adjacenlt to t:
minlics. Id. illi'.

NOTE XVtIII. P' 49.

IORtlrI.MADAi, alfter a l!on cnumierrtion, which Ini

the appearancc of accuracy, conludcIl; thle 1nulllLc
of mlonllliries in New Spain to be four Iiund(lre(.
Mon. I nd. lib. xix . c. 32. 'T'i nunlber of nimoaiieric
in the city of ecxico alone was, in the year I74.;,
fifty-fivc. Villa Segnor. TIheat. Amer. i. 34. Ullo.:
reckons up forty convents in Lima ; and mentionini
those for nuns, lie savs, that a finall tovwn might be
peopled out of them, the number of persons fiut up
tlicre is so great. Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a lcttci
to the viceroy of Peru, A.1). 1620, observes, that the
number of convents in Iima was so great, that thiv
covered more ground than all the reft of the city.
S'olor'. lib.iii. cii .

. . .57. Lib. iii. c. I6. Tor-

(ucml. . xv. c. 3. ''The l irf mona1tcry in INcwv
Spain w.s founded A. D. 1525, four years only aftce
the co!iciuct. l'orq. lib. xv. c. I6.

Ac crt):, i;(; to Gil GCon:,a:1cz Davila, the conplict'

efLtalilhment. of the Anmerican church in all thle Spall1h
sc ttlcmLilsw1 \\,l, in tlhe ycar i649, i patriarch, 6 arli-
Iilliops', :' tjitiiops, 3.46 prebends, 2 abbots, 5 royl
crlhplains, .1o C'. convents. Teatro Ecclcfiaftico dic na.
Ind. Occidln t. vol. i. Pref. WhV n tihe order of Jcl'fit

W2;

>as expelled from all the Spanifi dominions, the
colleges, pi;ofjffd house:;, and residencics, which it
offcfl'nd in the province of New Spain, were thirty,
in Quito sixteen, ill the New Kingdom of Granada
thirteen, in Peru fcvcntecn, in Chili eiglteen, in
Paraguay eighteen ; in all a hundred and twelve.
Colleccion General de Providencias hafta acqui toma-
dis fobre eftranamento, &c. (te la Compagnia, part i.
p. 1. The number of Jcfuits, pricfts, and novices in
:11 thefc amounted to 2245. MS. pencs mle.

IN the ycar 1644, the city of Mexico prefcntcd a

pjtition to the king, praying that no new monaftcrv
might be founlded, and that the re-venucs of tliho
:'rcady clmablifd mllight be circumscribed, otherwise
:e religious IIoufes woulld foni acquire tile property
,f t he whole country. The pctitioners rcqueft lilie-
wife, that the bishops might be laid under reflridtions
ai conferring holy orders, as there were at that time in
New Spain above fix thloutand clergymen without any
'iiaig. Id. p. i6. 'ThLci abuses nmuf have been
ilnormous inldeed, lwhlen tie fuperltition of American
').liLn-ls Rwas flockcd, :,and induced to relnonitrate
.;:;.&ii 1 lh cmll .

NOTI' XIX. p. 53.

'1 t.'; defeliplion of tile ialile rs of the Spaitill
rgyv, 1 iliould not 1anvve vintred to give upon tihe

:clliiiony of pIroteltant a:U'l()or! :1lol, a t1hey may be
\lil)cml-cd of p)rjudic( or exaggerationl. Gage, il

.ieltl ', wV]io had a beller opportunily than any
;.',i.,i .:'i to ( view tle i'lterior Itbla ol SpiLniih Americ;a,

7. 2 deferibcs

describes the corruption of the church which he lial
forfakei, witli so much of the acrimony of a new
convert, that I mfould have diftrulted his evidence,
though it communicates bfome very curious and itrikiin
facts. But Benzoni mentions the profligacy of cccle-
fiattics in AAmerica at a very early period after their
fettlemcnt there. I-itt. lib. ii. c. 19, 20. M. Frczier,
;an intcliigent observer, anl zealous for his own religion,
p,!iits the difiolute manners of the Spanifil cccleiildic3,
in Peru, particularly the regulars, in Itron-er color-,
than I have employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &e. I1.
Gentil confirms this account. oy. i. 34. Cotreal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circun:-
stances. Voy. i. 6r. 155. i6i. I have good reaf,)!
to believe, that the manners of the regula;r cicr',
particularly in Peru, are still extremely inlllccn:.
Acofla hinifelf acknowledges that great corruption (0
manners had been the confequccce of permittinli
monks to forfakc the retirement and clifcipline of the
cloister, and to mingle again with the world, by undr--
taking tihe charge of the Indian pariflies. De procur.
ndI. Salute, lib. iv. c. 13, &c. I-le mentions particu-
larly tilofe vices of which I have taken notice, nld
conlliders the temptations to thelim a;s so formidabl',
tilat lIe leans to the opinion of those who lo111( that tll'
re.ulair clergy ihould not be employed as parifli prMief

Al.i,. v. c. '20. Even the advocates for tile ireguilir
aldmiit, til.it many :n11(1 great Ciio-; mitices abhunilti
:iionlg tlie monks of diflferent orders, whein set fri,
fI1ru tile rltillrait of 1lmonaitic difciplinc ; and fromI tli
tollu olf tliir d(eflenc, one may conclude tiat thlr
chl:l'cge brought agai;ili. thlcm was not dleflitutlte
tiruthi. 11 tlhe I'rencl colonies the flatr of tle riguil .

ce i.' .t

clergy is nearly the fame as in the Spanish settlements,
and the fame colnfcqtciilces have followed. M. Biet,
superior of the secular priefls in Cayenne, inquires
with no less appearance of piety than of candour, into
the causes of this corruption, and imputes it chiefly to
tie exemption of regulars from the jurisdiction and
ccnfires of their dioccfans; to the temptations to
which they are cxpofcd; and to their engaging in
commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is remarkable that all
the authors, who cenlfure the liccntioufilefs of the
Spaniflh rcgulars with the greatest severity, concur in
vindicating the condud of the Jcfuits. Formed under
a discipline more perfect than that of the other monaflic
orders, or animated by that concern for the honour of
the society, which takes such full ploficflio:l of every
member of the order, the Jefuuits, both in Mexico and
Peru, it is allowed, maintailted a mofl irreproachl;.ll(
decency of mainlers. Frezicr, 223. Gentil, i. 34.
The fame praise is lilkcwif e due t ttle bifiops and nloit,
of the dignified clergy. Frez. Ibid.

A voLU ME of the (.C;zcittc dc Mexico for tlie years:

172(, 1729, i713o, I:Lvillng beel communicated to
mll, I flld there .1 fIlililig co)niiim;a1tino of{ wh;lt 1
lhave adV;inccd co(cerning the 1sprit of low illil)Lall
lupertlition prevaleint in Spanifli Anmerica. From the
nsrawplpers of any na:tionl o(ne lii learn wlhat .1re
the olbjc'ts wlhich chiefly Clenglofs its laltelltion, :lld
wlilch appe:r to it moll intereiling. '1'le (;.izlte of.
Mexico is filled .illoll letirely with ;accounts ol rcli-
iiutls fun(lions, wili defriplions of plrcllion:;, 0on-
ft crtlolins oft churchs, bea;llifictits of fainls, lclivti:,li,
, 1°,i1, dc si', & c. Civil or cuInnIel 'iail :i ti!'', :nil

Z, .3 t ' , 'll

even the tranfaceions of Europe, occupy but a i':! ,:
corner in this magazii. of montlvy intc!!l ic,:.
From the titles of new books, which are re.uiltrl;
inserted in this Gazette, it appears that two-third:, of
them are treatises of fehlolalti thul]ogy, or cir nI:r!.i',::
devotion.

NOTE XX . . 5

SOLORZANO, after mentioning tlhe corrupt 11,l..

of some of the regular clergy, withi that cautiu:-
reserve which became a Spaiiih l.lyman, in toluc!;:,
on a subjec so delicate, gives his opinion very cxli-;
citly, and with much firmneis, against connmitti]:
parochial charges to monks. lie produces the tit:-
mony of fevcral rcfplaable autlors of his country,
both divines and lawyers, in confirmation of 1!-
opinion. De Jure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A fLrikia.
proof of the alarm excitcd by the attempt of t'i
Prince d'Efqiuilachl to exclude the regulars frl,.'
parochial cures, is contained in the Colbert collec-
tion of papers. Several lcmmorials were pri'l;'nt.
to the king by the procurators for the 'nimlli,;l;
orders, and replies were made to these in nI;.mLC (!
the secular clergy. An eager, and even rancori(,
spirit is manifcfL on both fides, in the condudc of 1tii
dispute.

NOTE XXI. p. 6o.

Nor' only the native Indians, but the Al'z'.il, (ir

childre: of a Spaniar d and Indian, were orinil:l!ly
excluded from the priclliood(, illd rcfufed ;liin;ll 'i

into any rcligious order. But by a law iflued Sept.
28th, I588, Philip II. required the prelates of Ame-
rica to ordain such MItcfizos born in lawful wedlock,
as they flould find to be properly qualified, and to
permit them to take the vows in any monastery nwhere
they lhad gone through a regular noviciate. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard seems to have been
paid to this law in New Spain ; but none in Peru.
Upon a representation of this to Charles II. in the year
1697, he iflued a new edict, enforcing the observation
of it, and profenfing his dcfire to have all his fubjcts,
Indians and Mcleizos as well as Spaniards, admitted
to the enjoyment of tihe fame privileges. Sucli,
llowever, was the averioll of the Spaniards in America
to the Indians, and thiir race, that this feemts to have
produccd little cffcc ; for, in tle vear 172;, Philip V.
was obliged to renew the injulncioll in a more pcrnmp-
tory tone. But so unfurmoulntblce re the hatred and
contempt of the Indians among tlhe Peruvima Spaniards,
hiat the present king has been conflrained to enforce
the former cdiitLs allew, by a law publflied Sept. i i,
1774. Real Cedul;l, I1'S. pr/ls /;i'.

M. CIAVi CtO ha:s contrar:lilCed what I lih:-vc relat:d

concerning tlie ccclclialitc:ll slate of tle Ilni.iis, part-
cularly their cxclufion front the sacrament of the

iucha:rinl and from holy orders, cither as Seculars or

Regullar;, in filch a m1nneieCr as cannoI t fail to make al
(deep imprcllion. 1 i, from his own knowlledgc;
:ilerts), ' thlat in New Spain not only arc Indian.;
perm'itted to pa;rt:elt of thel f.ciltlellnt of the akr, }ilt
thItt Indimn priefl: aire so llnl('ro 1 tlit tlu-' i. h1 '
couited by hunidrl(ds ;antl d a ni tiele ltal'.c L.:c;i

7 4 r' .lilV

many hundreds of rctors, canons, and doctors, and,
as report goes, even a very learned bishop. At present,
there are many priests, and not a few rectors, among
whom there have been three or four our own pupils."
Vol. II. 348, &c. I owe it therefore as a duty to the
public, as well as to myself, to confider each of these
points with care, and to explain the rcafons which
induced me to adopt the opinion which I have pub-
lifled.

I KNEW that in the Christian church tlire is no

diftinEcion of persons, but that men of every nation,
who embrace the religion of Jcfu;s, are equally entitled
to every christian privilege which they are qualified to
receive. I knew likewise, that an opinion prevailed,
not only among most of the Spanifl laity fettled in
America, but among " many ecclcfiallis, (I use thl
words of Herrcra, )cc. ii. lib. ii. c. I5.) that the
Indians were not perfec or rational men, and were not
poflfiiTed of such capacity as qualified them to partake
of the facramcnt of the altar, or of any other benefit
of our religion." It was againfl this opinion that Las
Calas contended with the laudable zeal which I have
defcrlibCd in Books III. and VI. But as the bishop of
Iarien, I)odor Sepulvlda, and other refpclablc
ccclefiallics, vigoronuly supported the common opinion
concc:rniig the incap.;icty of the Indi;an;, it bcc::iic
ncccfllTry, in order to (determine the point, thiat tlit
authority of the Holy Sec fliould be intcrpoled ; alnd
accordingly Paul III. iflled a bull A. . 1537, ill
wliichl, after condceming tile opinion of tlofe who
held that tlie Indian;, as being on a level with brute
bflts, flihould be reduced to Icrvitudle, lie dcclari1;

tli.o.

that they were really men, and as such were capable
of embracing the christian religion, and participating
of all its bleflings. My account of this bull, notwith-
tanding the cavils of M. Clavigero, muit appear just to
every person who takes the trouble of perusing it;
and my account is the fame with that adopted by
Torquemada, lib. xvi. c. 25. and by Garcia, Orig.
p. 31 . But even after this decision, so low did the
Spaniards residing in America rate the capacity of the
natives, that the first council of Lima (I call it by that
name on the authority of the btlt Spanill authors)
discountenance d the admiflion of Indians to the holy
communion. Torqucm. lib. xvi. c. 20. In New Spain
the cxclufion of Indians from the sacrament was still
more explicit. Ibid. After two ccnturies have elapsed,
and notwithftandilg all the improvement that the
Indians may be supposed to have derived from thcir
intercourse with the Spaniards during that period, we
are informed by D. Ant. Ulloa, that in Peru, where,
as will appear in the fcquel of this note, they are sup-
posed to be better instructed than in New Spain, their
ignorance is so prodigious that very few are permitted
to communicate, as being altogether deititutc of the
rcquifCite capacity. Voy. I. 341, &c. Solorz. Polit.
Ind. I. 203.

WlVI T refpcEd to thie xclufion of Indians from til:

priesthood, either as Secul.rs or RegulaLrs, we mnay
obfcirvc, that while it continued to be the comnlum
opinion that the natives of Amcricai, on l:coulllt of
their incapacity, flould not be prlllitcted to parta:lk
of the holy f.lcra;incnt, \: c.innot fupp tllt thley
would be cluthcd \, itli titat l icrcd character which

:lntitlcd

entitled them to corfecrate and to difpellf it. WTllhen
''orqucmada composed his MAlonarqrti Indiana, it was
almost a century after the conquefl of New Spain ; ald
yet in his time it was still the general praCtice to
exclude Indians from holy orders. Of this we have
the most satisfying evidence. Torquemada having
celebrated the virtues and graces of the Indians at great
length, and with all the complacency of a miifionary,
he itarts as an objeaion to what he had aftlrted, " If
the Indians really poflefs all the excellent qualities
which you have dcfcribed, why are they not permitted
to assume the religious habit ? Why are they not
ordained priests and bishops, as the Jcwifli and Gentile
converts were in the primitive church, cfpecially a.
they might be employed with fuclh fipcrior advantage t,,
other perions in the inflruction of their countrymenll
Lib. xvii. c. I3.

IN answer to this objc&ion, wlicl eflablifics, inl tl.

most unequivocal manner, what was thle gcl'r.al
pradice at that period, Torquemada oblfrv yes, tl.,:
although by their natural dispositions tlie Iudiianl ;:
well fitted for a subordinate fittation, they ;ar deilittiu
of all the qualities rcquifite in any fllationl of (di ii;i'
andl authority; and that they are in gellcral so addiclcli
to drunkenness, that, upon the slightest temptation,
one cannot promise on their behaving with the ldccncy
suitable to the clerical chara:cr. The propriety o!
excluding them from it, on these accounts, was, 1c
obfhirvcl , s;o well jlfliifcld by experience, that whllii
a. foreigner of great crudition, who caiime fromn Spnan,
coltlldemedl the pralice of thlie l'xica(;lll c(litl,
lie was co;t'ii;c(! d cf li:, t:iua;.c in a pnblil.e diluin-

t: .:!io

altionl with the learned and most religious Father
ID. Juan de Gaona, and his retraEtation is still extant.
Torquemada indeed acknowledges, as M. Clavigero
observes, with a degree of exultation, that in his time
obme Indians had been admitted into monasteries;
but, with the art of a disputant, he forgets to men-
tion that Torquemada specifies only two examples of
this, and takes notice that in both instances tliofe
Indians had been admitted by mitlake. Relying upon
the authority of Torquemarda witl regard to New
Spain, and of Ulloa with rcgaidl to Peru, and confi-
dering the humiliating d(prffion of the Ilndians in
all the Spanish settlements, I concluded that they
were not admitted into the ecclcfiaftical order, which
is held in the ligheift veneration all over the New
World.

BUT when M. Clavigero, upon his own knowledge,

afrirtcd facts so repugnalt to the conclusion I had
formed, I began to diftruit it, and to wifl for further
information. In order to obtain this, I applied to a
Spanifhl nobleman, high in office, and eminent for his
abilities, who, on difiercent occafioiis, ha;s permiittted
3me to have the honour and bernefit of corrcfpondiiing
with himn. I have becn favoured with the following
:'nfwrcr: "Wlhat you have wlitten concerningb tlLe
admifion of Indians into holy orders, or into monllf-
teries, iln Book VIII. cfpeciailly as it is explainld aind
limited in Note LX.XXVIII. of tle qluarto editionl, is
in general accurate, and conform, tlc to the autho-
r;tics which you quote. A(tl a though le congre-
gationi of the council lrc;lvclid anld declared, Feb. 13,
A. . 68 2, tlat the ciruilllllajuce f being ii, i Ildian,l

i, mULI-

]atto, or mestizo, did not disqualify any person fronl
being admitted into holy orders, if he was poflfnfed of'
what is required by the canons to entitle him to tlia-
privilege; this only proves such ordinations to be
legal and valid (of which Solorzano, and the Spanifil
lawyers and historians quoted by him, Pol. Ind. lib. ii.
c. 29. were persuaded), but it neither proves the pro-
priety of admitting Indians into holy orders, nor what
was then the common practice, with respeCt to this;
but, on the contrary, it shews that there was some
doubt concerning the ordaining of Indians, and fomit
repugnance to it.

" SINCE that time, there have been fomen cxamnplcs

of admitting Indians into holy orders. We have now
at Madrid an aged pricfl, a native of Tl.lf;la. His

name is D. Juan Cerilo de Castilla Aquihual catehutlc,
dcfcended of a cazique converted to chrifiianity soon
after the conquest He studied the ecclefiaflicall fciencic'
in a seminary of Pucbla de los Anlgeles. He was :
candidate, nevcrthelefs, for ten years, and it requirei
much interest before Biflhop Abren would consent t,
ordain him. This eccclfialtic is a man of unexcl,'-
tion;ablc clhara'cr, modleft, felf-dlnicd, ;In(d itii ,i
competent iknowledge of what relates to his lkric..l
funclion.s. -Ie came to Madrid abosv thirty-four
years ago, with the sole view of bfliciting admifllion
for the Indians into thl colleges and seminaries in New
t"ipain, that if, after bcing well inilruLtcdl alnd triel,
they fliould findl an inclination to enter into tlie
ccc lerfiaflical slate, they might cmbra:ce it, and per.
'orml its functions with tlhe grcatefc blenefit to their
C:i,.tintrym'cin, whlom they could a(drefs inl their nat,'

Unge't.

tongue. Ic lhas obtained various regulations favour..
able to his fchecme, particularly that the firit college
which became vacant in consequence of the exclusion
of the Jcefuits, should be let apart for this purpose.
But neither thcfe regulations, nor any firnilar ones
inserted in lhe laws of the Indies, have produced any
effect, on accoulnt of objcations and rcprefcntations
from the greater part of persons of chief consideration
employed in New Spain. Whether their opposition
be -wel founded or not, is a problem difficult to
resolve, and towards the solution of which fevcral
dill.inffions all( modifications arc rcquifite.

" Acconoix; to the accounts of tilis ecclesiastic,

and the information of other persons who have resided
in the Spanifil dominions in Amcrica, You may reft
allured that in thc kinigdom of Tierra Firmn4 no fucli
tiling is know.n as either an Indian secular prieit or
monk ; and that in New Spain there are very few
ecclesiastics of Indian race. In Peru, perhaps, tlle
number may be greater, as in that country there are
more Indians who poflifs the means of acquiring such
a learned education as is neccefary for pri-ons who
4l)pirc to tlie clcrical chlar.tttr."

NOTE XXI1. p. 64.

ITZTAIZ I)

, i accurate and cautious calculator, fccn-,

to (ladmit, tha;t tlil qutrity of filvcr wS'licl does not
pay duty may be i:tld thus lhi A

i. Accordinlg to

{lrrera, tli.'r, '.;-, lt bove a third of what was
cxtratcted fi,!m l'o tofi th,!t paid tile kin, ' fiftl.

l)c . viii. lil. ii. . i
. ,"S, uli:.r:, , aflhrts litkew ll ,

:; rl'3v-

that the quantity of filvcr which is fraudulently circu-
lated, is far greater than that which is regularly
flampcld, after paying the fifth. De Ind. Jure, vol. ii.
lib. v. p. 8.46.

NOTE XSII. p. 68.

ArfIILN the mines of Potofi were discovered in the

year 1545, the veinls rwre io near the surface, that the
ore was clahily cxtraCted, and so rich that it was refined
with little trouble and at a small expence, merely by
the aEtion of fire. Thllis imnple mode of refining by
fusion alone continued until the year 15 74, when the
uife cf mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was
difeovcrcd. Those micns having been wrought with-
out interruption for two centuries, the veins are now
funk so decp, that the cxpence of extracting the ore is
greatly increascd. Besides this, the richness of tllh
ore, contrary to what happens in most other mines,
has become less, as the vein continued to dip. The
vein lias likewifl diminificd to such a degree, that onIe
is amalzed that the Spaniards should persist in workini
it. (OtL1i rlicl mines have been successively dilco-
vcrcl, hut in general tlie value of the ores lhas
decreircfd lo Lmuchl, wliile the expence of cxtracliii
tlhem has augmlented, tlhat the court of Spain, in thel
ye:r 1i736, tleduccd the duty payable to the king froml
a./i/?, to a tt','l,. All the quicksilver ulfe in Peru i:;
extrate(d from tlhe famous niine of GuancabL li.I,
dlilcov'rcd in tlhe year 15(;3. Thl crown has refelrve-,
tlie property ol: lli, nli!m: to itself; and: the perll;i
whoi purchlille t lc (qiic kl!vcr pay not only the price ul

it, but likewise a sith, as a duty to the king. But, ill
thec year 76 , this duty on quicksilver was abolifihcd,
on account of the iicreafc of cxpence in working
mines. Ulloa, .lltrctcninlicmtos, xii-xv. Voyage,
i. p. 505. 523. In confequcilce of this abolition of
the fifJ., and some fubfequcnt abatements of price,
which became incefry on account of the increasing
cxpencc of working mines, quicksilver, which was
formerly fold at eighty pcfos the quintal, is now
delivered by the king at the rate of sixty pesos. Cam-
pomanles Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note. The duty on
gold is reduced to a l:.t'mnlt/. , or five per cent. Any
of my readers, whlo are dleirols of being acquainted
with the mode in which the Spaniards conduct the
working of their mines, and the refinement of the ore,
v.ill find an accurate dcfeription of the ancient method
by Acolla. Lib. iv. c. i-- 3. And of thci- more
recent improvements ini tile met:dlurgic art, by Gaboa
Comment. a las ordclna!n. dc minas, c. 22.

NOTE XXIV. . 72.

MANY remarkable proofs occur of the advainced
ilate of indufiry in Spain, at the begiinini of tihe
lixtccnth century. 'Thei number of cities in Sp:ili
was coiiidlcl;ible), and they were peopled far bhyornl
the proportion tllat was common ill oherl p:irt of
IEurope. ''The caufl-s of tlis I have cxplaim !, l ifl. of
Cha. V. i. 1 8. Wlerver cities arc populous, lthat
Ipecitrs of iiulll'(y elwhich i; peculiar to themlc ilcrcaf;c;,
:tir is.leer; and iiialf:alurer.;s aboundl. T'le

1 fl, . ] of

}iI' ,{Atlei'i.:taii ira2de il griillvng aslivity to thelf is Iliiii-
t('li, from : il eii faFtl. In the yena 1 5,4, while

Spaill

Spain continued to depend on its own industry for lihe
supply of its colonies, so much work was beflpoke
from the manufacturers, that it was supposed they
could hardly iiniih it in less than fix years. Camporn.
1. 406. Such a demnand mull have put much induifry
in motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts.
Accordig:lly, we are informed, that in the beginning
of Philip II.'s reign, the city of Seville alone, where
the trade with America centered, gave employment to
no fewer than I6,ooo looms in silk or woollen work,
and that above 3o,o000 persons had occupation in
carrying on these manufactures. Campom. ii. 472.
But so rapid and pernicious was the operation of the
cauifes which I {lall enumerate, that before Philip III.
ended his reign, the looms in Seville were reduced to
400. Uztariz, c. 7.

SINsci tlhe publication of the firfl edition, I have the

fatisf;acionl to find my ideas concerning the early com-
mercial intercourse bctwcen Spain and her colonies
confirmed and illustrated by I). Bernardo Ward, of
tlhe Junta de Comercio at Madrid, in his Proyr7o
'.Eroioiirco, Part ii. c.. . Under the reigns of
Charles V. and Philip II." fays lie, " the manu-
fiadurcs of Spain and of the Low Countries fubjcct to
her dominion were in a most flourishing itatc. Those
of France a nd England were in their infancy. The
republic of the United Provinces did not tlen cxift.
No l'uroplan power but Spa in I ad colonies of any
v.1lue in the New \Vrorld. Spiiin could flipply her
lettlciienlts there vwith tile prodtuclions of her own
loil, tli ct ris wrought by

r tlle hI1 ds of her own
artiz.lll ;, .n111 all fl.: r:eceive inl retulrn for these

belon ged

belonged to herself alone. Then the exclusion of
foreign manufatures was proper, because it might be
rendered effectual. Then Spain might lay heavy duties
upon goods exported to America, or imported from it,
and might impose what refrraints she deemed proper
upon a commerce entirely in her own hands. But
whcn time and successive revolutions had occasioned
an alteration in all those circumstances, when the
manufactures of Spain began to decline, anti the
d!emands of America were fipplied by foreign fabrics,
the original maxims and regulations of Spain should
have been accommodated to the change in her fitua-
dan. The poiicv that was wife at one period bcamne
:thlird in the other."

NOTE XXV. p. 82.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of trca-
t!re is examined. Both are received on the credit of
the persons to whom they belong; and only one
inrlance of fraud is recorded, during the long period
in which trade was carried on with this liberal confi-
lence. All the coined silver which was brought from
Peru to Porto-bello in the year I654 was found to be
.:lulteralte, , a:nd to bc omtingled with a fifth part of base
metal. 1 t'ih Spanifil mcrchl: ts, withl fentimcnts suit-
..l!: to tlleir ufu1a integrity, sustained thle whole loss,
.[1i indemnified the foreigners; by whom they were cm-
'l';y'd. '1'lie frlald was dcteCtd, and the trcaflircr of
!: reveniuc in Peru, the author of it, was publicly
'urnt. B. Ulloa Retablif, de Manus. &c. liv. ii. p. 102.
V\ l .IV. '\ A

NOTE XXVI. p. 87.

MANY finriking proofs occur of the scarcity of

money in Spain. Of all the immense fums whic!
have been imported from America, the amount of
which I fllall afterwards have occasion to mention,
Vlonclada aflerts, that there did not remain in Spain,
in 1619, above two hundred millions of pesos, one
half in coined money, the other in plate and jewels.
Reflaur. de Efpagna, Disc. iii. c. I. Uztariz, who
publifled his valuable work in 1724, contends,
that in money, plate, and jewels, there did not
remain an hundred million. Theor. &c. c. 3. Cam-
ponanes, on the authority of a remonstrance from
the community of merchants in Toledo to Philip II)
relates, as a certain proof how scarce cash had become,
that persons who lent money received a third part of
the fum which they advanced as interest and premium.
Educ. Popul. i. 417.

NOTE XXVII. p. 91.

TiiE account of the mode in which the fadlori

of the South Sea company conducted the trade i;
the fair of Porto.bello, which was opened to them
by the Affiento, I have taken from Don Dlion.
Alccdo y H-errera, president of the court of Audi-
ence in Q,(ito, and governor of that province. Don
Dionyfio was a pcrfon of such rcfpedtable cllarader

for

for probity and discernment, that his testimony in
any point, would be of much weight; but greater
credit is due to it in this cafe, as he was an eye-
witness of the transactions which he relates, and was
often employed in detecting and authenticating the
frauds which he describes. It is probable, however,
that his representation, being composed at the com-
mencement of the war which broke out between-
Great Britain and Spain, in the year 1739, may,
in some inflances, discover a portion of the acri-
monious spirit natural at that juncdure. His detail
of facts is curious; and even Engliflh authors con-
firm it in rome degree, by admitting both that
various frauds were pratifed in the tranfations of
the annual ship, and that the contraband trade from
Jamaica, ::nd other Britifli colonies, was become
enormouily great. But for the credit of the Englifli
nation it may be observed, that those fraudulenlt
operations are not to be confidered as deeds of the
company, but as the diflonourable arts of their
facors and agents. The company itself sustained
a considerable loss by the Affiento trade. Many of
its servants acquired inmmenfe fortunes. Anderfou
Chronol. decuct. ii. 3S8.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 99.

SFeVFyrAI. faCts with respect to the institution,

the progress, and the cffects cf tllis comp:ay, are
curious, and but little known to Englifi readers.
Thcugh the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas,
ecxtendls four hundred miles along the coast, and

A A 2 iS

is one of the most fertile in America; it w a. 1
much neglected by tile Spaniards, that during tlie
twenty years prior to the cil.tbiiflhmcnt of tlie com-
panv, only live fllips failed from Spain to tlhat pro-
vilce ; and dluring fixtcin years, from i706 to 1722,
not a single filip arrived from tli Caraccas in Spain.
Notici.s (Ce Real Companiai de Caraecas, p. 28.
During this period Spain must have been supplied
altoft entirely with the large quantity of cacao,
which it consumes, by foreigners. Before the
eretion of the company, neither tobacco nor lildce
were imported from Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. I 7.
Since the commercial operations of the company
began in the year I 31, the importation of cacan
into Spain has increased amazingly. During thirty
Vcars fubfcquclnt to 70oI, the number of F]anegas of
cac;ao (each ai hundred and ten pounds) imported
from Caraccas, wIas 643.,215. During eightee!
years fubifqucnt to 1731, the number of Frmgia.i
imported was 869,27 ; and if we suppose the import-
ation to be continued in thle fame proportion durin,
the remainder of thirty years, it will amount to
1,448,746 iFansgas, which is an increase of 805,531
I.[an as.d. Pd. p. 148. D)uring eight years fubfequcnit
to 15G6, there has been imported into Spain by tle
con:pal'y 88,,t2 ar-robas (each twenty-live pounll('
of tobacco; and hides to the number of 177,3 54
Id . i. Since tic publication of tlhe Noticias dc
C:aallpalia, in 176 5, irs trade feeClm to be on tie
inlcreaf. l)uri ig five years fubflqucnt to 1769, it
lias imlported 179, 156 Fl'igWass of calcao into Spain,

6,2o1 :irrobas of tobl;ico, 75,496 hides, and
2.21,.1 2 pelos iln Ipcci. (.'Jlaniponllas, ii. 162. 'he

lalt

iall article is a proof of the growing wealth of the
colony. It receives cafll from Mexico in return for
tlhe cacao, with which it fuipplies that province, and
this it remits to Spain, or lays out in purchalfim
European goods. But, besides this, the most explicit
evidence is produced, that the quantity of cacao
raised in the province is double to what it yielded ill
173 ; the number of its live flock is more than
treble, and its inhabitants much augmented. 'The
revenue of the bifhlop, which arifc:; wholly froim
tithes, has increased from eight to twenty thoulind
pesos. Notic. p. 69. In confcquence of the aug-
mentation of the quantity of cacao importe iinto
Spain, its price has dccrcafcd from eighty pesos for
tlie anllcga to forty. Id. 6i. Since the publication of
the firlt edition, I have learned that Guyana, including
all the cxtcnfive provinces situated on tle hanks of
the Orinoco, the islands of Trinidad and Margarita
are added to the countries with which the company oi
of Caraccas lhad liberty of trade by thlir former

,larters. Real Cdlula, Nov. 19, 1776. 1

)'t I

have likewise )eeln illormed, tliat tlh inllititti';;; of
this companly lha; llot b1cen attelded w ith all the bene-
ficial cfndls vwhich I hnave aferihed to it. In many of
its operations tie illibLr.tl alad olpprellive liirit ot
monopoly is tlill couifpicuous. But in order to cxpl.iii
this, it would be neceflary to enter into milnte detail'
wlhich are not suited to the natrie of tlil, tllk.

.4 . *

NOTE XXIX. p. o16.

THIS first experiment made by Spain of opcniii

a free trade with any of her colonies, has produced
effecs so remarkable, as to merit some farther illuftra-
tion. The towns to which this liberty has bec;
granted, are Cadiz and Seville, for the province of
Andalusia; Alicant and Carthagena, for Valencia and'
lurcia; Barcelona, for Catalonia and Arragon;
Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for Galicia; and(
Gijon, for Aflurias. Append. ii. ia Ia Educ. Pop!i!.
p. 41. These are either the ports of chief trade in
their refpelive diftrics, or those nioft convcnicnt!v
situated for the exportation of their respective produc-
tions. The following fa:ts give a view of the
increase of trade in the fettlermcnts to which the new
regulations extend. Prior to the allowance of free
trade, the duties colletcld in the cuftom-houfc at
the Havannah were computed to be 104,208 pesos
annually. During the five years preceding 1774,
they rofc at a medium to 308,000 pesos a year. In
Yucatan, the duties have arisen from 8000 to i ,co.
In Hispaniola, from 2500 to 5600. In Porto Rico,
from 1200 to 7000. The total value of goods im-
ported from Cuba into Spain was reckoned, ir:
1774, to be 1,500,000 pesos. Educ. t'opul. i
450, &c.

NOTE XXX. p. 114.

THE two treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Cam-

pomanes, Fical del real cofejo y Supremo (an office in
rank and power nearly similar to that of Attorney-
General in England), and Dire&or of the Royal
Academy of History, the one intitled Difcurfo fobre
el Fomento de la Induftria Popular ; the other, Dif-
curfo fobre la Educacion Popular de los Artefainos y
fu Fomento ; the former published in 1774, and the
latter in 1775, afford a striking proof of this. Almost
every point of importance with refpcct to interior
police, taxation, agriculture, manufadures, and trade,
domestic as well as foreign, is examined in the courfc
of these works; and there are not many authors,
even in the nations mot: eminent for commercial
knowledge, who have carried on their inquiries with
a more thorough knowledge of thulf various fuljcdts,
and a more perfect freedom from vulgar and national
prejudices, or whlo have united more happily the calm
rcfearclhes of phliofolly,a

itl the ardent zel o a

public-fpirited cii zcn. Ilheli: ooks are in high
eltimationi among tle Spanlli t Li; and it is ;a dcliili\e
evidence of the progref; of their own ideas, that they
are capable of rclillinlg an author whose fenitilmciiu
.re so, libral.

*i /i 4

NOTE XXXI, p. 119.

TiHE galcon cmployed in that trade, inflead of tlih

fix hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.
lib. xlv. 1. 15. is commonly from twelve hundred to
two thousand tons burden. The flip from Acapulco,
taken by Lord Anson, inflead of the 5oo,ooo pesos
permitted by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos,
besides uncoined silver equal in value to 43,6I pI es
more. Anson's Voyage, 384.

NOTE XXXII. p. I=:.

THE price paid for the bull varies according to the

rank of different persons. Those in the lowest order,
who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or
one fiilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and
those in public office, or who hold encomiendas,
sixteen reals. Solorz. de Jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii.
c. 25. According to Chilton, an English merclhmt
who resiled long in the Spanifl settlements, the bull
of Cruzado bore an higher price in the year 1570,
being then fold for four reals at the lowest. Hak-
luyt, iii. 461. The price iecms to have varied
at different periods. That exacted for the bulls
issued in the last Predicanion will appear from the
cnfiling table, which will give folne idea of the pro-
portional numbers of the dliliercnt claflis of citizens
in New Spain and Peru.

The re

lhere were issued for New Spaill,
Bulls at 10 pesos each - 4-

at 2 pesos each - - 22,60o
at I pefl each - - 164,220
at 2 reals each - -2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 16 pcfos 4'- reals each - 3
at 3 pcfos 3 reals each - 1,202
at I peso 5-- reals - - 78,822

at 4 reals 4-

- 410,325
at 3 reals - - - 668,6o0

1,171,953

NOTE XXXIII. p. 123.

As Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this

information contained in his Tlleatro Anlcricano, pub-
liflied in Mexico, A. 1). 1746, was accomptant-
general in one of the moil considerable departments
of the royal revenue, ant by tlat nimeas had acccfs
to proper information, his testimony -with rcfpcEt to
this point merits great credit. No fich accurate
detail of the Spanifli revcnues in any part of America
has hitherto been publified in the Enllifi language ;
and the particulars of it may appear curious alnd
interesting to some of my readers.

FR0,-M

FROM the bull of Cruzado, published every two
years, there arises an annual revenue in pesos, 5000ooo

From the duty on ilver - 700,000
From the duty on gold - 60,00o
From tax on cards - - - 70,00
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by

the Indians - - - 6i,ooo,

From tax on stamped paper - - 41,00
From ditto on ice - - - 15,522
From ditto on leather - 2,50
From ditto on gunpowder - - 71,550
From ditto on fait - - - 32,000
From ditto on copper of Mcchochan - I,ooo
From ditto on alum - - - 6,5oo
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 2r, oo
From the half of ecclcfiatlical annats - 49,o00
From royal ninths of bifhopricks, & c. - 68,8co
From the tribute of Indians - - 6o5,oo
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 721,875
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house 373,33,
From the mint - - - 357,500

3,552,68-

'lTI-s fum amounts to 819,16I 1. flerlilng; and if

we add to it the profit accruing from the tale of 5000
quintals of quicksilver, imported from the mines of
Almaden, in Spain, on the king's account, and what
accrues from the Averia, and Come other taxes which
Villa Segnor does not cftimatc, the public revenue in
New Spain may well be reckoned above a million
pounds Rlerling money. Tlicat. . vex .
vol. i. 38, &c.

Accordii

Accordl.-,: o *V lla Serrlnr, the total produce of the
M..xi :: i:'n.: .... :uu:;.. at a mediuml to eight millions
of pci,' ll silver Imually, and to 591 2 m.!-',3 of gold.

lb. Se.

-44 Sever.sl bran.ch:s of the revenue have

been exp:inec! ii the ,euirfe of the liflory; some,
uwhich thiire was n o occalioin :' mentioning, require a
particul.:r iliutlration. 'I l' right to the iitht' in the
New World is vCefed in the crown of Spain, by a
bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to
be applied in the following manner: One fourth is
allotted to the bifllop of the dioccfe, another fourth to
the dean and chapter, and other ofiiccrs of the cathe-
dral. The rcmaining half is divided into nine equal
parts. Two of theic, under the denomination of los
dos. Novenos ;-rca/s, are paid to the crown, and constitute
a branch of the royal revenue. The other seven parts
are applied to the maintenance of the parochial clergy,
the building and support of churches, and other pious
uses. Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi Ley, 23, &c. Aven-
dano Thefaur. Indic. vl. i. p. 1.84.

Ti-JE lcava!a is a (luty icvied by an excifi on the

sale of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent.
In America to four per cenlt. Solorzano Polit. Indi-
ana, lib. vi. c. 8. Avvndano, vol. i. x86.

THE A/lliinjcrifa/gr, or (uilloin paid in A\ncrica on

goods imported and exported, may amlount :1l an
average to fifteen per cent. Rceopil. lib. viii. tlt. iv.
Ley. 1. Avc;itidlo, vol. i. 188.

il'[ 11:. 'l'r' i,, or tax paid oiI ,l'cctl L; of (,:'\',,

gual c the ships failing to .11d frum 'il l'i,m a
\ ', . i It

imposed when Sir Franci., Drake filled the New
World with terror by his expedition to the South Sea.
It amounts to two per cent. on the value of goods.
Avendano, vol. i. p. 189. Rccopil. lib. ix. tit. ix.
Ley. 43, 44.

I HAVF not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the several branchcs of revenue in Peru, later than
the year I614. From a curious manuscript, contain-
ing a state of that viceroyalty in all its departments,
presented to the Marquis of MIontes-Claros, by Fran.
Lopez Caravantes, acconmptant.gencral in the tribunal
of Lima, it appears that the public revenue, as nearly
as I can compute the value of the money in which
Caravantes iates his accounts, amounted, in ducats
it 4S. I id. to -- 2,372,7 63

Expenccs of government - - 242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in flerling money - f. 583,303
I'xpenccs of government - - 305,6

Net free revenue 277, 73

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in tlhi

computation, such as the duty on stamped paper,
leather, cclciafitical annats, &c. so that the revelnue
of Peru may be well supposed equal to that ot
Mexico.

1N computing the cxpence of government in Nev.
Spain, I may take that of Peru as a flandard. There

the

the annual eftablilhmcnt for defraying the charge of
adminiliration exceeds one half of the revenue col-
lected, and there is no reafln for supposing it to )e
lcfs in New Spain.

I -IHAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount

of tlhe public revenue of Spain from America and
the Philippines, lwhich, as the reader will perceive
from the two last articles, is more recent than any of
the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas

(Cufioms', &c. in pesos fu-

rtes - - - 2,5o00,C

Duties on gold and lilver - 3,000,0
Bull of Cruzado - - I,ooo,cco
'Tribute of the Indians - - 2,000,cc10
B3y sale of quiclkfilvr - - ^oo.'.C
Paper exported on the king's

account, and fold in the roval
warchoucfs - - 300,0C"
Stamped p;aper, tobacco, and otlihr

Imall duties - - ICoCO'o
I)uty on coinage of, at the rate (co

one real de la I'lata for eachl

mark - - - .,c,cos
'Froni tlie trae of Acapulco, :L:d

thle coa.lling trade from pro-
vince to province - 5 -,cc

A Iiento of ':ctlOl:i - -'! ,ooo
l.i o l the trade of Ait]'', or herb

of l); ai'., l iv, forl erly IUinor-
polizcd i, rie Jotsilb , - 5,oocc

)11(22

Fro:m other revenues forrmerly be-

longlillg to that order -400,000

TIotal i2,000,000

' ot:ii il Cterl[ng '.-o;, y ,. 2,700,000
')?dui§ h.ilf, as the expc:ce of

. id;itiilr.l itn, and there re-

t'iti;n ,.et fr'c revenu
e e - £.,35o,o0o

.NOTE XXXEiV1 p. p. 23.

.\. ..l..or, k cr, ;', cenvcrfnt in commercial fpecula-
io;, lhas con;putcd, ;li.a fromi the mines of New

;-',ii ,!, ;'o.:, tLie i r.-cives annually, as his fifth,
o '_ rum of two n;illo;:s cf our money. Harris Collect.
ls Vo y. ii. p. i64. Accordii:g to this calculation, the
ot.ll p'.oiuce of the mines muti be ten millions ftcr-
i:ig ; a fum io exorbit!nt, and lo little corresponding
wv.: all accounts of the annual importation from
Amerilca, that the information on which it is founded
nlmu evidently be erroneous. According to Campo-
m.ines, the total produci of the American mines may
Lhe c,:' putcd at thirty mlilliols of pesos, which, at
lour lliillin/,s and fixpenice a peso, amounts to
7,425,c0co /. flerli, tl the kin':s fifth of which (if tli:t
v'ere rccgulrly paid) ould be 1,485,ooo00 1. But
f;£no this fumi muutl be dletduitcld what is loIl by
al fr.ilulent witliloldinlg of the fifth due to the
crownl, as \well ls the fum ni cefiry for delraying the
c:'.,c eeIC ol ;ul inifi l tio tcn. . IPopuli.r. vol. ii.
p 1. 131 t. ote. oth tliefe fums are coliderable.

NOTE XXXV. p. 124.

ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign good;,

exported from Spain to America pay duties of various
kinds, amounting in all ro more than 25 per cent. As
mole of the goods with whlich Spain supplies her colo-
nics are foreign, such a tax upon a trade so extensive
muif yield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de
Manus. & du Commerce 'Eifp. p. 5IO. He computes
the value of goods exported annually from Spain to
America to be about two millions and a half sterling.
p. 97.

NOTE XXXVI. p. I26.

THFE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a

monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the
Manila trade, as well as in that to Spain, gained
annually a million of ducats. In one year he remitted
a million of ducats to Spain, in order to purchase
from the Condi Olivares, and his creatures, a prolong-
ation of his government, p. 6I. le wsas fiiccefsful in
his suit, and continued in oltic' from 1624 io 1635,
jouble ilie uflual time.

d' 6,[,~

I/ -y ^ T II S A J- ^J^'^^ T^?^"2~
^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

^N

, ../^^..A/.^^S^^

·I'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I I

^.~~~~ ~ . =====j
^'^s'1'^-^ e^

sl ClrPH~~~~~~~~ZLI(ZI ~ ~ ~ C si dt

lbs, ~ '

a^

· 'am- ^
a
p

T~r~c- :" .·

'~'"~'<<"~'

:
-"~r~· 'IhCL~~

dt~~~~n~~k/l'~~~~~~:'.~~~~ Z 3~~~~~~
~Z1

i -'""' """v
I ^ ^-.-- J

:~, T. ~'~JL~·~

S G`UTU S-EA,

i~ ;^ ^!Rm^^ ^ 11'^ / --y<C .^

J ,""' N|,,,.,;.:~o.u,, o.

. . . ~" ?" ':"i'-^ ^ S' A v ^ "

''
i ; .. W r-t,-,.u.i<. (/' **^'^ - V^ r ' / \ ^ *^ % ^ l

-or .".' "d"' I..,

^ "

"

C ------ A - ^

' *

^

/ ^

/ " ^_______________^ 1 ^

' ^ .
^^--- --|

~~~~~~~~~~~.,..' -. '?,.t..-(

.,/~'~

I '4>- ':r -.

/!%

r*'^ ~;"'i

>

.

)rl

c
si," tr TITi SE A-j/,<-?'" . ..:~<<<~

%.vJ r.

i ^l·

l .

. -

<

; '

^

,
~"'<; " ;-/<; :zT^\ 'F.7 :

^'~ i ~: ~ .,:,/'..~',luV '-"'"'''" 1';"", /'^ - ; 3i' ~

. , .:..
..-. x ?,''.^ , 'i " ^ \

;;~~~~~~~~~~~7I,,

,-,/l ,, ,bP
HJ~~h~rv or'. ~. a(.vi(.a.)

-Sr '''^C^-u- G ' \)

h, ' *') ., ,

*Y \
,,,."l" -

AI'
ts / ' :s.

y .i^ ,,,;n^ -v/^ -y \,A/ ,'s

." 'i z;,,,~,?,1, ; /
+.-.

IJ;

.. -.,

4 <..

,~~. '"" .....r

] C~~r, l~~l|Il../l''5s~~~a'J - '' ?^

,.,:^l - ''

< ' ,~. ~jn -,,,. ) __; "

, l,,-/'::/,, '_ " ",, .,

j Isj '~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.r/~,-,,;,:l. '.'-~--1., , -x T-. '~ "';'"~./... ...... * 'A^' >-

1
"''! --- ^^T""^ % ^ ^ hj -,

..,-

***

- -i ^^>^

^ i

V~.

:

- - =^

L.5 ___ .r':""'<" "';"':d L .,..- p~,, , .^^ i~~n~i^«lm
'~'.. - B, io ,"7-x:s

(
"· " l"~)Z"e4):'r -. r.

'ILI*A,·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~" 4~~

~,., 7,.,,,
', t~...

-- ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

~.

.._ _,___.:k,,,,<' ,,s / /.*-....,.,,ii,.ir/-',

v - :

- i :'·..:'.i I.i,,,. ~o ' '' '.,. e-u,

d
T..· ../ t- -

( II 11Ol O'/ .

I Illi( l

. /

t

l":;4'//.,/d · *·

~.lr:.r ....

h(~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~},.,,, '( .,Y;......,d ./
,~: Q,,s. ._.

~~~~<,'/,,, ~ ,/,,j -<:

1111~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~s. n.r
....~:~ (

'

t

,

z ~
. ...s. Z,', ,..,,, ae,~~,,

'%'<'?, "

`:-~i

:,~,,>,/~-/' t ~<

'""',,..~i,:,-,,-,,.,, , i.,,.,~,,,,.
! d-.'' "~'~,,,,.,,," XZ.., ,.,

1~14~"~·s

. . . . . . 111 Ie

R~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}/:n ;,7.',, ^'

5 ,, ,,,,.< :-.'.,-'a~..
-

·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~''-~.,,., , n I. ),/,./,,

c~~~~~~,'. . .,,;,.
' . .~k'']/Y~/ /&

+~~~~~~~~~~~~~

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
'. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the

Figures to the Page.

A
.j'rssrIYiA, an embafTy sent to that country by John Ilo

king of Portugal, i. 79.
/,capulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence

to Manila, iv. I 18. Amount of the treasure on board
the (hip taken by Lord Anson, 360.
,4co/qa, hin method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 353.
A/dair, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 398.
.4danfon, his justification of lHanno's account of the

African teas, i. 349.
3,frica, the western coast of, firrf explored by order of

John 1. king of Portugal, i. 58. Is discovered from
Cape Non to Bojador, 60. Cape Bojador doubled,
65. 'lhe countries southward of the River Senegal
discovered, 73. Cape of Good H-ope seen by Bar-
tholomew Dias, 79. Caules of the extreme heat of
the climate there, ii. ii. Ignorance of the ancient
aTlronomers concerning, i. 350. Expedition to the
co;if: of, iv. X

. I.

c.ri/ttlIr'', the l.ate of, among the native Americans, ii.
117. ITwo principal causes of the defects of, 121.
.tlenad is font to Hi|p.niol,, as a commiflioner to infpe&l

lie coni(tut ol Cui iii uSs, i. 184.
VuoL, 1iv, L B uii'r,

.guilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

among the Indians at Cozumel, by Fernando Cortes,
ii. 258.
Albuqurque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of trc

Indians of Hispaniola, i. 302.
Aicavala, in the Spanish customs, the term explained, iv.

363.
Alexander the Great, his political charater, i. 20. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 21. His
discoveries in India, 22.
Alexardcr V I. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Isabella no

Castile the right of all their western discoveries, i. 159.
Sends miiflionaries with Columbus on his second voy-
age, 160
lmnagro, Diego de, his birth and charaaer, iii. 1o6.
Aflbciates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage ol
discovery, 107. His unsuccessful attempts, 109. I
neglected by Pizarro in his Spanifl negociation, 1 I
Is reconciled to him, 121. Brings reinforcements t:
Pizarro at Peru, 146. Beginning of diflentions be-
tween him and Pizarro, 166. Invades Chili, 17C
Is created governor of Chili, and marches to Cuzco.
176. Seizes Cuzco out of the hands of Pizarro, 178.
Defeats Alvarado, and takes him prisoner, 179. I1
deceived by the artful negociations of Francis Pizarro.
182. Is defeated by the Pizarros, b16. Is takein
prisoner, 187. Is tried and condemned, 189. Is put
to death, 19o.
./iln1mgro, the son, affords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 202. His character, ibid. Heads a con-
fpiracy against Francis Pizarro, ibid. Pizarro afaf-
linated, 204. Is acknowledged as his fucceffir, 206.
His precalious situation, 207. Is defeated by Vaca de
Caltro, 210. Is betrayed and executed, 212.
A/lmajcifaro, in the Spanish American cufloms, the

amount of, iv. 363.
A/lvaradlo, Alonzo, is sent from Lima by Francis Pizarro,

with a body of Spaniards to relieve his brothers at
Cuzco, iii. 179. Is taken a prisoner by Almagro,
ibid. HIIs cc;cpc, 182.

Alvarad&,

dIvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortes to command at
Mexico, while he marched againfl Narvaez, iii. 6.
He is besieged by the Mexicans, 15. His imprudent
conduct, 16. His expedition to Quito in Peru, 162.

Amnazons, a community of, said to exist in South America,

by Francis Orellana, iii. r99.
.,merica, the continent of, discovered by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. 195. How it obtained this name, 2r1o
Ferdinand of Castile nominates two governments in,
270. The propositions offered to the natives, 27r1
Ill reception of Ojeda and Nicuefla among them, 272.
The South Sea discovered by Balboa, 288. Rio de
Plata discovered, 300. The natives of, injuriously
treated by the Spaniards, 328. The vast extent of, ii.
A. The grand objecfs it presented to view, 3. The
circumstances of, favourable for commerce and civili-
zation, 5. The climates of, 7, 8. Various causes
of the peculiarity of its climates, 9. Its rude and un-
cultivated state when firir discovered, 14. Its animals,
i8. Its insets and reptiles, 2o. Birds, 2r. General
account of its foil, 23. Inquiry into the first popula-
tion of, 25. Could not be peopled by civilized nations,
33. The northern extremity of, contiguous to Asia,
37. Prohably peopled by Asiatics, 47. Condition
and character of the native inhabitants inquired into,
50. Were more rude than the natives of any other
known parts of the earth, 5r. The Peruvians and
Mexicans excepted, 52. The first discoverers inca-
pable of a judicious fpecula;ive examination, 54. The
various fyflems of philosophers refpesding the natives,
57. Method observed in the present review of their
bodily conflitution and circumstances, 59. The vene-
real disease derived from this part of the world, 87.
Why so thinly inhabited, 129. The country depopu-
!a(ed by continual wars, 171. Cause of the extreme
coldnels toward the southern extremity of, 359. The
natural uncultivated slate of the country described,
g61. Bones of large extinct species of animals disco-
voredl under ground near the banks of the Ohio, 362.
WVhy IEuropean animals degenerate there, 364. Sup-

a i 2 posed

posed to have undergone a convulsive reparation from
Asia, 369. The vicinity of the two continents of
Alia and America clearly ascertained, 370-375.
Causes of the depopulation of, traced, iv. 2. This
depopulation not the result of any intentional fytfem of
policy, 5. Nor the result of religion, 8. Number of
Indilln natives still remaining in Mexico and Peru, 9.
All the Spanifi dominions there fubjefled to two vice-
roys, 14. Its third viceroyalty lately eftablifiaed, 15.
See Mexico, Peru, Cortes, Pizarro, Cabot, &c.
America, North, project of fettling there, iv. 158. Firfl

expedition to, fails, 16r. A second expedition to.
ends difafiroufly, ibid. Plan of fettling there resumed
withiout effect, 162. The coast of, divided into twec
parts, 178. Charters granted to two companies for
fettling colonies in, 179. Emigrations from Eng.
land to, 286. See Colonies, Newz England, Firginic,
&c.
Americans, native, in Spanith America, their bodily con-

ititution and complexion, ii. 61. Their flrength and
abilities, 6z. Their insensibility with regard to thei.
wonen, 65. No deformities in their frame, 71. 'This
circumfiance accounted for, 72. Uniformity of theil
colour, 7-. A peculiar race of, described, 78. The
Efquimaux, 80. Patagonians, 82. The exiflence ol
Palatlonian giants yet remaining to be decided, Sj.
'Their dilcafes, 85. The venereal disease peculiar:
theirs, 87. The powers and qualities of their mniii,
88. Are only solicitous to lupply immediate want:,
89. 'The art of computation, scarcely known to thc'ir
91. Have no abftra& ideas, 93. The North Anlt
ricans much more intelligent than those of the Soutl.
95. Tlheir aversion to labour, 97. Their foci;
itate, joo. IDomeftic union, lot. The womer.
103. 'I heir womnin not prolific, 1o6. Their paien
tal aficlion and filial duty, 108. Their modes o:
fubfiltcnce, i 1. Fishing, 112. Hunting, 114
Agriculture, 117. 'I'he various objects of their cul
ture, ibid. Two principal causes of the defects o
their agriculturc, 21. 'Their want of tame animals,

ill

1222. Their want of useful metals, 125. Their poli-
tical institutions, 128. Were divided into small inde-
pendent communities, ibid. Unacquainted with the
idea of property, 130. Their high sense of equality
and independence, 132. Their ideas of Subordination
imperf.ct, 133. To what tribes these descriptions
apply, 136. Some exceptions, i38. Florida, 139.
The Natchez, ibid. The Islands, 14i. In Bogota,
ibid. Inquiry into the causes of there irregularities,
143. Their art of war, 147. Their motives to
ho!tility, 148. Caufesof their ferocity, 149. Perpe-
tuity of their animofities, 151. Their modes of con-
ducting war, 152. Are not defiitute of courage and
fortitude, IS5. Incapable of military discipline, 157.
Their treatment of prisoners, 159. Their fortitude
under torture, i6i. Never eat human flcfh but to
gratify revenge, 164. How the South Americans
treated their prisoners, 165. Their military educa-
tion, 166. Strange method of choofing a captain,
among the Indians on the banks of the Orinoco, 168.
Their numbers wafted by continual wars, 171. Their
tribes now recruit their numbers by adopting pri-
foners, 172. Are never formidable in war to more
polifled nations, 174. Their arts, dress, and orna-
ments, 175, 176. Their habitations, 179. Their
arms, 183. Their domestic utensils, 18,.. Confiruc-
tion of their canoes, i85. The listlessness with which
they apply to labour, iJ7. T1heir religion, ig9.
Some tribes altogether deltiitjte of any, 193. Re-
nmaikable diversity in their religious notions, 1 97
Their ideas of the immortality of the foul, 201.
Their modes of burial, 202, 203. Why their phyfi-
cians pretend to be conjurors, 205, 206. Their love
of dancing, 209. 'Their immoderate paltion for
gaming, 213. Are extremely addiLIed to diuncen-
ness, 214. Put their aged and incurable to death,
219 . General estimate of their charafler, 221.
Their intcllectual powers, 222. Their political t:-
clnts, 223. Powers of affcdtion, 225. llariinefl ol
heart, 227. Their i fenlibility, 228. Taciturnity,

11 B 3 230.

230. Their cunning, 231. Their virtues, 23!
Their spirit of independence, ibid. Fortitude, ibid
Attachment to their community, 234. Their satis-
fadion with their own condition, 23,. General cau-
tion with refpcd: to this inquiry, 239. Two diflin.
guifhable classes of, 24r. Exceptions as to their
charaCter, 243. Their charadteriftic features de-
fcribed, 376. Inflances of their persevering speed,
378. An antipathy induflrioufly encouraged between
them and the negroes in America, by the Spaniards,
iv. 35. Their present condition, 37. How taxed,
ibid. Stated services demanded from them, 39. Mode
of exacting these services, 40. How governed, 41.
Protector of the Indians, his function, ibid. Reafu;,s
why so small a progress is made in their conversion,
55-
.merigo Vespucci publishes the firfl written account of

the New 'World, and hence gave name to America, i.
210. His claim as a discoverer examined, 375.
Anacoana, a female cazique of Hispaniola, her base anJ

cruel usage by the Spaniards, i. 253, 254.
Andes, flupendous height and extent of that range or

mountains, ii. 3. Their height compared with other
mountains, 351. Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable ex-
pedition over, iii. 195.
Animals, large, very tew found in America at its firll

discovery, ii. 18.
Ancients, cause of the imperfeCtion of the art of naviga-

tion among them, i. 6. Their geographical knowledge
extremely confined, 350-354.
Arabians peculiarly attached to the study of geography, i

39. Argonauts, the expedition of, why so famous among the

Greeks, i. J6, 17.
Arithmetic, or computation, the art of, hardly known to

the native Americans, ii. 91.
Afcolino, father, his extraordinary miflion to the prince ot

the Tartars, i. 46.
A/fatic discoverics made by the Ruffians, ii. 87.

i/Jficnto

fliento trade, the nature of, explained, iv. go. The

frauds in, and how put an end to, 91, 92.
jfahualpa, is left by his father HuaCcar his successor in

the kingdom of Quito, iii. 130. Defeats his brother
Huafcar, and usurps the empire of Peru, I32. Sends
presents to Pizarro, 135. Visits Pizarro, 139. Is
perfidiously seized by him, 143. Agrees with Pizarro
on a ransom, 145. Is refused his liberty, 150. His
behaviour during his confinement, 153. A form of
trial bestowed on him, 151. Is put to death, 156.
Comparison of authorities relating to his tranfadions
with, and treatment by, Pizarro, 400.
,udience of New Spain, hoard of, establishrd by the

Emperor Charles V. iii. 98. Courts of, their jurif-
diEtion, iv. 17.
iveria, a Spanish tax for convoy to and from America,

when first imposed, iv. 363. Its rate, ibid.
.zores, those islands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 71.

B
Yacon, Nathaniel, heads an infurreaion in Virginia, iv.

246. Forces the governor and council there to fly,
249. They apply to England for succour, 250. His
death terminates the rebellion, 251.
Balboa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony at Santa

Maria, in the gulph of Darien, i. '27. Receives
intelligence of the rich country of Peru, 282. His
charatder, 285. Marches actofs the ifthmts, 286.
Difcoveis the Southern ocean, 288. Returns, 289.
Is superseded in his command by the appointment of
Pedrarias Davila, 292. Is fined by Pedrarias for
former tranfations, 293. Is appointed lieutenant-
governor of the countries on the South Sea, and
marries Pedrarias's daughter, 296. Is arrested and
put to death by Pedrarias, 298.

Bark, Jcfuits, a production peculiar to Per!, iv. 69.
Barrere, his deicriptiol of the conftrudion of Indian

houles, ii. 407.

1B B 4 Behaim,

Behaim, Martin, the honour of having discovered Arne.

rica falsely ascribed to him by some Germari authors,
i. 367. Account of him and his faniily, ibid.
2Behring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have discovered the north-well extremity of America
from the eastward, ii. 40. Uncertainty of their
accounts, 367.
Benulcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the king-

dom of Quito, iii. 16I. Is deprived of his command
by Pizarro, 195.
Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordinary travels, i.

45.
Bernaldes, inflance of the bravery of the Caribbees men-

tioned by him, ii. 414.
Bethencourt, John de, a Norman baron, conquers and

poteffes the Canary islands, i. 54.
Birds, an account of those natural to America, ii. 21.

The flight of, often firetch to an immense distance from
land, i. 360.
Bogota in America, Come accountof the inhabitants of, ii.

143. Causes of their tame fubmilfion to the Spaniards,
145. Their religious doarines and rites, 201.
B'jador, cape, the first discovery of, i. 60. Is doubled by

the Portuguese discoverers, 65.

Boju, his account of the American war-fong, ii. 401.
Bovadilla, Francis de, is sent to Hispaniola to inquire

into the conduLc of Columbus, i. 217. Sends Co-
lumbus home in irons, 219. Is degraded, 222. 227.
Bougainville, his defence of the Periplus of Hanno, i.

348.
Bouguer, M. his charaaer of the native Peruvians, ii,

384.
Brasil, the coafi of, discovered by Alvarez Cabral, i. 213.

Remarks on the climate of, ii. 357.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, iv. 433.
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some account of that

province, iii. 372.
Bulls, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before

examined and approved by the royal council of the
Indies, iv. ,18. See Cruiado.
B'rial of the dead, American mode of, ii. 202.

C
Cabot, Giovanni, is appointed to command the first expe-

dition to explore unknown countries, iv. 37. Embarks
with his son at Briflol, 1i 8 Discovers Newfound-
land, 139. Returns to England, ibid. No advantage
is derived from his discoveries, 14o. The scheme is
abandoned, 141. He is appointed governor of a
company of merchant-adventurers, for whom he
obtains a charter, r47.
Cabot, Sebastian, fails on an expedition to South Ame-

rica, iv. 144. Visits Brasil, and touches at Hilpa-
niola and Puerto Rico, 145. His voyage extends the
sphere of Engliflf navigation, and proves the means of
opening an intercourse with the Archipelago, and rome
towns on the coast of Syria, ibid.
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portugueie commander, discovers the

coat of Brasil, i. 2 3.
Cacao, the best in quality, produced in the Spanish Ame-

rican colonies, iv. 69. The preparation of chocolate
from, derived from the Mexicans, 96.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from

Seville, iv. 81.
Calfornia, the peninsula of, discovered by Fernando

Cortes, iii. Ioo. The true state of this country long
unknown, 362. Why depreciated by the Jesuits, 363.
Favourable account of, given by Don Joseph Galvez,
364.

Californians, the charaicer of, by P. Venegas, ii. 387.
Campeachy, discovered by Cordova, who is rcpulfed by the

natives, i. 337.
Campomanes, Don Pedro Rodriguez, character of his

political and commercial writings, iv. 359. 1i.
account of the produce of the Spanilih American mines,
360.
Canary islands crec'ed into a kingdom by pope Cl(-

ment VI. i. 5't. Are conquered by John deJc IlLhcil-
¢ourt, ibid.

C'nN' ali, D

Cannibais, no people ever found to eat human fleil for

subsistence, though often for revenge, ii. 164. 4c2.
Canoes, American, the conftrution of, described, ii.

185.
Caraccas, efrablifhment of the company trading to that

coaff, iv. 97. Growth of the trade, 352.
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 161.
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 243. Their

charater by M. de Chanvalon, 386. Probable con-
jecure as to the diftinEtion in character between them
and the natives of the larger islands, 416.
Carpini, his extraordinary mission to the prince of the

Tartars, i. 46.
Carthagena, the harbour of, the safest and best fortified

of any in all the Spanish American dominions, iii,
376.
Carthaginians, fiate of commerce and navigation among,

i. Ix. The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco,
13.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Caffro's

vi'cory over young Almagro, iii. 211. Encourages
Gonzalo Pizarro to assume the government of Peru,
23 . Advises Pizarro to assume the sovereignty of
the country, 237. Is seized by Gafca, and executed,
257.
Ca/fillo, Bernal Diaz del, characer of his Hiftoria Var-

dadera de la Conquifta de la Nueva Efpagna, ii. 418,
419.
Centeno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy of Peru, iii. 23... Is defeated by Carvajal,
and secretes himself in a cave, 236. Sallies out and
seizes Cuzco, 251. Is reduced by Pizarro, 253. Is
employed by Gafca to make discoveries in the regions
about the river Plata, 264.
Chancellour, Richard, fails in search of a north-west

paflage, iv. 147. The fleet is scattered in a storm,
ibid. He enters the WVhite Sea, and winters at Arch-
angel, ibid. Vilits Moscow, adifance of 1200 miles,
.rd delivers a letter to the czar, 148. Is the means of

opening

opening a trade with Ruflia, 149. Is empowered by
Q(een Elizabeth to negotiate with the czar in her
name, 150.
Chanvalon, M. de, his characer of the native Caribbees,

ii. 386.
Chapetones, in the Spanish American colonies, who thus

distinguished, iv. 30.
Charles II. king of Spain, efRablifhes packet-boats be-

tween Spain and the colonies, iv. 1oI. Allows free
trade to the windward islands, 102. Grants the colo-
nies a free trade with each other, ro6.
Charles V. emperor, fends Roderigo de Figueroa to His-

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 317. Causes this subjea to be debated
before him, 325. Equips a squadron at the solicit-
ation of Ferdinand Magellan, iii. 78. Resigns his
claim on the Moluccas to the Portuguese, 85. Ap-
points Cortes governor of New Spain, 88. Rewards
him on coming home, 97. Establishes a board called
the Audience of New Spain, 98. His consultations
on American affairs, 212. Eftablilhes new regula-
tions, 218.

Chefapeak. See Virginia.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 170. How fubjeaed

by the Spaniards, 367. Excellence of its climate and
foil, 368. Cause of its being neglected, 369. Pro-
sped of its improvement, 370.
Chiquitos, political slate of that people, from Fernandez,

ii. 397.

Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iv. 96.
Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with some

account of the town, ii. 309. A conspiracy against
Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants destroyed, 311,
312.
Church government, sentiments refpeling, at the Re-

formation, iv. 250. Religious persecution in the
reigns of Queen Mary, and Queen Llizibeth, 261,
26z. Intolerant spirit of the church, 265. Separa-
tion of the Puritans from the church, 268. They are
reduced into an ccclefia(tic;l fyflem by Robert Brown,

a popular

a popular declaimer, and adopt the name of Brownifis,
269. Take refuge in Holland, 270. Remove thence
to America, 271. Church government is eftablifled
in Massachusets Bay, 284. Its intolerance, 285.
The intolerance of Laud increases the emigrations
from England, 286.

Cicero, infianceof his ignorance in geography, i. 354.
Cinaloa, political Rate of the people there, ii. 397.

Their mode of living, 406. Are destitute of all reli-
gion, 41o. Extraordinary large grain of gold found
there, iii. 433.
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries of

rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 360, 361.
Probable effets of there discoveries, 362.
Clavigero, TM. several of his objecions answered, iv.

34-3--349.
Clement VI. pope, ereAs the Canary islands into a king-

dom, i. 54.
Climates, influenced by a variety of causes, ii. 7, 8. Their

operation on mankind, 239. Inquiry into the cause
of the different degrees of heat in, 353.
Cochineal, an important production, almost peculiar to

New Spain, iv. 69.
Cold, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 8. Causes of this peculiarity, 1o.
Colonies, Engli(h American, project of fettling them, iv.

158. Two expeditions fail, A61. The first colony
established in Virginia, 164. In danger of perifhiiig
by famine: it returns to England, 167. A fecoiJi
attempt made to fettle there, but the colony perilhes
by famine, 159, 170. 'he scheme of fettling there
is abandoned, 172. Circumstances in the reign of
Elizabeth unfavourable to colonization, 172. The
reign of James favourable to the eirabliflment of
colonies, 174. James divides the coast of America
into two parts, the one called the firfl or south colony
of Vilginid; the other, the second or north colony,
178. He grants charters to two companies for the
government of them, 179. Tenor and (lfec(ls of
those charters, ibid. 8'o. Under there charters the

settl lciit,,

settlements of the English in Virginia and New Eng-
land were established, 182. Capt. Newport fails from
England for Virginia, and discovers the Chefapeak,
18<, 184. Sails up James River, and founds a
settlement in James Town, 185. Its bad adminifira-
tion, ibid. It is annoyed by the Indians, and suffers
from scarcity and the unhealthiness of the climate, 186.
Seasonable succours are sent from England, 189. A
survey ot the country is undertaken, 190. The
colony depends for fubfiflence chiefly on supplies from
the natives, 192. A change is made in the'conftitu-
tion of the company, and a new charter is granted
with more ample privileges, iy3. Lord Delaware is
appointed governor us the colony, 194. Anarchy
prevails there, i95. It is ani;of reduced by famine,
196. Lord Delaware arrives, and by his wife admi.
niltration restores order and discipline, 199. His
health obliges him to retiur to England, and he is
superseded by Sir Thomas DTilc, who efiabliflies mar-
tial law, 200. A new charter is if'ued to the colony,
and new privileges are granted , 2,202. Cultivation.
of the land is promoted, and a treaty entered into
with the natives, 0o3. 'The land in Virginia becomes
property, 205. The culture of tobacco is intro-
duced, and its pernicious consequences, 207. The
company in England fend out a number of young
women, to induce the colonilts to fcrm more exten-
five plans of indufiry, 200. Negroes are first intro-
duced, ihid. A new constitution is given to the
colony, 211. A general maflacre of the Englif is
planned by the Indians, and executed in most of the
ettlelments, 214, 25. A bloody war is commenced
with the indian,, and in ither old nor youn -a, 'e pared,
217. 1 hec feterlcents extend, acd il.dultrv revives,
21e. 1D)efets in he ti ll conilitution of the colonies,
227. Kigi Chliles's a hi r;:ry government ot them,
22(). lie grants themi new privileges, 233. They
flotri.0i nr;der the new government, 2.3 . 'he colo-
nifts retmn.in attached to the royal caule, and parlia-
mncnt niakes war on Virgiria, which is ebliged tr

;cke ne lcd;·

acknowledge the commonwealth, 236, 237. Re-
firaints are laid on the trade of the colonies, 238.
The colonists are dissatisfied with there reffraints, 239.
Are the first to acknowledge Charles II., but their
loyalty is ill rewarded, 240. RestraintS on their
commerce farther extended by the navigation ac,
241. Effeits of the a&, 243. Colonists remonflrate
againfl it, 244. The colony of Virginia is attacked
by the Indians, 245. Discontents are produced by
the grants of land by the crown, 246. A colony is
eflablifhed at New Plymouth in New England, 274.
Plan of its government, ibid. A grand council is
appointed, 277. A new colony is projeced, 278.
Settles at Maflachufets Bay, 283. The charter of
the company in England being transferred to the
colonies, they extend in consequence of it, 288, 290.
The colonists increase, 293. New settlers arrive,
296. Sectaries fettle in Providence and Rhode Island:
300. Theological contefis give rife to a colony at
Connecticut, o30. Emigrants from Massachusets
Bay fettle there, 303. Settlements are formed in the
provinces of New Hampshire and Main, 304. State
of the colonies at the Revolution, 315. Are exempted
from certain duties, 316. Enter into a league of
confederacy, 317. Alilme the right of coining, 320.
Are patronized by Cromwell, who proposes to tranf-
port them to Jamaica, 321. They decline his offer,
322. See Nuew England, Virginia, &c.
Colonies, Spanflh American, view es the policy and trade

of, iv. i. Depopulation the first effecat of them, 2.
Causes of this depopulation, ibid. The small-pox
very fatal to, 5. General idea of the Spanish policy
in, 1 . arlly interposition of the regal authority in,
12. An excliifive trade the firfl olject in, 22. Com-
pared with thuoe of ancient Greece and Rome, 23.
The great reltri]lions they are fuhjicci to, 24. Slow
progress of their population from Europe, 26. Are
dilcouraged by the tate of property there, 27. And
by the nature of their ecclefialtical policy, 29. The
variousclclies of people in, 30. Ecclcftltical confti-

tution

tution of, 44. Form and endowments of the church
there, 46. Pernicious effelts of monastic institutions
there, 48. Character of the ecclesiastics there, 49.
Produtions of, 6o. The mines, 6r. Those of
Potofi and Sacotecas, 62. The spirit with which they
are worked, 64. Fatal effeEts of this ardour, 66.
Other commodities that compose the commerce of,
68. Amazing increase of horned cattle there, 70.
Advantages which Spain formerly derived from them,
71. Why the fame advantages are not still received,
72. Guarda Cofras employed to check the contra-
band trade in, 92. The use of regifter-flips introduced,
93. And galeons laid afde, 95. Company of the
Caraccas initituted, 97. Establishment of regular
packet-boats to, IoI. Free trade permitted between
them, o06. New regulations in the government of,
107. Reformation of the courts of juitice, lo8.
New distribution of governments, ibid. A fourth
viceroyalty established, o09. Attempts to reform
domestic policy, 112. Their trade with the Philip-
pine islands, 117. Revenue derived from, by Spain,
121. Expence of administration there, 124. State
of population in, iv. 328. The number of monasteries
there, 338. See Mexico, Peru, &c.
Columbus, Bartholomew, is lent by his brother Chrifto-

pher to negociate with Henry VII. king of England,
i 98. The misfortunes of his voyage, Io3. Follows
his brother at Hirpaniola, 174. Is vested with the
administration of affairs there by his brother on his
return to Spain, s85. Founds the town of St.
Domingo, 197.
Columbus, Chritopher, birth and education of, i. 83.

I-is early voyages, 84. Marries and fettles atLifbon,
8i6. H11s geographical retleclions, 89. Conceives the
idea of nmking dilcovcries to the wefward, 9 . Offers
his services to the Genoefc senate, .9. Cause of his
c',crtiires being rIjtefted in Portugal, 96. Applies to
the courts of Castile andl iEngland, 97, 98. His pro-
pofia, how treated by tie Spanifi geographers, 99. Is
patronized bly Joaln pcrcz, o10,. Ils proposals again

rcjedt c,

rejected, 1o5. Is invited by Isabella, and engaged in
the Spaniih service, nIo, iii. Preparations for his
voyage, Ii2. The amount of his equipment, 14.
Sails from Spain, 116. His vigilant attention to all
circumfianccs during his voyage, 118. Apprehen-
sions of his crew, 119. His address in quieting
their cabals, 124. Indications of their approaching
land, 126. An island discovered, 127. He lands,
128. His interview with the natives, i29. Names
the island San Salvadore, 131. Prosecutes his disco-
veries southward, i32. Discovers, and lands on, the
iland of Cuba, 133. Discovers Hispaniola, 136.
buffers shipwreck, but is saved by the Indians, 140.
Builds a fort, 144. PReturns to Europe, 147. His
expedient to prefervc the memory of his discoveries
eluring a florm, 149. Arrives at the Azores, 150.
Arrives at Lifbion, ibid. His reception in Spain, 152.
His audience with Ferdinand and Isabella, I54. His
equipment for a second voyage, 155. Discovers the
Caribbee islands, i6r. Finds his colony on Hifpa-
niola deflroyed, 162, 163. Builds a city, which he
calls Isabella, 165. Visits the interior parts of the
country, 167. His men discontented and fatious,
17o, 17r. Dilcovers the island of Jamaica, 172.
Meets his brother Barholomew at Isabella, 173. The
natives ill used by his men, and begin to be alarmed,

74, 175. He defeats the Indians, 179. Exa&ts
Kribute from them, iSo. Returns to Spain tojuftify
his conduti, 185. Is furnished with a more regular
pi.in for colonization, iS8. His third voyage, 192.
Difcovcrs the iland of Trinidad, x94. Iifcovers the
continent of America, I95. State of Hirpaniola on
his arrival, 197. Composes the mutiny of Roldan and
his adherents, 200. Is diflrefled by the faCtious
behaviour of his men, 21.|. Complaints carried to
Spain againit him, 215, 210. Is lent home in irons,
219. Clears his conduct, but is not restored to his
authority, 222. His (blicitations neglefded, 228.
I'orms new fchenes of difcovcry, 229. Engages in a
fourth voyage, 231. Ilis treatment at I-hlpaniola,

6 232.

23:. Searches after a passage to the Indian ocean,
234. Is (hipwrecked on the coast of Jamaica, 236.
His artifice to secure the friendlhip of the Indians, 240.
Is delivered, and arrives at Hispaniola, 244. Returns
to Spain, 745. His death, 247. His right to the
original discovery of America defended, 365. The
spirit of adventure raiTed in England by his discoveries,
iv. 134. Is checked by the want of skill in navigation,
135. His fyftern of opening a passage to India by
fleering a western course is adopted by Cabot, 138.
Columbus, Don Diego, sues out his claim to his father's

privileges, i. 265. Marries, and goes over to His-
paniola, 266, 267. Establishes a pearl finiery at
Cubagua, 268. Projecs the conqueff of Cuba, 277.
His measures thwarted by Ferdinand, 301. Returns
to Spain, 302.
Sommerce, the tera from which its commencement is to

bedated, i. 3. Motives to an intercourse among di-
ftant nations, 5. Still flourifled in the eaffern empire
after the subversion of the western, 37. Revival of,
in Europe, 40.
Compass, mariner's, navigation extended more by the

invention of, than by all the efforts of preceding ages,
i. 51. By whom invented, ibid. 52.
Condamine, AM. his account of the country at the foot of

the Andes, in South America, ii. 361. His remarks
on the charadter of the native Americans, 385.
Cowo, the kingdom of, dilcovered by the Portuguese,

1. 74. Conf/antinuple, the consequence of removing the feat of

the Roman empire to, i. 35. Continued a commer-
cial city after the extinction of the weflern empire,
37. Became the chief mart of Italy, 40.
Cordova, Francisco Hernandez, dilcovers Yucatan, i. 336.

Is repulsed at Campeachy, and returns to Cuba, 338.
Corita, Alonzo, his observations on the contraband trade

of the Spaiiilh colonies, iv. 115. Charaier of his
American memoirs, iii. 410.
Ceries, Fernando, his birth, education, and character,

ii. 247. Is by Velasquez appointed commrander of the

VOL. IV. cc armament

armament fitted out by him against New Spain, 250.
Velasquez becomes jealous of him, 251. Velasquez
fends orders to deprive him of his commission, and lay
him under an arretf, 253. Is proteEted by his troops,
255. The amount of his forces, 256. Reduces the
Indians at Tabasco, 258. Arrives at St. Juan de
Ulua, 259. His interview with two Mexican com-
manders, 262. Sends presents to Montezuma, 265.
Receives others in return, 266. His schemes, 273.
Etfablifhes a form of civil government, 277. Resigns
his commission under Velasquez, and assumes the com-
mand in the king's name, 280. His friendship courted
by the Zempoallans, 282. Builds a fort, 285. Con-
cludes a formal alliance with several caziques, 286.
Discovers a conspiracy among his men, and destroys
his fiips, 290, 291. Advances into the country, 294.
Is opposed by the Tlafcalans, 269. Concludes a peace
with them, 303. His rafli zeal, 307. Proceeds to
Cholula, 309. Discovers a conspiracy against him
here, and destroys the inhabitants, 311, 312. Ap-
proaches in fight of the capital city of Mexico, 314.
His first interview with Montezuma, 315. His anxiety
at his situation in the city of Mexico, 323. Seizes
Montezuma, 328. Orders him to be fettered, 332.
Reasons of his condu&, ibid. Prevails on Montezuma
to own himself a vaflal to the Spanish crown, 337.
Amount and division of his treasure, 339. Enrage,;
the Mexicans by his imprudent zeal, 343. An arma-
ment lent by Velasquez to supersede him, 346. His
deliberations on this event, iii. 4. Advances to meet
Narvaez, 8. Defeats Narvaez, and takes him pri-
soner, 13. Gains over the Spanifl soldiers to his
interell, 14. Returns to Mexico, 17. His improper
conduct on his arrival, 18. Is resolutely attacked by
the Mexicans, 19. Attacks them in return without
ufccefs, 21. Death of Montezuma, 22. His extra-
ordinary escape from death, 25. Abandons the city
of Mexico, 26. Is attacked by the Mexicans, ,8.
His great loses in the encounter, 29, 30. Difficulties
of his retreat, 3r. Battle of Otumba, 33. Defeatc

the

the Mexicans, 35. Mutinous spirit of his troops, 39.
Reduces the Tepeacans, 41. Is flrengthened by
several reinforcements, ibid. Returns to Mexico, 44.
Eflablifhes his head-quarters at Tezeuco, 47. Reduces
or conciliates the surrounding country, 49. Cabals
among his troops, 50. His prudence in fupprefling
them, 52. Builds and launches a fleet of brigantines
on the lake, 56. Besieges Mexico, 57. Makes a
grand assault to take the city by storm, but is repulsed,
62, 63. Evades the Mexican prophecy, 67. Takes
Guatimozin prisoner, 7I. Gains pofleflion of the
city, 72. And of the whole empire, 75. Defeats
another attempt to supersede him in his command, 86.
Is appointed governor of New Spain, 88. His
schemes and arrangements, 89. Cruel treatment of
the natives, ibid. His condud fubje&ed to inquiry,
95. Returns to Spain to justify himself, ibid. Is
rewarded by the emperor Charles V. 97. Goes back
to Mexico with limited powers, 98. Discovers Cali-
fornia, 1oo. Returns to Spain and dies, ibid. ior.
Inquiry into the nature of his letters to the emperoi
Charles V. 416. Authors who wrote of his conquefl
of New Spain, 417-419.

Council of the Indies, its power, iv. 19.
Creoles, in the Spanish American colonies, characer of,

iv. 31.
Croglan, Colonel George, his account of the discovery

of the bones of a large extind species of animals in
North America, ii. ;62.
Crusades to the Holy Land, the great political advantages

derived from, by the European nations, i. 42, 43.
Cruzado, bulls of, publii]hed regularly every two years in

the Spanish colonies, iv. 1 22. Prices of, and amount
of the sale at the last publication, 361.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Chriitu[,her Columlbus,

i. 133. Is failed round by Ocampo, 265. The con-
quelt of, undertaken by Diego Velafqlcez, 276. Cruel
treatment ot the cazique I-latucy, and his repartee to a
friar, 277. Co)urn bus's cnthulia ic dcfcription of a

< C 2, harbour

harbour in, 361. The tobacco produced there, the
finest in all America, iv. 70.

Cubagua, a pearl fishery established there, i. 268.
Cumano, the natives of, revenge their ill treatment by

the Spaniards, i. 329. The country desolated by
Diego Ocampo, 333.
Cuzco, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Manco Capac, iii. 127. Is seized by Pizarro, 6o0.
Is besieged by the Peruvians, 174. Is surprised by
Almagro, 178. Is recovered and pillaged by the
Pizarros, 188. Was the only city in all Peru, 353.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favourite paflion among the

Americans, ii. 209.
Darien, the isthmus of, described, i. 284. The increase

of settlement there, obftruted by the noxiousness of the
climate, iii. 375.
Delaware, Lord, is appointed governor of Virginia, iv.

194. His wife administration there, 197. Is obliged
to return to England on account of his health, 200.
De Solis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata, i.

300.
De Solis, Antonio, character of his Hilforia de la Con-

quilta de Mexico, ii. 419.
D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his vigorous mea-

fures for restraining the excesses of the regular clergy
there, iv. 54. Rendered ineffectual, ibid.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hope,

i. 78.
Dicoveries, the difference between those made by land,

and those by Tea, Hated, i. 353.
Dodwell, his objecions to the Periplus of Hanno ex-

ploded, i. 348.
Domingo, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by

Bartholomew Columbus, i. 197.

Dominicans,

Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly remonfirate

against the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 303..
See Las Casas.

Drake, Sir Francis, fails round the world, iv. 156.
Drunkenness, strong propensity of the Americans to in-

dulge in, ii. 214.

E
Earth, the globe of, how divided into zones by the

ancients, i. 32.
Egyptians, ancient, state of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 6.
El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called,

made by Francis Orellana, iii. 199.

Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 363.
Elizabeth, the reign of, auspicious to discovery, iv. 153.

She encourages commerce, and secures the trade to
Russia, 154. Circumitances in her reign unfavourable
to colonization, I72. Her high idea of her fupe-
rior skill in theology, 262.
Escurial, curious calendar discovered in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iv. 421. Description of that
valuable monument of Mexican art, iblid.
Efquimaux Indians, resemblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 46. Some account
of, 408.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exclusive

right to all the countries they should discover, tromn
Cape Non to the continent of India, i. 69.
Europe, how affeeted by the dismemberment of the

Roman empire by the barbarous nations, i. 36.
Revival of commerce and navigation in, 40. Political
advantages derived from the ciulades, 42.

c 3

F
Ferdinand king of Castile. See Columbus and IJ/bella.

Turns his aitention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 259. Don Diego de Columbus
sues out his father's claims against him, 265. Erels
two governments on the continent of America, 270.
Sends a fleet to Darien, and supersedes Balboa, 292.
Appoints Balboa lieutenant-governor of the countries
on the South Sea, 296. Sends Dias de Salis to dif-
cover a western paflage to the Moluccas, 300.
Thwarts the measures of Diego Columbus, 30o.
His decree concerning the treatment of the Indians,
305.
Fernandez, Don Diego, chara'ter of his Hiftoria del

Peru, iii. 396.
Fernandez, P. his description of the political fiate of the

Chiquitos, ii. 397.
Figuero:, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of His-

paniola, with a commission to examine into the treat-
ment of the Indian natives, i. 317. Makes an expe-
riment to determine the capacity of the Indians, 330.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 278. The

chiefs there hereditary, ii. 139. Account of, from
Alvara Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, 391.

Flota, Spanish, some account of, iv. 81.
Fonseca, bishop of Badajos, minifler for Indian affairs,

obftruEts the plans of colonization and discovery
formed by Columbus, i. 181. 192. Patronises the
expedition of Alonzo de Ojeda, 209.
Frobijher, Martin, makes three unsuccessful attempts to

discover a north-eait passage to India, iv. 155.

G
Galtons, Spaniflh, the nature and purpose of there vcffcls,

iv. 81. Arrangement of their voyage, ibid.

Galvez,

Galvez, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true fiate of

California, iii. 363.
Gama, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 204.

Doubles the Cape of Good Hope, 205. Anchors before
the city of Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in
Malabar, 206.

Gaming, firange propensity of the Americans to, ii. 213.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the position

of that river, i. 352.
Ga/ca, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as president of the Court

of Audience in Lima, iii. 243. His charadter and
moderation, 243, 244. The powers he was vested
with, 245. Arrives at Panama, 246. Acquires pof-
session of Panama with the fleet and forces there, 249.
Advances towards Cuzco, 254. Pizarro's troops
desert to him, 256. His moderate use of the viEtory,
257. Devises employment for his soldiers, 264. lis
division of the country among his followers, 265.
The discontents it occasions, 266. Restores order and
government, 267. His reception at his return to
Spain, 268.

Geminus, instance of his ignorance in geography, i. 355.
Geography, the knowledge of, extremely confined among

the ancients, i. 31. Became a favourite fludy among
the Arabians, 39.
Giants, the accounts of, in our early travellers, uncon-

firmed by recent discoveries, i. 50. ii. 380, 381.
Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, condu6ts the firlt colony to

North America, iv. I59. A charter is granted to
him and his heirs, 16o. Conducts another expedition,
which ends difaltroufly, and in which he perishes,
r6r.
Gioia, Fiavio, the inventor of the mariner's compass, i.

5'.

Globe, its division into zones by the ancients, i. 32.
Gold, why the first metal with which man was ac-

quainted, iii. 369. Extraordinary large grain of, found
in the mines at Cinaloa, iv. 434.
Gomara, character of his Cronica de la Neuva Efpagna,

ii. 417.

c c Good

Good Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 79.
Gofnold, Bartholomew, is the firRt who attempts to fleer

a direEt course from England to North America, iv.
174. Defcries Massachusets Bay, and returns to
England, 175. The consequences of his voyage,
ibid.
Government, no visible form of, among the native Ame-

cans, ii. 134. Exceptions, 138.
Gran Chaco, account of the method of making war among

the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 399.
Granada, new kingdom of, in America, by whom re-

duced to the Spanish dominion, iii. 380. Its climate
and produce, 38i. A viceroy lately established there,
iv. 15.
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and discovery

among them, i. 16. Their commercial intercourse
with other nations very limited, 18, 19.

Greenland, its vicinity to North America, ii. 45.
Greenville, Sir Richard, eflablifhes a colony in Virginia,

which being in danger of perishing by famine, is
obliged to return to England, iv. 164, 165. Appears
off the coast soon after the departure of the colony,
and lands fifteen of his crew to keep poffefion of the
island, who are defiroyed by the savages, 169.
Grijalva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

discovery, i. 339. Discovers and gives name to New
Spain, 34t. His reasons for not planting a colony in
his newly discovered lands, 343.
Guarda Costas employed by Spain to check illicit trade

in the American colonies, iv. 92.
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in America,

iv. 69.
Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma,

succeeds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of Mexico, iii.
47. Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards, in florming
the city of Mexico, 63. Is taken prisoner by Cortes,
71. Is tortured to difcovcr his treasure, 74. Is
hanged, 91.
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility of the foil

there, ii. 366.

H
.Hakluyt improves the naval and commercial skill of

the age in which he lived, iv. 176. Is empowered
to fettle any part of the south colony of Virginia,
I78.
Hanno, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 347.
Hatuey, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treatment, and

memorable repartee to a Franciscan friar, i. 277.
Hawkefworth's voyages, account of New Holland, and

the inhabitants, from, ii. 393.
Heat, the different degrees of, in the old and new con-

tinents, accounted for, ii. 353. Estimated, 365.
Henry Prince of Portugal, his charader and fludies, i.

6r. Expeditions formed by his order, 63. Applies
for a papal grant of his new discoveries, 68. His
death, 72.
Herrada, Juan de, affaflinates Francis Pizarro, iii. 204.

Dies, 209.
Herrera, the best historian of the conquest of New

Spain, ii. 420. His account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 407.
Hispaniola, the island of, discovered by Christopher

Columbus, i. I36. His tranfaftions with the na-
tives, ibid. 137. A colony left there by Columbus, .15.
The colony destroyed, 163. Columbus builds a
city called Isabella, 165. The natives ill used,
and begin to be alarmed, I74. Are defeated by
the Spaniards, 177. Tribute exated from them,
i8c. They fcherne to starve the Spaniards, 182.
St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
197. Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla,
219. Nicholas de (vando appointed governor, 223.
Summary view of the conduct of the Spaniards to-
wards the natives of, 251. Unhappy fate of Ana-
coana, 254. Great produce from the mines there,
257. The inhabitants dirninifh, 260. The Spa-

niards

niards recruit them by trepanning the natives of the
Lucayos, 262. Arrival of Don Diego de Columbus,
267. The natives of, almost extirpated by slavery,
27'6. 302. Controversy concerning the treatment
of them, 302. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of, 362.
Curious instance of superstition in the Spanish planters
there, ii. 365.
Holguin, Pedro Alvarez, erefls the royal flandard in

Peru, in opposition to the younger Almagro, iii. 209.
Vaca de Cafiro arrives, and assumes the command,

210.
Homer, his account of the navigation of the ancient

Greeks, i. 17.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing to its pro-

duction of the logwood tree, iii. 366.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in Spanish

America, iv. 70.
Horses, astonishment and mistakes of the Mexicans at

the first fight of them, ii. 426. Expedient of the
Peruvians to render them incapable of adion, iii.
406.
Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, his characer and family,

iii. 130.
H]uarfar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brother Ata-

hualpa's fucceflion to Quito, iii. 131. Is defeated and
taken prifbner by Atahualpa, 132. Solicits the assist-
ance of Pizarro against his brother, 133. Is put to
death by order of Atahualpa, 147.
ZIlutchifiin, Mrs. heads a set of religious women in New

.England, who are denominated Antinomians, iv. 298.
Her docrines are condemned by a general fynod there,
299.

Jamaica, discovered by Christopher Columbus, i. 172.
Yerome, St. three monks of that order tent by cardinal

Ximcnes to lHilpaniola, to regulate the trcatmeLit of

6 the

the Indians, i. 31 . Their conduct under this com-
miflion, 314. Are recalled, 317.
jesuits, acquire an absolute dominion over California,

iii. 363. Their motives for depreciating the country,
ibid.
Jews, ancient state of commerce and navigation among

them, i. !o.
Incas of Peru, received origin of their empire, iii. 128.

329. Their empire founded both in religion and
policy, 330, 331. See Peru.
India, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his expedi-

tion to, i. 20. The commerce with, how carried on
in ancient tines, 27, 28. And when arts began to
revive in Europe, 40. The first voyage made round
the Cape of Good Hope, 204. Attempts to difcovera
north-west paflage to, unsuccessful, iv. 146. 155. An
attempt made by the north-east to, 147. A company
of merchants in England is incorporated to prosecute
discoveries in, ibid. A communication with, atte-npted
by land, 150. The design is encouraged by queen
Elizabeth, '54.

Indians in Spanish America. See Americans.
Indies, Weft, why Columbus's discoveries were so named,

i. 157.
Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinary miflion to the prince

of the Tartars, i. 46.
Inquisition, court of, when and by whom first introduced

into Portugal, i. 357.
Insets and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in

America, ii. 20.
.7ohn I. king of Portugal, the firfl who lent ships to e -

plore the weflern coafls of Africa, i. 57, 58. His so,
prince Henry engages in thcee attempts, 61.

/sohn II. king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

discoveries, i. 74.. Sends an embafly to Ahylinia, 79.
His ungenerous treatment of Columnbu, 97.
Iron, the icafon why savage nations were unacquainted

with this metal, ii. 125.
Jfabella, queen of Castile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf of Christopher Cujl:uibu;, i.
t o.. s again

appt!ici

applied to by Quintanilla and Santangel, o18. Is
prevailed on to equip him, ro. Dies, 245. Her
real motives for encouraging discoveries in America,
iv. 6.
Isabella, the city of, in Hirpaniola, built by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. 165.
Italy, the first country in Europe where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman empire,
i. 40. The commercial spirit of, ative and enter-
prifing, 42.

L
Ladrone islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, iii,

8i.

Lakes, amazing size of those in North America, ii. 4.
Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to

solicit the cause of the enslaved Indians at the court of
Spain, i. 308. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximencs, 31i. Returns diflatisfied, 311. 316. Pro-
cures a new commiflion to be sent over on this subject,
317. Recommends the scheme of Supplying the colo-
nies with negroes, 319. Undertakes a new colony,
321. His conference with the bishop of Darien before
the emperor Charles V. 325. Goes to America to
carry his schemes intoexecution, 328. Circumstances
unfavourable to him, 330. His final miscarriage, 331.
Revives his representations in favour of the Indians,
at the desire of the emperor, iii. 216. Composes a
treatise on the deitruaion of America, 217.
Leon, Pedro Cieza de, character of his Chronica del Peru,

iii. 395.
Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

T'oupinambos, ii. 400.
Lima, the city of, in Peru, founded by Pizarro, iii.

168.
Lilon, Mr. the British minister at Madrid, his answer to

'Lveral interefling inquiries relating to the admission of
Indians into holy orders, iii. 347.

Logwood,

Lsgwood, the commodity that gives importance to the

provinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 365. Policy
of the Spaniards to defeat the Englilh trade in, ibid.
Louis, St. king of France, his embafly to the chan of the

Tartars, i. 47.
Lozana, his account of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 399.
Luque, Hernando de, a priest, associates with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 107.

M

Madeira, the island of, firif discovered, i. 64.
Madoc, prince of North Wales, story of his voyage and

discovery of North America examined, i. 369.
Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic size of

the Patagonians, ii. 82. 'IThe existence of this gigantic
race yet to be decided, 83. 380, 381. His introduc-
tion to the court of Cafile, iii. 78. Is equipped with
a squadron for a voyage of discovery, ibid. Sails
through the famous strait that bears his name, 80.
Discovers the Ladrone and Philippine islands, 8S, 82.
Is killed, 82.
Magnet, its property of attracting iron known to the

ancients, but not not its polar inclination, i. 6.
Extraordinary advantages resulting from this discovery,
51.
Malo, St. account of its commerce with Spanish America,

iv. 89.
Manco Capac, founder of the Peruvian empire, account

of, iii. 127, 128. 329.
Mandeville, Sir John, his eaflern travels, with a charater

of his writings, i. 4g.
Manila, the colony of, eflabliflied by Philip I1. of

Spain, iv. 117. Trade between, and South America,
ibid.
AIlankind, their dipofition and manners formed by their

lituation, ii. 30. I-lence refcmblances to be traced in
very diltant places without communulication, 31. Have

uniformly

uniformly attained the greatest perfection of their nature
in temperate regions, 240.
Ilaarca Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in

the Eaff, i. 48.
?sMare/t, Gabriel, his account of the country between the

Illinois and Machilimakinac, ii. 394.

Marina, Donna, a Mexican slave, her history, ii. 260.
.larinus, Tyrius, his erroneous position of China, i,

359.
.]a-tyr, Peter, his sentiments on the first discovery of

America, i. 372.

Maryland. See Virginia.
Majfachrufts Bay. See America, New England, &c.
/1'lcrcnhats, Englifl, the right of property in the North

American colonies, vested in a company of, resident in
London, iv. 172. Charters are granted to two com-
panies of, to make settlements in America, 179.
Tenor and defeCSts of there charters, i8o. A new
charter is granted to them, with more ample privi-
leges, 9-,. They are divided by factions, 219. An
inquiry is in{litute(l into their conduEt, 220. They
are required to surrender their charter, which they
reiufe, 223. A writ of quo warranto is issued out
Iiain&t them, 221. They are tried in the court of
King's Bench, and the company is dissolved, 225.
Their charter is transferred to the colonies, 288.
Aeyiizos, in the Spanish American colonies, diftin&ion

between them and Miulattoes, iv. 33.

lietals, useful, the original natives of America totally

unacquainted with, ii. 128.
,Mexicans, their account of their own origin, compared

with later difcoveiies, ii. 49. Their paintings few in
number, and of ambiguous meaning, iii. 277. Two
colleclions of them discovered, 278, note. Defcrip-
tions of their hiltorical pictures, 418. Various
exaggerated accounts of the number of human victims
I.ictificed by them, 427. Their language furnished
with refpeltful terminations for all its words, 413.
Ilow they contributed to the support of government,
ibid.

Mexico,

,fexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coast of, ii.

259. His interview with two Mexican officers, 262.
Information sent to Montezuma, with some Spanifl
presents, 265. Montezuma fends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 266, 267.
State of the empire at that time, 268. The Zempo-
allans court the friendship of Cortes, 282. Several
caziques enter into alliance with Cortes, 286. Cha-
racIer of the natives of Tlafcala, 294. The Tlafcalans
reduced to sue for peace, 302. Arrival of Cortes at
the capital city, 315. The city described, 320.
Montezuma acknowledges himself a vassal to the Spa-
nifh crown, 337. Amount of the treasure collected
by Cortes, 339. Reasons of gold being found in such
small quantities, 341. The Mexicans enraged by the
imprudent zeal of Cortes, 343. Attack Alvarado
during the absence of Cortes, iii. i5. Their resolute
attack on Cortes when he returned, 19. Death of
Montezuma, 24. The city abandoned by Cortes,
26. Battle of Otumba, 33. The Tepeacans re-
duced, 41. Preparations of the Mexicans against
the return of Cortes, 45. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 59. The Spaniards repulsed
in fforming the city, 63. Guatimozin taken prisoner,
71. Cortes appointed governor, 88. His schemes
and arrangements, 89. Inhuman treatment of the
natives, go. Reception of the new regulations there,
221. A retrofped into the form of government,
policy, and arts in, 271. Our information concerning
very imperfele, 275. Origin of the monarchy, 278.
Number and greatness of the cities, 284. Mechanical
proteffions there distinguished from each other, 286.
Diltinclion of ranks, 287. Political institutions, 290.
Power and splendor of their monarchs, 294. Order of
government, 295. Provilfon for the f(ipport of it, ibid.
Police of, 296. Their arts, 297. Their paintings,
2')9. 'lheir method or computing time, 307. Their
wars continual and rre ciou, 308. Their funeral rites,

o.0 Ilnperfedioi of their agriculture, ibid. Doubts
concerning the ext!cnt of the empire, 3 l. Little in-

tercourfe

tercourfe among its several provinces, 313. Ignorance
of money, 3t5. State of their cities, 316. Temples
and other public buildings, 3,7, 318. Religion of,
324. Causes of the depopulation of this country,
iv. 2. The frall-pox very fatal there, 5. Number
of Indian natives remaining there, 9. Lift and
character of those authors who wrote accounts of
the conquest of, ii. 414. Description of the aqueduc
for the supply of the capital city, iii. 415. See
Colonies.
Michael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea, discovered

and named by Balboa, i. -88. The colony of, efta-
blithed by Pizarro, iii. 125.

Migrations of mankind, why firit made by land, i. r.
Mind, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the wants

of the body, ii. 97.
Miines of South America, the great inducement to popu-

lation, iii. 359. Some account of, iv. 6i. Their
produce, 63. The spirit with which they are worked,
64. Fatal effeOts of this ardor, 66. Evidence of
the pernicious effecs of labouring in them, 335. Of
Mexico, total produce of, to the Spanish revenue, iv.
364, 365, 366.
Mlolucca Islands, the Spanish claims on, fold by the

Emperor Charles V. to the Portuguese, iii. 84.
iAlonajfic inflitutions, the pernicious effects of, in the

Spanish American colonies, iv. 4.8. Number of con-
vents there, 338.
_lIonfoons, the periodical course of, when discovered by

navigators, i. 27.
Montefino, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub-

licly remoaftrates against the cruel treatment of the
Indians, i. 303.
Mloniezuma, the firit intelligence received by the Spa-

niards of this prince, i. 342. Receives intelligence of
the arrival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii.
265. His presents to Cortes, 266. Forbids him to
approach his capital, 2z7. btate of his empire at this
time, 268. His char;;ter, 269. His perplexity at
the arrival of the Spaniards, 270. His timid negocia-

tions

tions with Cortes, 27 r His scheme for defiroying
Cortes at Cholula discovered, 311. His irresolute
conduct, 315. His first interview with Cortes, ibid.
Is seized by Cortes, and confined to the Spanish
quarters, 328. Is fettered, 332. Acknowledges
himself a vassal to the Spanish crown, 337. Remains
inflexible with regard to religion, 342. Circumstances
of his death, iii. 23. Account of a gold cup of his,
in England, 415.
.Mulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies, explana-
tion of this diftinaion, iv. 33.

N
Narvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velasquez with an arma-

ment to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. 348. Takes
poffeflion of Zempoalla, iii. 8. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Cortes, 13. How he carried on his cor-
refpondence with Montezuma, 386.
Natchez, an American nation, their political institutions,

ii. 139, 140. Causes of their tame fubmiflion to
the Spaniards, 145. Their religious do&trines, 146.
Navigation, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial
intercourse, 3. ImperfeEtions of, among the ancients,
6. More improved by the invention of the mariner's
compais, than by all the efforts of preceding ages,
5 . The first naval discoveries undertaken by Portu-
gal, 55.
Negroes, their peculiar fitua..ion under the Spanish domi-

nion in America, iv. 35. Are first introduced into
Virginia, 209.
New England, first attempts to fettle in, unsuccessful, iv.

257. Religious disputes give rife to the colony there,
258. A lettlement is formed at New Plymouth in
Malfachufets Bay, 27/4. Plan of its government,
275. All property is thrown into a common
flock, 276. A grand council is appointed, 277.

VOL. IV. D A new

A new colony is projeeed at Maffachurets Bay, and a
charter granted for its eflablifhment, 280. Its fettle-
ment there, 283. A new church is instituted there,
284. Its intolerance, 285. Charter of the Englilh
company of merchants in London is transferred to
the colonies, 288. The colony at Mafiachufets Bay
extends, 90o. None but members of the church arc
admitted as freemen there, 291. Bad consequences of
this regulation, 292. The settlement increases, and
the aflembly is reftrided to the representatives of
freemen, 294. Extent of political liberty assumed by
the aflembly, ibid. Spirit of fanaticism spreads in the
colony, 295. New settlers arrive, and the doarines
of the Antinomians are condemned by a general fynod,
299. Secaries fettle in Providence and Rhode Island,
300. Theological contests give rife to the colony of
Conneaicut, 301. Emigrants from Massachusets Bay
fettle in Conneaticut, 303. The Dutch, who had
eflablifhed a few trading towns on the river there,
peaceably withdraw, ibid. Settlements are formed in
the provinces of New Hampshire and Main, 304.
Further encroachments of the English are refifled by
the natives, 306. War with the Pequod tribes is
commenced, 308. Purification of the army, 309.
The Indians are defeated, 3o0. Cruelties exercised
against them, 311. Emigrations from England to
the colonies are prohibited by proclamation, 312.
Colony of Massachusets Bay is sued at law, and found
to have forfeited its rights, 313. Confederacy of the
iates in, 317. See Colonies.
Newfoundland, its situation described, ii. 353. Discovery

of, by Cabot, iv. 139.
New Holland, some account of the country and inhabit.

ants, ii. 39 '.
New Plymouth, settlement at, iv. 274. See Colonies, New

England.
New Spain, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 341. See Mexico.
Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 2 r.

Norwegians

Norwegians might in ancient times have migrated to, and

colonized, America, ii. 47.
Nugnez Vela, Blasco, appointed Viceroy of Peru, to

enforce the new regulations, iii. 22 . His charaaer,
227. Commits Vaca de Castro to prison, ibid.
Dissentions between him and the court of audience,
230. Is confined, ibid. Recovers his liberty, 232.
Resumes his command, 233. Is pursued by Gon-
zalo Pizarro, 235. Is defeated and killed by Pizarro,
236.

0
Ocatnpo, Diego, Cent with a squadron from Hispaniola to

desolate the country of Cumana, i. 329. 332.
Ocampo, Sebafrian de, firfi fails round Cuba, and discovers

it to be an island, i. 265.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intercourse between

distant countries, continued long a formidable barrier,
i. 2. See Compass and Navigation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to the Weft

Indies, i. 209. His second voyage, 224. Obtains a
government on the continent, 270.
Onledo, Father Bartholomew de, checks the rash zeal of

Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico, ii. 308. Is sent by
Cortes to negociate with Narvaez, iii. 5.
Orellana, Francis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii. 197.
Sails down the Maragnon, 198. Returns to Spain
with a report of wonderful discoveries, 199. Herrera's
account of his voyage, 407.
Orgognez commands Almagro's party againif the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, iii. i86, 187.
Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by Christopher

Columbus, i. 194. The amazing plenty of fish in,
ii. 390. Strange method of choofing a captain among
the Indian tribes on the banks of, 168.
Otaheite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 409.

D D 2 Otumba,

Otumba, battle of, between Cortes and the Mexicans,

iii. 33.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to Hispaniola, i.

225. His prudent regulations, 227. Refuses ad-
minfion to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 232. His
ungenerous behaviour to Columbus, on his ship-
wreck, 238. 242. Receives him at length, and fends
him home, 244. Engages in a war with the Indians,
251. His cruel treatment of them, 252. Encourages
cultivation and manufactures, 258. His method of
trepanning the natives of the Lucayos, 262. Is re-
called, 266.

P

Pacific ocean, why and by whom so named, iii. 8I.
Packet boats, first efiablilhment of, between Spain and

her American colonies, iv. tot.

Panama is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 299.
Parmcnides, the first who divided the earth by zones, i.

356. Patagonians, some account of, ii. 8i. The reality

of their gigantic size yet to be decided, 83. 380,
381. Pedrarias, Davila, is sent with a fleet to supersede Balboa

in his government of Santa Maria on the isthmus of
Darien, i. 291. Treats Balboa ill, 293. Rapacious
condu& of his men, 295. Is reconciled to Balboa,
and gives him his daughter, 296. Puts Balboa to
death, 298. Removes his settlement from Santa
Maria to Panama,, 299.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the

Welch language, i. 370.
Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the court of Castile,

i. o14. His solemn invocation for the success of
Columbus's voyage, li6.
Periplus of Hanno,.the authenticity of that workjultified,

i. 348.

Peru,

Peru, the first intelligence concerning this country, re-

ceived by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 283. 289. The
coast of, first discovered by Pizarro, iii. iI5. Pi-
zarro's second arrival, 122; His hostile proceedings
against the natives, 124. The colony of St. Michael
eltablifhed, 125. State of the empire at the time of
this invasion, 126. The kingdom divided between
Huafcar and Atahualpa, 131. Atahualpa usurps the
government, ibid. Huafcar solicits assistance from
Pizarro, 133. Atahualpa visits Pizarro, i+o. Is
seized by Pizarro, 143. Agreement for his ransom,
145. Is refused his liberty, i50. Is cruelly put to
death, 156. Confusion of the empire on this event,
x58. Quito reduced by Benalcazar, I6i. The city
of Lima founded by Pizarro, 168. Chili invaded by
Almagro, 170. Insurrection of the Peruvians, 171.
Almagro put to death by Pizarro, rgo. Pizarro
divides the country among his followers, 193. Pro-
grefs of the Spanilh arms there, 194. Francis
Pizarro aflaflinated, 205. Reception of the new
regulations there, 223. The viceroy confined by the
court of audience, 230. The viceroy defeated and
killed by Gonzalo Pizarro, 236. Arrival of Pedro de
la Gafca, 246. Reduction and death of Gonzalo
Pizarro, 257. The civil wars there not carried on
with mercenary soldiers, 259. But nevertheless gra-
tified with immense rewards, 260. Their profuSion
and luxury, 261. Ferocity of their contests, 76i.
Their want of faith, ibid. Inltances, 263. Divi-
sion of, by Gafca, among his followers, 265. A
retrofpet into the original government, arts, and
manners of the natives, 271. The high antiquity
they pretend to, 326. Their records, 327. Origin
of their civil policy, 329. This founded in religion,
331. The authority of the Incas absolute and unli-
mited, 332. All crimes were punishcd capitally,
333. Mild genius of their religion, 334. Its influl.
ence on their civil policy, 336. And on their military
fyltem, 337. Peculiar slate of property there, 338,

D D 3 Diltiltmiol

Diitinóion of ranks, 339. State of arts, 340. Im-
proved ifate of agriculture, 34i. Their buildings,
343. Their public roads, 346. Their bridges, 348..
Their mode of refining silver ore, 35c. Works of
elegance, 35I. Their civilization, nevertheless, but
imperfect, 353. Cuzco the only place that had the
appearance of a city, ibid. No perfeCt reparation of
profeflions, 354. Little commercial intercourse, ibid.
Their unwarlike spirit, 355. Eat their flesh and fifl
raw, 357. Brief account of other provinces under the
viceroy of New Spain, 358. Caules of the depopula-
tion of this country, iv. 3. The finall-pox very fatal
there, 5. Writers who gave accounts of the conquest
of, iii. 394. Their method of building, 431. State of
the revenue derived'from, by the crown of Spain, iv,
362. See Colonies.
Peter I. czar of Russia, his extensive views in profccuting

Asiatic discoveries, ii. 38.
Phenicians, ancient, slate of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 8. Their trade, how conduLCed,
347.
Philip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition aided by his

American treasures, iv. 73. Establishes the colony of
Manila, 17.
Philip Ill. exhaufis his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iv. 74.
Philippine ifands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, iii.

82. A colony established there by Philip II. of Spain,
iv. 117. Trade between, and America, ibid.
Physic, the art of, in America, why connected with divi-

nation, ii. 205.
Pinto, Chevalier, his description of the characeriftic

features of the native Americans, ii. 377.
Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a veflel under Co-

lumbus in his first voyage of discovery, i. 1 4. Sails
to America on a private adventure with four lhips,
i 6. Dilcovers Yucatan, 264.
Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzco by the Peru.

vians, iii. 173. Is furpriled there by Almagro, 178.

6 Efcapcs

Escapes with Alvarado, 182. Defends his brother
at the court of Spain, 191. Is committed to prison,
193.
Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in his settlement on

the isthmus of Darien, i. 274. Marches under him
across the isthmus, where they discover the South
Sea, 287. His birth, education, and charaaer, iii.
o15. Aflociates with Almagro and De Luque, in
a voyage of discovery, 107. His ill success, 109.
Is recalled, and deserted by most of his followers, 112.
Remains on the island of Gorgona for supplies, 114.
Discovers the coast of Peru, 1 5. Returns to Panama,
xi6. Goes to Spain to solicit reinforcements, 118.
Procures the supreme command for himself, 119.
Is aflifted with money by Cortes, 120. Lands again
in Peru, 122. His hostile proceedings against the
natives, 124. Establishes the colony of St. Michael,
125. State of the Peruvian empire at this time, 126.
Cause of his easy penetration into the country, 132.
Is applied to by Huafcar for assistance against his
vitorious brother Atahualpa, 133. State of his
forces, 134. Arrives at Caxamalca, 137, Is visited
by the Inca, 140. His perfidiousfeizure of him, 143.
Agrees to Atahualpa's offer for his ransom, 145. Divi-
fiop of their plunder, 148. Refuses Atahualpa his
liberty, 150. His ignorance exposed to Atahualpa,
154. Bestows a form of trial on the Inca, ibid. Puts
him to death, 156. Advances to Cuzco, 159. Ho-
nours conferred on him by the Spanish court, i65.
Beginning of dissentions between him and Almagro,
166. His civil regulations, 167. Founds the city of
Lima, 168. Insurrection of the Peruvians, 171.
Cuzco seized by Almagro, 178. Deludes Almagro by
negociations, 182. Defeats Almagro, and takes him
prisoner, 186, 187. Puts Almagro to death, 190.
Divides the country among his followers, 193. The
impolitic partiality of his allotments, ibid. Makes his
brother Gonzalo governor of Qsito, 195. 15 affaiiln-
ated by Juan de Herreda, 205.

D D 4 Pizarro,

Przarro, Gonzale, is made governor of Quito, by his

brother Francis, iii. 195. His expedition over the
Andes, ibid. Is deserted by Orellana, I97. His
distress on this event, 200. Iis difafirous return to
Quito, 20I. Is encouraged by the people to oppose
Nugnez Vela, the new viceroy, 228. Assumes the
government of Peru, 232. Marches against the vice-
roy, 234. Defeats and kills him, 238. Is advised
by Carvajal to assume the sovereignty of the country,
237. Choofes to negotiate with the court of Spain,
240. Consultations of the court on his conduEt, ibid.
His violent resolutions on the arrival of Pedro de la
Gafca, 247. Resolves to oppose him by violence,
250. Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco, 252.
Defeats him, 253. Is deserted by his troops on the
approach of Gafca, 256. Surrenders and is executed,
257. His adherents men of no principle, 263.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis, i. 300. Its

amazing width, ii. 352.
Playfair, Mr. Profeflbr of mathematics in Edinburgh,

the result of his comparison of the narrative and charts
given in Captain Cook's voyages, published in 1780 ;
and Mr. Coxe's account of the Ruffian discoveries,
printed in the fame year, in which the vicinity of the
two continents of Asia and America is clearly afcer-
tained, ii. 370-375.
Pliny, the naturalist, inflance of his ignorance in geo-

graphy, i. 355.
Ponce, de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 278. Ro-

mantic motive of his voyage, 279.

Populatioa of the earth, flow progress of, i. r.
Porto Bello, discovercd and named by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 235.
Porto Rico is settled and fubjeaed by Juan Ponce de

Lcon, i. 263, 264.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 63.
Portugal, when and by whom the court of inquisition

was first introduced into, i. 357.

Portugtue/f-i

Priurguefe, a view of the circumstances that induced

them to undertake the discovery of unknown countries,
i. 56. 58. First African discoveries of, 60. Madeira
discovered, 64. They double Cape Bojador, 65.
Obtain a papal grant of all the countries they should
discover, 70. Cape Verd Ifands and the Azores
discovered, 71. Voyage to the East Indies by Vasco
de Gama, 204.
Potofi, the rich silver mines there, how discovered, iv. 62.

The mines of, greatly exhausted and scarcely worth
working, 350.
Prisoners of war, how treated by the native Americans,

ii. 159.
Property, the idea of, unknown to the native Ameri-

cans, ii. 130. Notions of the Brafillians concerning,
395-
ProteCor of the Indians, in Spanish Atmerica, his func-

tion, iv. 41.
Ptolemy, the philosopher, his geographical descriptions

more ample and exaca than those of his predecessors,
i. 35. His geography translated by the Arabians, 39.
His erroneous position of the Ganges, 352.

Q

uetla'vaca, brother of Montezuma, fucceedshim as king;
of Mexico, iii. 45. Conduas in person the fierce
attacks which obliged Cortes to abandon his capit.il,
ibid. Dies of the small-pox, 46.
Quevedo, Bishop of Darien, his conference with .ns

Casas on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence
of the Emperor Charles V. i. 325.
Quicksilver, the property of the famous mines of, at (ula-

nacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 350,
The price of, why reduced, 35 r.
Quinquina, or Jesuits Bark, a production peculiar to 1'cri,

iv. 69.

^y'ios,

tuipos, or historic cords of the Peruvians, some account
of, iii. 327.
Quito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac,

Inca of Peru, iii. 130. Is left to his son Atahualpa,
ibid. Atahualpa's general revolts after his death,
159. Is reduced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar,
i61. Benalcazar deposed, and Gonzalo Pizarro
made governor, 195.

R
Ralegh resumes the plan of fettling colonies in North

America, iv. 162. Dispatches Amadas and Barlow
to examine the intended settlements, who discover
Virginia, and return to England, 163. Eftablilhes
a colony in Virginia, which, on account of famine,
is obliged to return to England, 165. Makes a
second attempt to fettle a colony there, which pe-
rifhes by famine, 170. Abandons the design, 171.
Ramufio, his defence of Hanno's account of the coast of

Africa, i. 349.
Regi/ser ships, for what purpose introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iv. 93. Supersede
the use of the galeons, 95.
Religion of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii.

189.
Ribas, his account of the political slate of the people

of Cinaloa, ii. 406. Of their want of religion, 410.
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of those provinces,

iii. 371.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
Robi/an, professor, his remarks on the temperature of

various climates, ii. 354, 355, 356.
Rollan, Francis, is left chief justice in Hispaniola, by

Christopher Columbus, i. 185. Becomes the ring-
leader of a mutiny, 198. Submits, 203.
Romans, their progress in navigation and discovery, i. 25.

Their military Ipirit averse to mechanical arts and

commercel

commerce, 26. Navigation and trade favoured in the
provinces under their government, 27. Their extensive
discoveries by land, 29. Their empire and the sciences
destroyed together, 36.
Rubruquis, father, his embassy from France to the Char

of the Tartars, i. 47.
Rufia, a trade to, opened by the English, iv. i5o.

Reftriced to a company of British merchants, ibid.
The connexion with the Ruffian empire encouraged
by Queen Elizabeth, 54..
Ruffians, Asiatic discoveries made by them, ii. 37. Un-

certainty of, 367, 368.

S
Sacotecas, the rich silver mines there, when discovered,

iv. 62.
San Salvador, discovered and named by Christopher

Columbus, i. 131.
SanchG, Don Pedro, account of his History of the Con.

quell of Peru, iii. 395.
Sandoval, the shocking barbarities executed by, in Mexico,

iii. 9I.
Sandoval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifitador of America, iii.
220. His moderation and prudence, 222.

Savage life, a general estimate of, ii. 222.
Scalps, motive of the native Americans for taking them

from their enemies, ii. 401.
Serralvo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viceroyalty in America, iv. 367.
Seville, extraordinary increase of its manufactures by the

American trade, iv. 352. Its trade greatly reduced,
353. The American trade removed to Cadiz, 81.
Silver ore, method of refining it praftifed by the native

Peruvians, iii. 350.

Smnall-pox, Indian territories depopulated by, iv. 293.
Sonora, late discoveries of rich mines mrade there by the

Spaniards, iii. 360.

So.,

Soul, American ideas of the immortality of, ii. 20o.
South Sea, firit discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 288.
Spa'i, :eneral idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iv. I . Early interposition of
the regal authority in the colonies, 12. All the Ame-
rican dominions of, fubjeEted to two viceroys, I4. A
third viceroyalty lately effablifhed, 15. The colonies
of, compared with those of Greece and Rome, 23.
Advantages she derived from her colonies, 71. Why
/he does not still derive the fame, 72. Rapid decline
of trade, 75. This decline increased by the mode
of regulating the intercourse with America, 78.
Employs guarda coflas to check illicit trade, 92. The
use of register lhips introduced, 93. Eflablifhment
of the company of Caraccas, 97. Enlargement of
commercial ideas there, 99. Free trade permitted to
several provinces, 102. Revenue derived from Ame-
rica, 121. Specification, 362.
Spaniards, their curious form of taling pofieffion of news

discovered countries, i. 378.
Strabo, a citation from, proving the great geographical

ignorance of the ancients, i. 351. His own want of
geographical knowledge, 356.
Superfiition always connected with a desire of penetrating

into the secrets of futurity, ii. 204.

T
Tapia, Chrifloval de, is sent from Spain to Mexico, to

fuperfcde Cortes in his command, but fails in the
attempt, iii. 86.
Tartars, the poflibility of their migrating to America, ii.

43.
7lajcala, in Mexico, characEer of the natives of, ii. 294.

Oppolf the paflage of the Spaniards, 296. Arc reduced
to sue for peace, 302.

Tobacco,

Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of any in all

America, iv. 69. The use of, firfl introduced into
England, I68. Culture or, in Virginia, and its
consequences, 207. Its exportation thence is annually
increased, 208. Trade for, opened with Holland,
212. Grants and monopoly of, 230.
7Toupinambos, account of their ferocious courage from

Lery, ii. 400.
Trade, no efforts made in England to extend it in the

reign of Henry VII. or his immediate successors, iv.
142. To what causes that negleE was owing, 143.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iv.

102. Increase of the Spanish customs from this mea-
sure, 358.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i. 27.

Travellers, ancient character of their writings, i. 50.
Trinidad, the ifand of, discovered by Christopher Colum-

bus on his third voyage, i. 194.
Tucuman, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. 37t.
Tyre, the commerce of that city, how conducted, i.

347.
Tythes of Spanish America, how applied by the court of

Spain, iv. 363.

'aca de CaJIro, Chrifloval, is sent from Spain to regulate

the government of Peru, iii. 192. Arrives at Quito,
207. Aflumes the supreme authority, 208. Defeats
young Almagro, 210. The severity of his proceed-
ings, 21 . Prevents an insurrection concerted to
oppose the new regulations, 225. Is imprisoncd by
the new viceroy, 227.
Valverde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Ata-

hualpa, Incaof Peru, iii. Io. Gives his fandtion to
the trial and condemnation of Atahualpa, 156.

Vega,

Vega, Garcilaffo de la, charaaer of his commentary on

the Spanish writers concerning Peru, iii. 396.
Vegetables, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil where

they grow, ii. 24, 25.
lVelafquez, Diego de, conquers the ifand of Cuba, i. 276.

334. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii.
245. His difficulty in choofing a commander for the
expedition, 246. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 247.
His motives to this choice, 250. Becomes suspicious
of Cortes, ibid. Orders Cortes to be deprived of his
commifion, and arrefled, 252, 253. Sends an arma-
ment to Mexico after Cortes, 346.
Senegas P. his character of the native Californians, ii.

387.
lenereal disease, originally brought from America, ii. 87.

Appears to be wearing out, 88. Its first rapid pro-
grefs, 382.

Venezuela, history of that settlement, iii. 378.
Venice, its origin as a maritime itate, i. 43. Travels of

Marco Polo, 48.

Verd islands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 71.
Ficeroys, all the Spanish dominions in America fubjeEted

to two, iv. 14. A third latelyeftablifhed, s1. Their
powers, ibid. A fourth eftablifled, iog.
Villa Segnor, his account of the fate of population in

New Spain, iii. 328. His detail of the Spanish Ame-
rican revenue, iv. 362.
Fillefagna, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments a

mutiny among his troops, iii. 51. Is discovered by
Cortes, and hanged, 52.
Virginia, first discovery of, iv. 163. Attempt to fettle

there unsuccessful, 164. A second attempt to fettle
there, when the colony perishes by famine, 171. The
scheme of fettling there abandoned, ibid. Is divided
into two colonies, 178. Charters are granted
to two companies to make settlements in, 179.
Captain Newport fails from England to, and
discovers the Chefapeak, 184. He proceeds up
James river, and founds a colony in James-town,

185,

s85. Its bad adminiitration, ibid. -Captain Smith
is excluded from his feat at the council board, ibid.
The colony is annoyed by the Indians, and suffers
from scarcity and the unhealthiness of the climate,
I86. Smith is recalled, and the prosperity of the
colony restorcd, 187. He is taken prisoner by
the Indians, his life spared and his liberty obtained
through the intercession of the favourite daughter of
an Indian chief, 188, 189. Returns to James-town,
and finds the colony in difirefs, 189. The colonits
are deceived by the appearance of gold, ibid. A
survey of the country is undertaken by Smith, 190.
The company obtains a new charter with more ample
privileges, 193. The jurifdiaion of the council in, is
abolished, and the government vefied in a council
resident in London, ibid. Lord Delaware is ap-
pointed governor and captain-general of the colony,
and Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers are
velsed with the command till his arrival, I94. The
vessel in which they embark is stranded on the coafd
of Bermudas, 195. Smith returns to England, and
anarchy prevails in the colony, ibid. The Indians
withhold supplies, and the colony is reduced by
famine, 196. Gates and Summers arrive from
Bermudas, and find the colony in a desperate fitua-
tion, 198. They are about to return to England,
when Lord Delaware arrives, ibid. He reconciles
all differences, and perfectly restores subordination,
199. Is obliged to resign the government, and
return to England, on account of his health, 20o.
Is superseded by Sir Thomas Dale, who eflabliihes
martial law, ibid. Another charter is granted to the
colony with new privileges, 20 . The land is
cultivated, and a treaty concluded with the Indians,
203. Rolfc, a man of rank in the colony, marries
the daughter of an Indian chief, 204.. The land first
becomes property, 205. The culture of tobacco is
introduced, 207. The quantity exported increases
every year, 208, 209. Negroes are lirft introduced,
ibid. A general aflsmbly of r:prefcntatives is formed,

210.

2iO. A new constitution is given to the colony, and
a trade for tobacco opened with Holland, 211, 212.
The necessary precautions for the defence of the
colony being negleted, a general maflacre of the
En;glith is planned by the Indians, and executed
in most of the settlements, 214, 215. A bloody
war is commenced with the Indians, 217. Their
plantations are attacked, and the owners murdered,
218. A few escape to the woods, where they perish
with hunger, ibid. The settlements extend, and
industry revives, ibid. The strength of the colony
is considerably weakened, 227. A temporary
council is appointed for its government, 228.
The arbitrary government of the colonies on the
acceflion of Charles I. 229. The colonists seize Sir
John Harvey, the governor, and fend him prisoner
to England, 231. He is released by the king, and
reinflated in his government, 232. Is fucceed-d
by Sir John Berkeley, whose wife administration is
produaive of the best effects, 233. New privileges
are granted to the colony, which flourishes under the
new government, 234, 235. It is attacked by the
Indians, 245. Discontents are produced by grants
of lands from the crown, 246. An infurreaion
breaks out, and the governor and council are forced
to fly, 249. They apply to England for succour,
250. The rebellion is terminated by the death of
Nathaniel Bacon, 251. The governor is reinstated,
and an assembly called, 252. The moderation of its
proceedings, 253. General slate of the colony till
the year 1688, ibid. See Colonies.
Ulloa, Don Antonio de, his description of the character-

iftic features of the native Americans, ii. 376. His
reason for the Americans not being so sensible of pain
as the reft of mankind, 403. His account of the
goods exported from Spain to America, with the duty
on them, iv. 362.
Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the northern parts of

the globe discovered by the Ruffians, ii. 368.

Wafr,

]rafer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu-

tive Americans, ii. 78. Compared with similar pro-
ductions in Africa, 79.
I/Var-fong of the native Americans, the sentiments and

terms of, ii. 401.
IFilloughby, Sir Hugh, fails in search of a north-ea{f

passage to India, iv. 147. Steers along the coast of
Norway, and doubles the north cape, ibid. His
squadron is separated in a florm, and his ship driven
into an obscure harbour in Ruffian Lapland, where
he and all his companions are frozen to death,
148.
1WJomen, the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. 103. Are not prolific, Io6. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken feasts, 218. Nor to wear orna-
ments, 405.

X
Xerez, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 394.
Ximenes, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in the Spaniflh colonies, i. 310. Patronises
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, iii. 78.

Y
Eticalan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Dias

de Solis, i. 265. Described, 382. From whence that
province derives its value, iii. 364. Policy of the
court of Spain with rcfpeC to, 366.
VOL. IV, E E

z
Zarate, Don AuguPrine, charaaer of his Hitfory of the

ConqueR of Peru, iii. 396.
Zones, the earth how divided into, by the geography of

the ancients, i. 32. By whom first so divided, 356.
Zunmmarriaga, Juan de, first bishop of Mexico, the de-

stroyer of all the ancient records of the Mexican
empire, iii, 276.

THE E ND.
