THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. IV.

i

)YonthJpnece 4' i~/. 4.

.L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.1

THE
HISTO R Y

OF THE
R E Ii G N

OF THE

/

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM R O B E R T S ON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND
HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME IV.
The SEVENTH EDITION, Correfed.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; T. CADBLL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

M DCt XCII.

/
/

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.
W HI LE Charles laboured, with such B O O K

unwearied industry, to persuade or to _
force the Protestants to adopt his regu- 1549.

]ations with refpea to religion, the effecs of his thesmes
fleadinefs in the execution of his plan were rendered the E'lh,
less coniderable by his rupture with the Pope, pero.
which daily increased. The firm resolution which
the Emperor seemed to have taken against restoring
Placentia, together with his repeated encroach-
ments on the ecclesiastical jurisdiCtion, not only by
theregulations contained in the Interim, but by his
attempt to re-aflemble the council at Trent, exaf-
perated Paul to the utmost, who, with the wcak-
ness incident to old age, grew more attached to his
f.imily, and more jealous of his authority, as he
advanced in years. Pulhed on by there palfions,
henmade new efforts to draw the French King into
VOL. IV. B an

B 0O0 K an alliance againit the Emperor : But finding
L X. that Monarch, notwithstanding the hereditary en-

'549. mity between him and Charles, and the jealousy

with which he viewed the successful progress of the
Imperial arms, as unwilling as formerly to involve
himself in immediate hostilities, he was obliged to
contract his views, and to think of preventing fu-
ture encroachments, since it was not in his power
to inflict vengeance on account of those which were
past. For this purpose, he determined to recal
his grant of Parma and Placentia, and after de-
claring them to be re-annexed to the Holy See, to
indemnify his grandson Oftavio by a new efta-
blifhment in the ecclesiastical state. By this expe-
dient he hoped to gain two points of no small con-
sequence. He, first of all, rendered his possession
of Parma more secure; as the Emperor would be
cautious of invading the patrimony of the church,
though he might seize without scruple a town be-
longing to the house of Farnese. In the next place,
he would acquire a better chance of recovering
Placentia, as his solicitations to that effect migh
decently be urged with greater importunity, and
would infallibly be attended with greater effect
when he was confidered not as pleading the caut
of his own family, but as an advocate for the
interest of the Holy See. But while Paul wa
priding himself on this device, as a happy refine
ment in policy, Ocavio, an ambitious and high
spirited young man, who could not bear with
patience to be spoiled of one half of his teri

a Mem. dc Ribier, ii. 230. r

tonie

tories by the rapaciousness of his father-in-law, B O 0 K
and to be deprived of the other by the artifices of 1
his grandfather, took measures in order to pre- '549.
vent the execution of a plan fatal to his interest.
He set out secretly from Rome, and having first
endeavoured to furprize Parma, which attempt
was frustrated by the fidelity of the governor to
whom the Pope had entrusted the defence of the
town, he made overtures to the Emperor, of re-
nouncing all connexion with the Pope, and of
depending entirely on him for his future fortune.
This unexpected defection of one of the Pope's
own family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
almost to madness, a mind peevish with old
age; and there was no degree of severity to
which Paul might not have proceeded againfl a
grandson whom he reproached as an unnatural
apostate. But, happily for Octavio, death pre-
vented his carrying into execution the harsh refo-
lutions which he had taken with refped to him,
and put an end to his pontificate in the sixteenth
year of his administration, and the eighty-fecond
of his age *.

As

*Among many inflanccs of the credulity or weakners of

hilorians in attributing the death of illultrious personages to
extraordinary causes, this is one. Almost all the hiltorians
of the sixteenth century affirm, that the death of Paul III. was
Occasioned by the violent paflions which the behaviour of his
grandson excited ; that being informed, while he was refiefh-
ing himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of Oacavio's
attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with the
nlperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued

B 2 some

B K As this event had been long expe&ed, there

-x.
v- -- was an extraordinary concourse of Cardinals at

5o50. . Rome;

some hours in a swoon, theh became feverish, and died with-
in three days. This is the account given of it by Thuanus,
lib. vi. 21 i. Adriani Iflor. di fuoi Tempi, lib. vii. 480. and
by Father Paul, 28o. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better in-
formed than any writer with regard to the events which hap-
pened in the papal court, and, when not warped by prejudice
or system, more accurate in relating them, agrees with their
narrative in its chiefcircumftances. Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta,
who wrote his history by command of the senate of Venice,
relates it in the fame manner. Hiftorici Venez. vol. iv. 212.
But there was no occasion to search for any extraordinary
cause to account for the death of an old man of eighty-two.
There remains an authentic account of this event, in which
we find none of those marvellous circumstances of which the
historians are so fond. The cardinal of Ferrara, who was
entrufled with the affairs of France at the court of Rome,
and M. D'Urst, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote
an account to that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of
the Pope's death. By thefeit appears, that Otavio's attempt
to furprize Parma, was made on the twentieth of Otober;
that next day in the evening, and not while he was airing
himself in the gardens of Monte-Cavalio, the Pope received
intelligence of what he had done; that he was seized with
such a transport of paflion, and cried so bitterly, that his
voice was heard in fevcral apartments of the palace; that
next day, however, he was so well as to give an audience to
the cardinal of Ferrara, and :o go through business of.differ-
ent kinds; that OFtavio wrote a letter to the Pope, not to
cardinal F:rncfe his brother, intimating his resolution of
throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor: that the
Pope received this on the twenty-firfR without any new fymp-
toms of emotion, and returned an answer to it; that on the
twcnty-fecond of Ocober, the day on which the cardinal of
Ferrara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his usual late of
health. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 247. By a letter of M. D'Urfce
Nov. 5. it appears that the Pope was in such good health,

that

Rome; and the various competitors having had B o O K
time to form their parties, and to concert their
measures, their ambition and intrigues protracted 1550.
the conclave to. a great length. The Imperial
and French facions firove, with emulation, to
promote one of their own number, and had, by
turns, the profpea of success. But as Paul
during a long Pontificate had railed many to the
purple, and those chiefly persons of eminent
abilities, as well as zealously devoted to his fa.
mily, Cardinal Farnese had the command of a
powerful and united squadron, by whose addrels Feb- 7th.

The elec-

and firmnels he exalted to the papal throne the tion of
Cardinal di Monte, whom Paul had employed as Julius 1I.
his principal legate in the council of Trent, and
trusted with his most secret intentions. He as-
fumed the name of Julius III. and, in order to
express his gratitude towards his benefactor, the
first aft of his. administration was to put O&avio
Farnese in pofefsion of Parma. When the in-
jury which he did to the Holy See, by alienating a

that on the third of that month he had celebrated the anni-
verfary of his coronation with the usual folemnities. Ibidem,
251. By another letter from the fame person, we learn, that
on the sixth of November a catarrh or defluxion fell down on
the Pope's lungs, with such dangerous symptoms, that his life
was immediately dcfpaired of. Ibid. 252. And by a third
letterwe are informed, that he died November the tenth.
In none of these letters is his death imputed to any extraor-
dinary cause. It appears, that more than twenty days
elapsed between Ocavio's attempt on Parma, and the death
of his grandfather, and that the disease was the natural
efic& of old age, not one of those occasioncd by violence of
palTon.

B 3 terri-

B o O K territory of such value, was mentioned by some of

X.
x .- the Cardinals, he brifldy replied, " Thathe would
3550. rather be a poor Pope, with the reputation of a

gentleman, than a rich one, with the infamy of
having forgotten the obligations conferred upon
him, and the promises which he had made ." But
all the lustre of this candour or generosity he
quickly effaced by an action most Ihockingly inde-

Hir charac- cent. According to an ancient and eftablilhed
ter and con-
<ua. practice, every Pope upon his eleaion confiders it

as his privilege to bestow, on whom he pleases, the
Cardinal's hat, which falls to be disposed of by his
being invefled with the triple crown. Julius, to the
astonishment of the sacred college, conferred this
mark of diffintion, together with ample ecclefi-
aftical revenues, and the right of bearing his name
and arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of sixteen,
born of obscure parents, and known by the name
of the Ape, from his having been trusted with
the care of an animal of that species, in the Car-
dinal di Monte's family. Such a proflitution of
the highest dignity in the church would have
given offence, even in those dark periods, when
the credulous fuperfticion of the people em-
boldened ecclesiastics to venture on the most
flagrant violations of decorum. But in an en-
lightened age, when, by the progress of know-
ledge and philosophy, the obligations of duty
and decency were better underltood, when a blind
veneration for the Pontifical character was every

i Mern. dc Ribier.

wlilr

where abated, and one half of Christendom in B o K
open rebellion against the Papal See, this action X
was viewed with horror. Rome was immediately 'sso.
filled with libels and pasquinades, which im-
puted the Pope's extravagant regard for such an
unworthy objeEt to the most criminal paflions.
The Protestants exclaimed against the absurdity
of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine
truth could dwell in a breast so impure, and
called more loudly than ever, and with greater
'appearance of justice, for the immediate and
thorough reformation of a church, the Head of
which was a disgrace to the Christian name .
The reft of the Pope's conduct was of a piece
with this first specimen of his dispositions. Hav-
ing now reached the summit of ecclesiastical
ambition, he seemed eager to indemnify himself,
by an unrefirained indulgence of his desires, for
the felf-denial or dissimulation which he had
thought it prudent to pratife while in a subordinate
station. He became careless, to so great a degree,
of all serious bufGnefs, that he could fcldom be
brought to attend to it, but in cafes of extreme
neceflity; and giving up himself to amusements
and dilfipation of every kind, he imitated the
luxurious elegance of Leo rather than the severe
virtue of Adrian, the latter of which it was necef-
fary to display, in contending with a seC which de-
rived great credit from the rigid and austere man-
ners of its teachers '1

Slei;. 49z. F. Paul, 281. Pallav. ii. 76. T4uan.
ib Vi. 215. d F. Paul, ibid.

B 4 TIE

B o0o K THE Pope, however ready to fulfil his engage-
I- o.- ments to the family of Farnese, discovered no

1s55. inclination to observe the oath, which each Car-

J-lis views
and pro- dinal had taken when he entered the conclave,
¢eedings
with espea that if the choice Ihould fall on him, he wobld
al hcouncil immediately call the council to re-affume its

deliberations. Julius knew, by experience, how
difficult it was to confine such a body of men
within the narrow limits which it was the intereit
of the fee of Rome to prescribe; and how
easily the zeal of some members, the rashness of
others, or the suggestions of the Princes on whom
they depended, might precipitate a popular and
ungovernable assembly into forbidden inquiries,
as well as dangerous decisions. He wished, for
these reasons, to have eluded the obligation of
his oath, and gave an ambiguous answer to the
first proposals which were made to him by the
Emperor, with regard to that matter. But
Charles, either from his natural obitinacy in
adhering to the measures which he had once
adopted, or from the mere pride of accom-
plithing whlat was held to be almost impofli-
ble, perrifted in his resolution of forcing the Pro-
teflants to return into the bofoml of the church.
Having persuaded himself, that the authoritative
decifsons of the council might be employed with
efficacy in combating their prejudices, he, in
consequence of that perfiafion, continued to f0-
licit earnetly that a new bull of convocation
might be iffuced; and the Pope could not, with
decency, reject that requef-. When Julius found

that

that he could not prevent the calling of a council, B o o K
he endeavoured to take to himself all the merit of x.
having procured the meeting of an afembly, s55o.
which was the object of such general desire and
expectation. A congregation of Cardinals, to
whom he referred the consideration of what was
necessary for reforing peace to the church, recom-
mended, by his direction, the speedy convocation
of a council, as the most effectual expedient for
that purpose; and as the new herefies raged with
the greatest violence in Germany, they proposed
Trent as the place of its meeting, that, by a near
infpetion of the evil, the remedy might be applied
with greater discernment and certainty of success.
The Pope warmly approved of this advice, which
he himself had dictated, and sent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make
known his intentions'.
ABOUT this time, the Emperor had summoned A diet at

Augsburg to

a new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to en- entorce he
force the observation of the Interim, and to pro- Intlrim.
cure a more authentic aft of the supreme court in
the Empire, acknowledging the jurisdiction of the
council, as well as an explicit promise of conform-
ing to its decrees. He appeared there in person, June 1S.
together with his son the Prince of Spain. Few
Elecors were present, but all sent deputies in
their name. Charles, notwithstanding the de-
Ipotic authority with which he had given law in

e F. Paul, 281. Pallav. i. 77.

the

B o K the Empire during two years, knew that the

X.

b. __
v spirit of independence among the Germans was

a5s*- not entirely subdued, and for that reason took

care to over-awe the diet by a considerable body
of Spanish troops which escorted him thither.
The first point submitted to the consideration of
the diet, was the necessity of holding a council.
All the Popish members agreed, without diffi.
culty, that the meeting of that assembly should be
renewed at Trent, and promised an implicit acqui.
efcence in its decrees. The Proteflants, intimi-
dated and disunited, must have followed their ex-
ample, and the resolution of the diet would have
proved unanimous, if Maurice of Saxony had not
begun at this time to disclose new intentions, and
to a&t a part very different from that which he had
so long assumed.

Maurice BY an artful diflimulation of his own sentiments;
form da- by address in paying court to the Emperor; and
fhgE gint by the seeming zeal with which he forwarded all
pcror. his ambitious schemes, Maurice had raised himself

to the EleEtoral dignity ; and having added the
dominions of the elder branch of the Saxon family
to his own, he was become the most powerful
Prince in Germany. But his long and intimate
union with the Emperor had afforded him many
opportunities of observing narrowly the dangerous
tendency of that Monarch's schemes. He saw
the yoke that was preparing for his country; and
from the rapid as well as for'mitlable progress of
the Imperial power, was convinced that but a

few

few steps more remained to be taken, in order B o o K
to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in Ger- .--
many as he had become in Spain. The more z5io.
eminent the condition was to which he himself had
been exalted, the more solicitous did Maurice na-
turally become to maintain all its rights and pri-
vileges, and the more did he dread the thoughts
of descending from the rank of a Prince almost
independent, to that of a vassal fubjeft to the comr
mands of a master. At the fame time, he perceiv-
ed that Charles was bent on exacting a rigid con-
formity to the doctrines and rites of the Romifli
church, instead of allowing liberty of conscience,
thepromife of which had allured several Protefbt
ant Princes to aflift him in the war. against the
confederates of Smalkalde. As he himself, not-
withstanding all the compliances which he had
made from motives of interest, or an excels of
confidence in the Emperor, was sincerely at-'
tached to the Lutheran tenets, he determined
not to be a tame fpedator of the overthrow
of a system which he believed to be founded in
truth.

THIS resolution, flowing from the love of The politi.
liberty, or zeal for religion, was firengthened by which in.
political and interested considerations. In that hiu,."d
elevated flation in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more extensive prospects opened
to his view. His rank and power entitled him to
be the head of the Protestants in the Empire.
lis prcdeceflbr, the degraded Eleator, with in-

ferior

B 0 0 K ferior abilities, and territories less considerable

x. . had acquired such an ascendant over the councils
s550. of the party; and Maurice neither wanted discern.

ment to fee the advantage of this pre-eminence,
nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But he
found himself in a situation which rendered the
attempt no less difficult, than the object of it was
important. On the one hand, the connexion
which he had formed with the Emperor was so
intimate, that he could scarcely hope to take any
ftep which tended to dissolve it, without alarm-
ing his jealousy, and drawing on himself the
whole weight of that power, which had crushed
the greatest confederacy ever formed in Germany.
On the other hand, the calamities which he had
brought on the Protestant party were so recent,
as well as great, that it seemed almost impossible
to regain their confidence, or to rally and re-
animate a body, after he himself had been the
chief instrument in breaking its union and vigour.,
These considerations were sufficient to have dif-
couraged any person of a spirit less adventurous
than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and
difficulty of the enterprise were allurements; and
he boldly resolved on measures, the idea of which
a genius of an inferior order could not have con-
ceived, or would have trembled at the thoughts
of the danger that attended the execution of
them.

Thepaf- I-Is paflions concurred with his interest in con-
lions which
,o.,,ert,.d firming this retblution; and the resentment ex
with tihcd. cited

cited by an injury, which he sensibly felts added B o0 K
new force to the motives for opposing the Em-
peror, which found policy fuggetted. Maurice, 15so5
by his authority, had prevailed on the Landgrave
of Hesse to put his person in the Emperor's
power, and had obtained a promise from the Im-
perial ministers that he should not be detained a
prisoner. This had been violated in the manner
already, related. The unhappy Landgrave ex-
claimed as loudly against his fon-in-law as against
Charles. The Princes of Hesse required Maurice
to fulfil his engagements to their father, who
had loft his liberty by trusting to him; and
all Germany suspeCted him of having betray-
ed, to an implacable enemy, the friend whom he
was most bound to prote&. Roused by these
solicitations or reproaches, as well as prompted
by duty and affection to his father-in-law, Mau-
rice had employed not only entreaties but remon-
ftrances in order to procure his release. All these
Charles had disregarded; and the shame of hav-
ing been first deceived, and then flighted, by a
Prince whom he had served with zeal as well as
success, which merited a very different return,
made such a deep impression on Maurice, that he
waited with impatience for an opportunity of being
revenged.

I'Hr utmoftl caution as well as the moss delicate The cu-
addrels were requisite in taking every fRep towards idOdrefw,:h
this end; as he had to guard, on the one hand, ,rc~,ho
0gainft giving a premature alarm to the Emperor; h iss hchc"

7 while

B 0 0 K while, on the other, something considerable ant
,_ explicit was necessary to be done, in order to re
3550. gain the confidence of the Protestant party. Mau

rice had accordingly applied all his powers of ar
and dissimulation to attain both there points. A!
he knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to th(
submission which he required to the Interim, hi
did not hesitate one moment whether he ihoulc
.stablish that form of do&trine and worflip it
his dominions: But being sensible how odious ii
*was to his fubjets, instead of violently impofin2
it on them by the mere terror of authority, ar
had been done in other parts of Germany, he en.
deavoured to render their obedience a voluntary

He enfories deed of their own. For this purpose, he had
the Interim '
in Saxony. afiembled the clergy of his country at Leipfick,

and had laid the Interim before them, together
with the reasons which made it necessary to con.
form to it. He had gained some of them by
promises, others he had wrought upon by threats,
and all were intimidated by the rigour with which
obedience to the Interim was extorted in the
.neighbouring provinces. Even Melan&hon,
whose merit of every kind entitled him to the
first place among the Protestant divines, being
now deprived of the manly counsels of Luther,
which were wont to inspire him with fortitude,
and to preserve him steady amidit the forms and
dangers that threatened the church, was seduced
into unwarrantable conceflions, by the timidity
of his temper, his fond desire of. peace, and his
excessive complaisance towards persons of high

t rank.

rank. By his arguments and authority, no lets B O IK
than by Maurice's address, the assembly was pre- .
vailed on to declare, C" that, in points which were 'O55
purely indifferent, obedience was due to the com-
mands of a lawful superior." Founding upon this
maxim, no less uncontrovertible in theory, than
dangerous when carried into praaice, especially
in religious matters, many of the Protestant Eccle-
liafics whom Maurice consulted, proceeded to class,
among the number of things indifferent, several
doarines, which Luther had pointed out as gross
and pernicious errors in the Romish creed; and
placing in the fame rank many of those rites which
distinguished the Reformed from the Popish wor-
ship, they exhorted their people to comply with the
Emperor's injun&ions concerning these particulars f.

BY this dextrous condu&c, the introduEtion of Makespro-
the Interim excited none of those violent con- zeaillorOthe
vulfions in Saxony which it occasioned in other Proteflanc
provinces. But though the Saxons Submitted,
the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed againf:
MelancEhon and his associates, as falie brethren,
who were either so wicked as to apostatize from
the truth altogether; or so crafty as to betray it
by fubrle diftinftions; or io feeble-fpirited as to
give it up fiom pusillanimity and criminal com-
plailance to a prince, capable of sacrificing to his
political interest that which he himnfelf regarded

'Sleid. 481. 485. Jo. Laur. Moflemii lnftitutionum Hist.

ErclecfaltHc,, lib. iv. Helmt. 1755, 4to. p. 748. J0 And.
Echmidii Hilloria Interimiltica, p. 70, &c. llclmlt. 1730.

as

B o 'o K as most sacred. Maurice, being conscious what

X.

a colour of probability his past conduct gave to
5sso5 those accusations, as well as afraid of losing en-

tirely the confidence of the Protestants, issued a
declaration containing professions of his zealous
attachment to the Reformed religion, and of his
resolution to guard against all the errors or en-
croachments of the Papal fee g.

Atthefame HAVING gone so far in order to remove the
time Courts
theEmpe. fears and jealousies of the Protestants, he found
ftu' it necessary to efface the impression which such a

declaration might make upon the Emperor. For
that purpose, he not only renewed his professions
of an inviolable adherence to his alliance with
him, but as the city of Magdeburg fill persisted
in rejecting the Interim, he undertook to reduce
it to obedience, and instantly set about levying
troops to be employed in that service. This
damped all the hopes which the Protestants begun
to conceive of Maurice, in consequence of his de-
claration, and left them more than ever at a 1so
to guess at his real intentions. Their former
suspicion and distrust of him revived, and the di-
vines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings
in which they represented him as the most formi-
dable enemy of the Protestant religion, who trea-
cheroufly affrimed an appearance of zeal for its
interest, that he might more effe6tually execute
his schemes for its destruction.

a Slcid. 485.

THIS

THrs charge, supported by the evidence of re- B o o Ki
cent faets, as well as by his present dubious. con-
du&, gained such universal credit. that' Maurice p 155°-
was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in his own againftthe
vindication. As soon as the re-assembling of the ceedilgin
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his the council
ambassadors protested that their master would not
acknowledge its authority, unless all the points
which had been already decided there, were review-
ed, and confidered as frill undetermined; unless
the Protestant divines had a full hearing granted
them, and were allowed a decisive voice in the
council; and unless the Pope renounced his pre-
tensions to preside in the council, engaged to
submit to its decrees, and to absolve the. bishops
from their oath of obedience, that they might
deliver their sentiments with greater freedom.
These demands, which were higher than any
that the Reformers had ventured to make, even
when the zeal of their party was warmest, or
their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced,
in some degree, the impression which Maurice's
preparations against Magdeburg had made upon
the minds of the Protestants, and kept them in
fulpenfe with regard to his designs. At the fame
time, he had dexterity enough to represent this
part of his conduct in such a light to the Empe-
ror, that it gave him no offence, and occasioned
no interruption of the ftric confidence which
lbiftied between them. What the pretexts were
wlich he employed,' in order to give uLch a bold
declaration an innocent appearance, the contem-
VOL. IV. C porary

B o o K porary historians have not explained ; that they im.

;X. posed upon Charles is certain, for he still conftinued
*550. not only to prosecute his plan, as well concerning

the Interim as the council, with the fame ardour,
but to place the fame confidence in Maurice, with
regard to the execution of both.

The diet THE Pope's resolution concerning the council
.resolve to
make war not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
on the cist
of Maegdc business of the diet was to enforce the obferva-
"urg. tion of the Interim. As the senate of Magde-

burg, notwithstanding various endeavours to
frighten or to tooth them into compliance, not
only persevered obstinately in their opposition to
the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortifi-
cations of their city, ard to levy troops in their
own defence, Charles required the diet to assist
him in quelling this audacious rebellion againfi a
decree of the Empire. Had the members of the
diet been left to at agreeably to their own in-
clination, this demand would have been reje&ed
without hesitation. All the Germans who fa-
voured, in any degree, the new opinions in reli-
gion, and many who were influenced by no other
consideration than jealousy of the Emperor's
growing power, regarded this effort of the citi-
Zens of Magdeburg, as a noble stand for the
liberties of their country. Even such as had not
resolution to exert the fame spirit, admired the
gallantry of their enterprise, and wilihed it fuc-
cess. But the presence of the Spanifi troops,
together with the dread of the Emperor's dif-

pleafiure

pleasure, overawed the members of the diet to such B o o K
a degree, that, without venturing to utter their x.'-
own sentiments, they tamely ratified, by their '5ss
votes, whatever the Emperor was pleased to pre-
scribe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles had
issued by his own authority against the Magde-
burgers, were confirmed; a resolution was taken
to raise troops in order to besiege the city in form;
and persons were named to fix the contingent in
men or money to be furnished by each state. At Appoint

Maurice

the fame time, the diet petitioned that Maurice general.
might be entruffed with the command of that
army; to which Charles gave his consent with
great alacrity, and with high encomiums upon the
wisdom of the choice which they had made 1. As
Maurice condu&ted all his schemes with profound
and impenetrable secrecy, it is probable that he
took no ftep avowedly in order to obtain this
charge. The recommendation of his countrymen
was either purely accidental, or flowed from the
opinion generally entertained of his great abilities;
and neither the diet had any foresight, nor the
Emperor any dread, of the consequences which
followed upon this nomination. Maurice ac-
cepted, without hesitation, the command to which
he was recommended, instantly discerning the im-
portant advantages which he might derive from
having it committed to him.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull for The con.
the convocation of the council, observed all those mon'd o

re-atiemblc
at rclllro
hSleid. 503, 51 . Decctnor.

C 2 tedious

B o OK tedious forms which the court .of Rome can art.

X. x-'. fully employ to retard any disagreeable measure.
1550. At last however it was publiihed, and the coun.

cil was summoned to meet at Trent on the
first day of the ensuing month of May. As
he knew that many of the Germans rejected or
disputed the authority and jurifdiaion which the
Papal See claims with refpe& to general councils,
he took care, in the preamble of the bull, to as-
fert, in the strongest terms, his own right, not
only to call and preside in that assembly, but to
direEt its proceedings; nor would he soften these
expressions, in any degree, in compliance with
the repeated solicitations of the Emperor, who
foresaw what offence they would give, and what
conftrution might be put on them. They were
censured accordingly with great severity by fe-
veral members of the diet; but whatever difguf
or suspicion they excited, such complete influence
over all their.deliberations had the Emperor ac-

155s. quired, that he procured a recess, in which the
Feb. 13. authority of the council was recognised, and de-

clared to be the proper remedy for the evils which
at that time affli&ted the church; all the Princes
and states of the Empire, fuich as had made in.
novations in religion, as well as those who ad
hered to the fyllern of their forefathers, wee
required to fend their representatives to the coun-
cil i the Emperor engaged to grant a safe conduc
to such as decmanded it, and to secure thern an
impartial healing in the council; he promiled tC
fix his relidence in iome city of the Empire, ir

4 tll(

the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might pro- B o0 K
tea the members of the council by his pretence, .
and take care that, by conduEting their delibera- 5ss51
tions agreeably to scripture and the doctrine of the
fathers, they might bring them to a desirable iflue.
In this recess, the observation of the Interim was
more ftritly enjoined than ever; and the Empe-
ror threatened all who had hitherto negleced or
refused to conform to it, with the severest effects
of his vengeance, if they perrifted in their difobe-
dience .
DURING the meeting of this diet, a new at- Another

fuitlefs at-

tempt was made, in order to procure liberty to temp, to
the Landgrave. That Prince, nowise reconciled rocre the
to his situation by time, grew every day more liberty.
impatient of restraint. Having often applied to
Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg, who
took every occasion of soliciting the Emperor in
his behalf, though without any effect, he now
commanded his sons to summon them, with legal
formality, to perform what was contained in the
bond which they had granted him, by surrender-
ing themselves into their hands to be treated with
the fame rigour as the Emperor had used him.
This furnished them with a fiefh pretext for re-
newing their application to the Emperor, together
with an additional argument to enforce it. Charles
firmly resolved not to grant their request; though,
at the fame time, being extremely desirous to be

Sleid. 5 z. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldafti Conllit. Im-
periales, vol. ii. 340.

C 3 delivered

B o0 K delivered from their incessant importunity, he en.

j.- _deavoured to prevail on the Landgrave to give
r551- up the bond which he had received from the two

Electors. But that Prince refuting to part with
a security which he deemed essential to his safety,
the Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could
not untie; and by a public deed annulled the
bond which Maurice and the Elector of Bran-
denburg had granted, absolving them from all
their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre-
tension to a power so pernicious to society as that
of abrogating at pleasure the most sacred laws of
honour, and most formal obligations of public
faith, had hitherto been formed by any but the
Roman Pontiffs, who, in consequence of their
claim of supreme power on earth, arrogate the
right of dispensing with precepts and duties of
every kind. All Germany was filled with astonish-
ment, when Charles assumcd the fame prerogative.
The fRate of fubjetion, to which the Empire was
reduced, appeared to be more rigorous, as well as
intolerable, than that of the most wretched and
enslaved nations, if the Emperor, by an arbitrary
decree, might cancel those solemn contrafs,
which are the foundation of that mutual confi-
dence whereby men are held together in social
union. The Landgrave himielf now gave up all
hopes of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's
content, and endeavoured to procure it by his
own address. But the plan which he had formed
to deceive his guards being discovered, such of
his attendants as he had gained to favour his

escape,

escape, were put to death, and he was confined in B o o K
the citadel of Mechlin more closely than ever . X.

2551.
ANOTHER tranfaaion was carried on during Charles's

plan of pro-

this diet, with refpee to an affair more nearly in- curing the
teresting to the Emperor, and which occasioned ronfor
likewise a general alarm among the Princes of his son

Philip.

the Empire. Charles, though formed with ta-
lents which fitted him for conceiving and con-
ducEing great designs, was not capable, as has
been often observed, of bearing extraordinary
success. Its operation on his mind was so violent
and intoxicating, that it elevated him beyond
what was moderate or attainable, and turned his
whole attention to the pursuit of vast but chime-
rical objeAs. Such had been the effet of his
victory over the confederates of Smalkalde. He
did not long reft satisfied with the substantial and
certain advantages which were the result of that
event, but, despising these, as poor or inconfider-
able fruits of such great success, he aimed at no-
thing less than at bringing all Germany to an uni-
formity in religion, and at rendering the Imperial
power despotic. These were obje&s extremely
splendid indeed, and alluring to an ambitious mind;
the pursuit of them, however, was attended with
manifest danger, and the hope of attaining them
very uncertain. But the steps which he had al-
ready taken towards them, having been accompa-
nied with such success, his imagination, warmed with

k Sleid. 504. Thuan. 1. vi. 23+, 235.

C 4 contem-

B 0 o K contemplating this alluring objet, overlooked or

X.
^- ... despised all remaining difficulties. As he con.
'551. ceived the execution of his plan to be certain, he

began to be solicitous how he might render the
possession of such an important acquisition per-
petual in his family, by transmitting the German
Empire, together with the kingdoms of Spain, and
his dominions in Italy and the Low-Countries,
to his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, without communicating it, even
to those ministers whom he moR trusted, he had
called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that his pre.
fence would facilitate the carrying forward the
scheme.

The oblfa- GREAT obstacles, however, and such as would
flood inits have deterred any ambition less accustomed to
way. overcome difficulties, were to be surmounted.

He had, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty, imprudently assisted in procuring his
brother Ferdinand the dignity of King of the
Romans, and there was no probability that this
Prince, who was till in the prime of life, and
had a son grown up to the years of manhood,
would relinquish, in favour of his nephew, the
near profpet of the Imperial throne, which
Charles's infirmities and declining state of health
opened to himself. This did not deter the Em-
peror from venturing to make the proposition;
and when Ferdinand, notwitlitanding his pro-
found reverence for his brother, and obsequious
fubmillion to his will in oilher inflanccs, rejeede

it

it in a peremptory tone, he was not discouraged B o O K
by one repulse. He renewed his applications to . X

.

him by his fifler, Mary QOeen of Hungary, to 5ss".
whom Ferdinand flood indebted for the crowns
both of Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her
great abilities, tempered with extreme gentleness
ofdifpofition, had acquired an extraordinary influ-
ence over both the brothers. She entered warmly
into a measure, which tended so manifestly to ag-
grandize the house of Austria; and, flattering her-
fdfthat the could tempt Ferdinand to renounce
the reversionary possession of the Imperial dignity
for an immediate establishment, she assured him
that the Emperor, by way of compensation for his
giving up his chance of succession, would initantly
bellow upon him territories of very considerable va-
lue, and pointed out in particular. those of the
Duke of Wurtemburg, which might be confiscated
upon different pretexts. But neither by her ad-
dress nor intreaties, could she induce Ferdinand to
approve of a plan, which would not only have de-
graded him from the highest rank among the
Monarchs of Europe to that of a subordinate and de-
pendent Prince, but would have involved both him
and his posterity in perpetual contests. He was,
at the time time, more attached to his children,
than by a rash concession to frufirate all the high
hopes, in profpe& of which they had been educated.

NOTWITHSTANDING the immoveable firmness His nde-
Which Ferdinand discovered, the Emperor did muunrtthcc.
not abandon his icheme. l-Ie flattered himself

that

B o o K that he might attain the obje&c in view by another
__-, channel, and that it was not impossible to prevail

IJs3. on the Ele&ors to cancel their former choice of

Ferdinand, or at least to elet Philip a second
King of the Romans, substituting him as next in
succession to his uncle. With this view, he took
Philip along with him to the diet, that the Ger-
mans might have an opportunity to observe and
become acquainted with the Prince, in behalf of
whom he courted their interest; and he himself
employed all the arts of address or insinuation to
gain the Electors, and to prepare them for liften-
ing with a favourable ear to the proposal. But
no sooner did he venture upon mentioning it to
them, than they, at once, saw and trembled at
the consequences with which it would be at-
tended. They had long felt all the inconveniencies
of having placed at the head of the Empire a
Prince whose power and dominions were so ex-
tensive; if they should now repeat the folly, and
continue the Imperial crown, like an hereditary
dignity, in the fame family, they foresaw that
they would give the son an opportunity of car-
rying on that system of oppreflion which the
father had begun; and would put it in his power
to overturn whatever was yet left entire in the
ancient and venerable fabrick of the German con-
flitution.

Phiip' THE charater of the Prince, in whose favour
di gre e:,lc this extraordinary proposition was made, rendered
othe Ger- it fill less agreeable. Philip, though poflefftI

wanas. w ith

with an insatiable desire of power, was a stranger B o o K
to all the arts of conciliating good-will. Haughty, -
reserved, and severe, he, instead of gaining new 1ss..
friends, disgusted the ancient, and most devoted
partizans of the Austrian interest. He scorned
to take the trouble of acquiring the language of
the country to the government of which he aspired;
nor would he condescend to pay the Germans
the compliment of accommodating himself, dur-
ing his residence among them, to their manners
and customs. He allowed the EleAors and most
illustrious Princes in Germany, to remain in his
presence uncovered, affecting a stately and dif-
tant demeanour, which the greatest of the Ger-
man Emperors, and even Charles himself, amidst
the pride of power and victory, had never as-
fumed'. On the other hand, Ferdinand, from
the time of his arrival in Germany, had studied
torender himself acceptable to the people, by a
conformity to their manners, which seemed to
low from choice; and his son Maximilian, who
was born in Germany, possessed, in an eminent
degree, such amiable qualities as rendered him'
the darling of his countrymen, and induced them
to look forward to his election as a most desirable
event. Their esteem and affection for him, for-
tified the resolution which found policy had fug-
gelsed; and determined the Germans to prefer
the popular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to

J Frediman Andrea Zulich Differtatio politico-hiflorica de
Nvis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 4to. p. z1.

the

B o o K that he might attain the obje& in view by another

L I ~channel, and that it was not impossible to prevail
3s51. on the Ele&tors to cancel their former choice of

Ferdinand, or at least to ele&E Philip a second
King of the Romans, substituting him as next in
fuccefion to his uncle. With this view, he took
Philip along with him to the diet, that the Ger-
mans might have an opportunity to observe and
become acquainted with the Prince, in behalf of
,whom he courted their interest; and he himself
employed all the arts of address or insinuation to
gain the Eletors, and to prepare them for liften-
ing with a favourable ear to the proposal. But
no sooner did he venture upon mentioning it to
them, than they, at once, saw and trembled at
the consequences with which it would be at-
tended. They had long felt all the inconveniencies
of having placed at the head of the Empire a
Prince whose power and dominions were so ex-
tensive; if they ihould now repeat the folly, and
continue the Imperial crown, like an hereditary
dignity, in the fame family, they foresaw that
they would give the son an opportunity of car-
rying on that system of oppression which the
father had begun; and would put it in his power
to overturn whatever was yet left entire in the
ancient and venerable fabrick of the German con-
ftitution.
Philip' THE chara&er of the Prince, in whose favour

,digreItle this extraordinary proposition was rade, rendered

tothe Gcr- it fll less agreeable. Philip, though poffefcl
la'lls . with

with an insatiable desire of power, was a stranger B o o K
to all the arts of conciliating good-will. Haughty, -.
reserved, and severe, he, instead of gaining new 55s'
friends, disgusted the ancient, and most devoted
partizans of the Austrian interest. He scorned
to take the trouble of acquiring the language of
the country to the government of which he aspired;
nor would he condescend to pay the Germans
the compliment of accommodating himself, dur-
ing his residence among them, to their manners
and customs. He allowed the Electors and most
illustrious Princes in Germany, to remain in his
presence uncovered, affecing a stately and dif-
tant demeanour, which the greatest of the Ger-
man Emperors, and even Charles himself, amidst
the pride of power and victory, had never as-
fumed'. On the other hand, Ferdinand, from
the time of his arrival in Germany, had fludied
to render himself acceptable to the people, by a
conformity to their manners, which seemed to
flow from choice; and his son Maximilian, who
was born in Germany, poifeffed, in an eminent
degree, ifch amiable qualities as rendered him
the darling of his countrymen, and induced them
to 1ook forward to his eletion as a most desirable
event. Their esteem and affeeAion for him, for-
tified the resolution which found policy had fug-
gested; and determined the Germans to prefer
thepopular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to

I Frediman Andreae Zulich Differtatio politico-hiftorica de
Nvis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 4to. p. 21.

the

B o o K the flubborn austerity of Philip, which interest
.--- -- could not soften, nor ambition teach him to dif.
chaeR5. guise. All the electors, the ecclesiastical as well
Charles
obliged to as secular, concurred in expressing such strong
relinquish
this chcaie. disapprobation of the measure, that Charles, not-

withstanding the reluctance with which he gave
up any point, was obliged to drop the scheme as
impracticable. By his unseasonable perseverance
in pulhing it, he had not only filled the Germans
with new jealousy of his ambitious designs, but
laid the foundation of rivalihip and discord in the
Austrian family, and forced his brother Ferdinand,
in felf-defence, to court the Electors, particularly
Maurice of Saxony, and to form such connexions
with them, as cut off all profpe&t of renewing the
proposal with success. Philip, foured by his dif-
appointment, was sent back to Spain, to be called
thence when any new scheme of ambition ihould
render his presence necessary m.

The Pope HAVING relinquiflhed this plan of domestic
or form-a ambition, which had long occupied and engrossed
defi n tr- him, Charles imagined that he would now have
and Placcn- leisure to turn all his attention towards his grand
ti. kfcheme of eftablifling uniformity of religion in

the Empire, by forcing all the contending parties
to acquiesce in the decisions of the council of
Trent. But such was the extent of his domi-
nions, the variety of connections in which this

m Sleid. 505. Thuan. 180. 238. Memoir. de Ribir, ii
219 zi2. 314. Adrianilllor, lib. viii. 507. 50z.

en angled

entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to i oO o
which there gave rife, as seldom allowed him to -
apply his whole force to any one object. The 5ssz.
machine which he had to conduct was To great
and complicated, that an unforeseen irregularity
or obftru&ion in one of the inferior wheels, often
disconcerted the motion of the whole, and prevent-
ed his deriving from them, all the beneficial effe&ts
which he expected. Such an unlooked-for occur-
rence happened at this juncture, and created new ob-
ftacles to the execution of his schemes with regard
to religion. Julius III. though he had confirmed
O&avio Farnese in the possession of the dutchy of
Parma, during the first effusions of his joy and
gratitude on his promotion to the papal throne,
soon began to repent of his own generosity, and
to be apprehensive of consequences which either
he did not foresee, or had disregarded, while the
sense of his obligations to the family of Farnese
was recent. The Emperor till retained Placen-
tia in his hands, and had not relinquiflied his
pretensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire.
Gonzaga, the governor of Milan, having, by the
part which he took in the inlurder of the late Duke
Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the family
of Farnese, which he knew could never be for-
given, had, for that reason, vowed its deftruc-
tion; and employed all the influence which his
great abilities, as well as long services, gave him
with the Emperor, in persuading him to icize Par-
ma by force of arms. Charles, in compliance
with his solicitations, and that he :night grarify

his

B o0 K his own desire of annexing Parma to the Milanese,
i-Y -» listened to the proposal; and Gonzaga, ready to
355'1 take encouragement from the slightest appearance

of approbation, began to assemble troops, and to
make other preparations for the execution of his
scheme.

anavio OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger,
Farnese
courts the found it necessary, for his own safety, to encreafe
assistance of
ancc. the garrison of his capital,- and to levy soldiers

for defending the reft of the country. But as the
expence of such an effort far exceeded his scanty
revenues, he represented his situation to the Pope,
and implored that protecEion and afflftance which
was due to him as a vassal of the church. The
Imperial minister, however, had already pre-oc-
cupied the Pope's ear; and by discoursing conti-
nually concerning the danger of giving offence
to the Emperor, as well as the imprudence of
supporting Oftavio in an usurpation so detrimen-
tal to the Holy See, had totally alienated him
from the family of Farnese. Otavio's remon-
itrance and petition met, of consequence, with a
cold reception; and he, despairing of any as-
fiftance from Julius, began to look round for
proteEtion from some other quarter. Henry II.
of France was the only Prince powerful enough
to afford him this protection, and fortunately he
was now in a situation which allowed him to
grant it. He had brought his tranfadions with
the two Britifl kingdoms, which had hitherto di-
verted his attention fiom the affairs of the Con-

tinent,

tinent, to such an issue as he desired. This he B o K
had effected partly by the vigour of his arms,
partly by his dexterity in taking advantage of the asst.
political factions which raged in both kingdoms to
such a degree, as rendered the councils of the
Scots violent and precipitate, and the operations
of the Englilh feeble and unsteady. He had pro-
curedfrom the English favourable conditions of
peace for his allies the Scots ; he had prevailed on
the nobles of Scotland not only to affiance their
young Queen to his son the Dauphin, but even
to fend her into France, that she might be edu-
cated under his eye; and had recovered Boulogne,
together with its dependencies, which had been
conquered by Henry VIII.

THE French king having gained points of so His eag,
much consequence to his crown, and disengaged withH'sn
himself with such honour from the burden of sup-
porting the Scots, and maintaining a war against
England, was now at full leisure to pursue
the measures which his hereditary jealousy of the
Emperor's power naturally suggested. He listened,
accordingly, to the first overtures which Oatavio
Farnese made him; and embracing eagerly an op-
portunity of recovering footing in Italy, he in-
tantly concluded a treaty, in which he bound him-
relfto espouse his cause, and to furnish him all the
afiftance which he desired. This tranfadtion could
not be long kept secret from the Pope, who, fore-
feeilg the calamities which mnuft follow if war
Were relkindled so near the ecclefiiaftical state, im-

mediately

B 0 0 K mediately issued monitory letters, requiring Oc.

-; . tavio to relinquish his new alliance. Upon his
·551. refusal to comply with the requisition, he soon

after pronounced his fief to be forfeited, andde.
cared war against him as a disobedient and re.
bellious vassal. But as, with his own forces alone,
he could not hope to subdue Otavio while sup.
ported by such a powerful ally as the King of
France, he had recourse to the Emperor, who
being extremely solicitous to prevent the establish.
ment of the French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga

Occaslons
the rcnew, l to second Julius with all his troops. Thus the
of holtilities French took the field as the allies of Oaavio; the
be:ween
Chares and Imperialists as the prote&t6rs of the Holy Sees
Henry' and hoitilities commenced between them, while

Charles and Henry themselves still asseted to
give out that they would adhere inviolably to the
peace of Crefpy. The war of Parma was not dif
tinguifhed by any memorable event. Many fmal
rencountres happened with alternate success; the
French ravaged part of the ecclesiastical territories;
the Imperialists laid waste the Parmesan; and the
latter, after having begun to besiege Parma in
form, were obliged to abandon the enterprise with
disgrace ".

Retards the BUT the motions and alarm which this war, o0
tle ou,,il. the preparations for it, occasioned in Italy, pre-

vented moit of the Italian prelates from repairing

n Adriani Ilor. lib. viii. 505. 514. 524. Sleid. 513. Pa

ruta, p. 220. Lettere del Caro fritte al nome diel Card
firnefe, tom. . i. p. , &c.

ts

to Trent on the firit of May, the day appointed B o o K
for re-assembling the council; and though the I -
papal legate and nuncios resorted thither, they 5ss5'
were obliged to adjourn the council to the first of
September, hoping such a number of prelates might
then assemble, that they might with decency begin
their deliberations. At that time about sixty pre-
lates, mostly from the ecclesiastical state, or from
Spain, together with a few Germans, convened °.
The session was opened with the accustomed forma- Henry pr-

tlefts against

lities, and the fathers were about to proceed to bu- the council.
finess, when the abbot of Bellozane appeared, and
presenting letters of credence as ambassador from
the King of France, demanded audience. Having
obtained it, he protested in Henry's name,
against an assembly called at such an improper
junture, when a war, wantonly kindled by the
Pope, made it impossible for the deputies from
theGallican church to retort to Trent in safety,
or to deliberate concerning articles of faith and
discipline with the requisite tranquillity; he de-
clared, that his master did not acknowledge this
to be a general or oecumenic council, but must
confider, and would treat it, as a particular and
partial convention p. The legate affected to de-
fpife this protest; and the prelates proceeded,
n0twithfanding, to examine and decide the great
points in controversy concerning the sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme
unflion. This measure of the French Monarch,

F F. Paul, 268.
' Sleid. 518. Thuan. 282. F. Paul, 301.
VOL. IV. D however,

B O O K however, gave a deep wound to the credit of the
,_L council, at the very commencement of its delibe-
'551- rations. The Germans could not pay much regard

to an afrrembly, the authority of which the sec6nd
Prince ii Chriffendor had formally difclaimried,
or feel any great reverence for the decisions of
a few men, who arrogated to themselves all the
rights belonging to the representatives of the
church universal, a title to which they had such
poor pretensions.

Violence of THE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining his
the Empe- authority to the utmost, in order to establish the
ror's pro-
ceedings reputation and jurisdiction of the council. He
against the
PotctanR. had prevailed on the three ecclesiastical Elecors,

the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the
church next to the Pope, to repair thither in per-
son. He had obliged several German bishops of
inferior rank, to go to Trent themselves, or to
fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial safe-
condu6t to the ambassadors nominated by the
Elector of Brandenburg, the duke of Wurtem-
berg, and other Protestants, to attend the coun-
cil; and exhorted them to fend their divines
thither, in order to propound, explain, and de-
fend their dotrine. At the fame time, his zeal
anticipated the decrees of the council; and as
if the opinions of the Protestants had already been
condemned, he took large (teps towards extermi-
nating them. With this intention, he called
together the ministers of Augsburg; and after
interrogating them concerning several contrlo-

verted

verted points, enjoined them to teach nothing 8 oO K
with refpea to these, contrary to the tenets of the - - _
Romish church. Upon their declining to comply 5ss51
with a requisition so contrary to the dictates of
their consciences, he commanded them to leave
the town in three days, without revealing to any
person the cause of their banishment; he prohi-
bited them to preach for the future in any province
of the Empire; and obliged them to take an
oath that they would punctually obey these injunc-
tions. They were not the only viAcims to his
zeal. The Protestant clergy, in most of the cities
in the circle of Swabia, were ejeEted with the fame
violence; and in many places, such magistrates as
had distinguished themselves by their attachment
to the new opinions, were dismissed with the most
abrupt irregularity, and their offices filled, in con-
sequence of the Emperor's arbitrary appointment,
with the most bigoted of their adversaries. The
Reformed worship was almost entirely suppressed
throughout that extensive province. The ancient
and fundamental privileges of the free cities were
violated. The people were compelled to attend
the ministration of priests, whom they regarded
with horror as idolaters; and to submit to the ju-
rifdition of magistrates, whom they detested as
usurpers q.

TIE Emperor, after this discovery, which was ic endea.
more explicit than any that he had hitherto made, fup"p.tthe

council.
q Sleid. 516. 528. Thuan. 276.

D2 of

B o O K of his intention to subvert the German confitu.

x'. tion, as well as to extirpate the Protestant religion,
,ss,. set out for Infpruck in the Tyrol. He fixed his
Nober. residence in that city, as, by its situation in the

neighbourhood of Trent, and on the confines of
Italy, it appeared a commodious station, whence
he might infpet the operations of the council, and
observe the progress of the war in the Parmesan,
without losing fight of such occurrences as might
happen in Germany r

The segeof DURING these tranfa&ions, the siege of Mag.
Magdeburg. deburg was carried on with various success. At

the time when Charles proscribed the citizens of
Magdeburg, and put them under the ban of the
Empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all the
neighbouring states to take arms against them,
as rebels and common enemies. Encouraged by
his exhortations as well as promises, George of
Mecklenburg, a younger brother of the reigning
Duke, an active and ambitious Prince, collefted
a considerable number of those soldiers of fortune
who had accompanied Henry of Brunswick in all
his wild enterprises; and though a zealous Lu-
theran himself, invaded the territories of the
Magdeburgers, hoping that, by the merit of this
service, he might procure some part of their do-
mains to be allotted to him as an eftabliflment.
The citizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure pa-
tiently the calamities of war, could not be re-
strained from rallying out in order to save their

r Slcid. 329. ,n

lands

lands from being laid waste. They attacked the B o0o0
Duke of Mecklenburg with more resolution than __
conduEt, and were repulsed with great slaughter. 'ss'5
Butas they were animated with that unconquer-
able spirit, which flows from zeal for religion
co-operating with the love of. civil liberty, far
from beingdifheartened by their misfortune, they
prepared to defend themselves with vigour. Many
of the veteran soldiers who had served in the long
wars between the Emperor and King of France,
crowding to their standards under able and expe-
rienced officers, the citizens acquired military skill by
degrees, and added all the advantages of that to
the efforts of undaunted courage. The Duke of
Mecklenburg, notwithstanding the revere blow
which he had given the Magdeburgers, not dar-
ing to invest a town strongly fortified, and defend-
ed by such a garrison, continued to ravage the
open country.
As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers Maurice

takes the

to the camp of this young Prince, Maurice of command
Saxony began to be jealous of the power which O'fhticham
lie possessed by being at the head of such a nume- ried on the
rous body, and marching towards Magdeburg
with his own troops, assumed the supreme com-
mand of the whole army, an honour to which his
high rank and great abilities, as well as the no-
mination of the dict, gave him an indilputable
title. With this united force, he invested the
town, and began the siege in form; claiming
great merit with the Emperor on that account,

D 3 as

B o K as from his zeal to execute the Imperial decree,

v_
' he was exposing himself once more to the censures
SSx.- and maledictions of the party with which he

agreed in religious sentiments. But the ap-
proaches to the town went on slowly; the gar-
rifon interrupted the besiegers by frequent sallies,
in one of which George of Mecklenburg was
taken prisoner, levelled part of their works, and
cut off the soldiers in their advanced posts.
While the citizens of Magdeburg, animated by
the discourses of their pallors, and the fuldiers,
encouraged by the example of their officers, en-
dured all the hardships of a siege without mur-
muring, and defended themselves with the fame
ardour which they had at firit discovered; the
troops of the besiegers aced with extreme re.
miTnefs, repining at every thing that they sus-
sered in a service which they disliked. They broke
out, more than once, into open mutiny, demand.
ing the arrears of their pay, which, as the mem-
bers of the Germanic body sent in their contribu-
tions towards defraying the expences of the war
sparingly and with great reluctance, amounted to
a considerable fum'. Maurice, too, had particular
motives, though such as he durst not avow at that
junEture, which induced him not to push the siege
with vigour, and made him chute rather to con-
tinue at the head of an army exposed to all the
imputations which his dilatory proceedings drew
upon him, than to precipitate a conquest that might

Thuan. 277. Sleid. 514.

have

have brought him some accefilon of reputation, but :B p o o
would have rendered it necessary to disband his ,'
forces. s5!.
AT last, the inhabitants of the town beginning Thecty

surrender8

to susser distress from want of provisions, and toMaurice.
Maurice, finding it impoflible to protract matters
any longer without filling the Emperor with such
suspicions as might have disconcerted all his mea-
fures, he concluded a treaty of capitulation with
the city upon the following conditions; that the
Magdeburgers should humbly implore pardon of
the Emperor; that they should not for the future
take arms, or enter into any alliance against the
house of Austria; that they should ftibmit to the Novemb. 3.
authority of the Imperial chamber; that they
ihould conform to the decree of the diet at Augf-
burg with refpeft to religion ; that the new forti-
fications added to the town should be demolished;
that they flould pay a fine of fifty thousand
crowns, deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to
the Emperor, and set the Duke of Mecklenburg,
together with their other prisoners, at liberty,
without ransom. Next day their garrison marched
out, and Maurice took poflefflon of the town with
great military pomp.

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were fettled, Maurice'
Maurice had held many conferences with Albert Jewst .hi
Maurice had held many conferences with Albert j~uanure.
count Mansfeldt, who had the chief command in
Magdeburg. He consulted likewise with count
Heideck, an officer who had served with great

D 4 reputation

B O K reputation in the army of the league of Smalkalde,

X.,r_ whom the Emperor had proscribed on account of
·551- his zeal for that cause, but whom Maurice had,

notwithstanding, secretly engaged in his service,
and admitted into the mofl intimate confidence.
To them he communicated a scheme, which he
had long revolved in his mind, for procuring li.
berty to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vin-
dicating the privileges of the Germanic body,
and setting bounds to the dangerous encroach.
ments of the Imperial power. Having deli-
berated with them concerning the measures
which might be necessary for securing the fuccef
of such an arduous enterprise, he gave Mansfeldt
secret assurances that the fortifications of Magde-
burg should not be destroyed, and that the inha-
bitants should neither be disturbed in the exercise
of their religion, nor be deprived of any of their
ancient immunities. In order to engage Maurice
more thoroughly from considerations of. interef
to fulfil there engagements, the senate of Magde-
burg elected him their Burgrave, a dignity which
had formerly belonged to the elecoral house
of Saxony, and which entitled him to a very
ample jurifdition not only in the city but in its
dependencies '.

The adan- THUS the citizens of Magdeburg, after en-
tages he de-
rived from during a siege of twelve months, and struggling
his negcia-
tions wihl
the Maglde. t Sleid. 5z8. Thuan. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici

Defcriptio per Scball. Bcflelncierum, ap. Scard. ii. 518.

for

for their liberties, religious and civil, with an in- B o o K
vincible fortitude, worthy of the cause in which X.

-

it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to ss55'
conclude a treaty, which left them in a better
condition than the reft of their countrymen, whom
their timidity or want of public spirit had be-
trayed into such mean fubmifllons to the Empe-
ror. But while a great part of Germany ap-
plauded the gallant conduct of the Magdeburgers,
and rejoiced in their having escaped the deftruc-
tion with which they had been threatened, all
admired Maurice's address in the conduct of his
negociation with them, as well as the dexterity with
which he converted every event to his own advan-
tage. They saw, with amazement, that after
aving afflicted the Magdeburgers during many
onths with all the calamities of war, he was at
aft, by their voluntary election, advanced to the
ation of highest authority in that city which he
ad so lately besieged; that after having been so
ongthe obje& of their satirical invectives as an
poftate, and an enemy to the religion which he
rofeffed, they seemed now to place unbounded
onfidence in his zeal and good-will u. At the
ame time, the public articles in the treaty of ca-
Pitulation were so perfecly conformable to those
wiich the Emperor had granted to the other Pro-
tefant cities, and Maurice took such care to
magnify his merit in having reduced a place which
had defended itself with so much obstinacy, that

U Arnoldi vita Maurit. apud Menkcn, ii. z227.

Charles,

B 0 0 K Charles, far from fufpeting any thing fraudulent

_ -' or collusive in the terms of accommodation, rati.
'55"1 fled them without hesitation, and absolved the

Magdeburgers from the sentence of ban which had
been denounced against them.

His expedi- THE only point that now remained to embar.
eing an rafs Maurice was how to keep together the vete.
army on ran troops which had served under him, as well

as those which had been employed in the defence
of the town. For this, too, he found an expe.
cient with singular art and felicity. His schemes
againit the Emperor were not yet so fully ripened,
that he .durst venture to disclose them, and pro.
ceed openly to carry them into execution. The
winter was approaching, which made it impossible
to take the field immediately. He was afraid
that it would give a premature alarm to the Em-
peror, if he should retain such a considerable bodd
in his pay until the season of action returned ii
the spring. As soon then as Magdedurg opene
its gates, he sent home his Saxon fubjets, whor
he could command to take arms and re-affembli
on the shortest warning; and at the fame time
paying part of the arrears due to the mercenarl
troops, who had followed his standard, as well a
to the soldiers who had served in the garrison, h
absolved them from their refpecive oaths o
fidelity, and disbanded them. But the momen
he gave them their discharge, George of Meck
lenburg, who was now set at liberty, offerec
to take them into his service, and to becom

furet;

surety for the payment of what was still owing to B o0 K
them. As such adventurers were accustomed -
often to change masters, they instantly accepted 'ss5
the offer. Thus these troops were kept united,
and ready to march wherever Maurice Ihould call
them, while the Emperor, deceived by this arti-
fice, and imagining that George of Mecklen-
burg had hired them with an intention to aftert
his claim to a part of his brother's territories by
force of arms, suffered this transaction to pass
without observation, as if it had been a matter of
no consequence ".

HAVING ventured to take these steps, which Ts adafst
were of so much consequence towards the execu- inghis in-
ion of his schemes, Maurice, that he might di- fromthe
vert the Emperor from observing their tendency Emperor
too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions which
that must have excited, saw the necessity of em-
ploying some new artifice in order to engage his
attention, and to confirm him in his present fe-
Curity. As he knew that the chief object of the
Emperor's solicitude at this juncture, was how
he might prevail with the Protestant States of
Germany to recognize the authority of the coun-
cil of Trent, and to fend thither ambassadors in
their own name, as well as deputies from their
,efpeaive churches, he took hold of this predomi-
ating paflion in order to amuse and to deceive

T'huan. 278. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. o164. Arnoldi
ita Mauritii, apud Menken, ii. 1227.

him.

B O O K him. He affected a wonderful zeal to gratify

V_. Charles in what he defired-with regard to this
's51 matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom he

empowered to attend the council; he made choice
of MelanAhon and rome of the mod eminen
among his brethren to prepare a confelion of
faith, and to lay it before that assembly. After
his example, and probably in consequence of his
solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the cit
of Strafburg, and other Proteflant States, appointed
ambassadors and divines to attend the council
They all applied to the Emperor for his safe.
conduct, which they obtained in the most ample
form. This wvas deemed sufficient for the fecu.
rity of the ambassadors, and they proceeded ac.
cordingly on their journey; but a separate safe.
conduct from the council itself was demanded for
the Protestant divines. The fate of John Huti
and Jerome of Prague, whom the council o
Constance, in the preceding century, had con.
demned to the flames without regarding the Im.
perial fafe-conduEt which had been granted them
rendered this precaution prudent and necessary
But as the Pope was no less unwilling that th(
Protestants ihould be admitted to an hearing in
the council, than the Emperor had been eager ir
bringing them to demand it, the legate by pro-
mises and threats prevailed orn the fathers of the
council to decline issuing a fafe-conduEt in the
fame form with that which the council of Bafln
had granted to the followers of Huss. The Pro-
teftants, on their part, infited upon the council'

I copying

copying the precise words of that instrument, B o0o K-
The Imperial ambafadors interposed, in order to x'
obtain what would satisfy them. Alterations in z55ss
the form of the writ were proposed; expedients
were fuggefled; protests and counter-protefts
were taken: the legate, together with his affo-
ciates, laboured to gain their point by artifice and
chicane; the Protestants adhered to theirs with
firmness and obstinacy. An account of every
thing that passed in Trent was transmitted to the
Emperor at Infpruck, who, attempting, from an
excess of zeal, or of confidence in his own ad-
dress, to reconcile the contending parties, was
involved in a labyrinth of inextricable negocia-
tions. By means of this, however, Maurice
gained all that he had in view; the Emperor's
time was wholly engrossed, and his attention di-
verted; while he himself had leisure to mature
his schemes, to carry on his intrigues, and to
finish his preparations, before he threw off the
mask, and struck the blow which he had so long
meditated y.

BUT previous to entering into any farther detail The affir,
concerning Maurice's operations, some account ofHungary.
muRf be given of a new revolution in Hungary,
which contributed not a little towards their pro-
ducing such extraordinary effets. When Solyman,
inthe year I541, by a stratagem, which suited the
bafeand inficlious policy of a petty usurper, rather

7 Slid. S265. F. Paul, 323. 338. Thuan. 286.

than

B O o K than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, de.

X. prived the young King of Hungary of the domi.
1551* nions which his father had left him, he had granted

that unfortunate Prince the country of Tranfylva.
nia, a province of his paternal kingdom. The go-
vernment of this, together with the care of educat.
ing the young King,. for he still allowed him to re-'
tain that title, though he had rendered it only an
empty name, he committed to the Queen and
Martinuzzi bishop of Waradin, whom the late
King had appointed joint-guardians of his son, and
regents of his dominions, at a time when those
offices were of greater importance. This co-ordi-
nate jurifdition occasioned the fame dissensions in a
finall principality as it would have excited in a
great kingdom; an ambitious young Queen, pof.
sessed with an high opinion of her own capacity for
governing, and an high-fpirited prelate, fond of
power, contending who should engross the greatest
share in the administration. Each had their par-
tizans among the nobles; but as Martinuzzi, by
his great talents, began to acquire the ascendant,
Isabella turned his own arts against him, and court-
ed the protection of the Turks.

Martinizz;i THE neighbouring Baflas, jealous of the bi-
mdinad' shop's power as well as abilities, readily promised
in thatnf her the aid which ihe demanded, and would soon
ingdom. 'have obliged Martinuzzi to have given up to her

the sole direscion of affairs, if his ambition, fertile
in expedients, had not suggested to him a new
measure, and one that tended not only to pre-

2 fcrve

erve but to enlarge his authority. Having con- B o K
luded an agreement with the Queen, by the me- ..
iation of some of the nobles, who were solicitous '55s.
t save their country from the calamities of a
ivil war, he secretly dispatched one of his confi-
ents to Vienna, and entered into a negociation
ith Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to
rfuade Ferdinand, that the fame man whole
mity and intrigues had driven him out of a
reat part of his Hungarian dominions, might,
pn a reconciliation, become equally inftru-
ental in recovering them, he listened eagerly to
he first overtures of an union with that prelate.
artinuzzi allured him by such profpeEts of ad-
antage, and engaged, with so much confidence,
hat he would prevail on the most powerful of
e Hungarian nobles to take arms in his favour,
hat Ferdihand, notwithstanding his truce with
dlyman, agreed to invade Transylvania. The
ommand of the troops destined for that service,
onfiffing of veteran Spanish and German fol-
iers, was given to Caftaldo Marquis de Piadena,
officer formed by the famous Marquis de Pes-
ra, whom he strongly resembled both in his
nterprifing genius for civil business, and in his
reat knowledge in the art of war. This army,
ore formidable by the discipline of the soldiers,
d the abilities of the general, than by its num-
rs, was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and
s fation among the Hungarians. As the Turk-
1 Bafflas, the Sultan himself being at the head
F his army on the frontiers of Persia, could not

afford

B 0 0 K afford the Queen such immediate or effeftual

v -_a assistance as the exigency of her affairs required,
'ss51- he quickly loft all hopes of being able to retain

any longer the authority which she possessed as
regent, and even began to despair of her son's
safety.

The ruccefs MARTINUZZI did not susser this favourable
hl,.""ma opportunity of accomplishing his own designs to

pass unimproved, and ventured, while she was in
this state of deje&ion, to lay before her a propo.
fal, which at any other time she would have re.
jected with disdain. He represented how impof.
fible it was for her to resist Ferdinand's victorious
arms; that even if the Turks should enable her
to make head against them, she would be far
from changing her condition to the better, and
could not confider them as deliverers, but as mar.
ters, to whose commands she must submit; he
conjured her, therefore, as she regarded her own
dignity, the safety of her son, or the security ol
Christendom, rather to give up Transylvania tc
Ferdinand, and to make over to him her fon'r
title to the crown of Hungary, than to allow both
to be usurped by the inveterate enemy of tht
Christian faith. At the fame time he promifet
her, in Ferdinand's nime, a compensation foi
herself, as well as for her son, fuicable to their
rank, and proportional to the value of what thel
were to sacrifice. Isabella, deserted by some o
her adherents, distrusting others, destitute 0
fiiends, and surrounded by Caftaldo's and Marti

nuzzi:

nuzzi's troops, subscribed these hard conditions, B o o K
though with a reluctant hand. Upon this, she X.
surrendered filch places of strength as were still tss5.
in her pofeffeion, Ihe gave up all the ensigns of
royalty, particularly a crown of gold, which, as
the Hungarians believed, had descended from
heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an un-
doubted right to the throne. As she could not
bear to remain a private person, in a country
where the had once enjoyed sovereign power,
he instantly set out with her son for Silesia, in
order to take poffeflion of the principalities of
Oppelen and Ratibor, the investiture of which
Ferdinand had engaged to grant her son, and like-
wife to bestow one of his daughters upon him in
marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Mar- Appointed
tinuzzi, and after his example the reft of the that port o
Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Ser- which

u as

dinand; who, in order to testify his grateful sense fubje, to
of the zeal as well as success with which that
prelate had served him, affected to diflinguifl
him by every poflible mark of favour and confi-
dence. He appointed him governor of Tran-
ylvania, with almost unlimited authority; he pub-
icly ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest deference
o his opinion and commands; he increased his
revenues, which were already very great, by new
appointmenits; he nominated him archbilhop of
Gran, and prevailed on the Pope to raise him to
hle dignity of a Cardinal. All this ostentation
VoL.. IV. E of

B O O K of good-will, however, was void offincerity, and

X. v' * calculated to conceal sentiments the most perfectly
'55s- its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's abi.

lities; dirtrufted his fidelity; and foresaw, that as
his extensive authority enabled him to check any
attempt towards circumscribing or abolifling the
extensive privileges which the Hungarian nobility
possessed, he would stand forth, on every occasion,
the guardian of the liberties of his country, rather
than a& the part of a viceroy devoted to the will
of his sovereign.

Ferdinand FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge
formdfign, to Caftaldo, to watch his motions, to guard against
gain him. his designs, and to thwart his measures. But

Martinuzzi, either because he did not perceive
that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his atlions,
or becaule he despised Ferdinand's insidious arts,
alfumed the direEtion of the war against the
Turks with his usual tone of authority, and con-
duAed it with great magnanimity, and no less
success. He recovered some places of which the
Infidels had taken pofeffeion; he rendered their
attempts to reduce others abortive; and establish-
ed Ferdinand's authority not only in Tranfylva-
nia, but in the Bannat of Temefwar, and several
of the countries adjacent. In carrying on there
operations, he often differed in sentiments from
Caftaldo and his officers, and treated the Turkish
prisoners with a degree not only of humanity, but
even of generosity, which Caflaldo loudly con-
demned. This was represented at Vienna as an

artful

artful method of courting the friendship of the B o o K
Infidels, that, by securing their protetion, he .
might shake off all dependence upon the fove- 'ss5.
reign whom he now acknowledged. Though
Martinuzzi, in juffification of his own conduet,
contended that it was impolitic by unnecessary
severities to exasperate an enemy prone to revenge,
Cafaldo's accusations gained credit with Ferdi-
nand, prepossessed already against Martinuzzi, and
jealous of every thing that could endanger his own
authority in Hungary5 in proportion as he knew
it to be precarious and ill established. These sus-
picions Caftaldo confirmed and strengthened, by
the intelligence which' he tranfinitted continually to
his confidents at Vienna. By misrepresenting
what was innocent, and putting the worst con-
truCtion on what seemed dubious in Martinuzzi's
condu&; by imputing to him designs which he
never formed, and charging him with actions of
which he was not guilty; he at last convinced
Ferdinand, that, in order to preserve his Hunga-
rian crown, he must cut off that ambitious pre-
late. But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would be
dangerous to proceed in the regular course of law
against a subje&t of such exorbitant power as might
enable him to set his sovereign at defiance, de-
termined to employ violence, in order to obtain
that fatisfadtion which the laws were too feeble to
afford him.
HI issued his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, He is als-

who willingly undertook that infamous service. hiiacto-llY

E 2 Having mand"

B 0 0 Having communicated the design to some Italian

v4_ _~ and Spaniih officers whom he could trust, and
Iss.a concerted with them the plan of executing it,
Dec. 18. they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early one

morning, under pretence of presenting to him
some dispatches which were to be sent off imme-
diately to Vienna; and while he perused a paper
with attention, one of their number struck him
with his poignard in the throat. The blow was
not mortal. Martinuzzi started up with the in-
trepidity natural to him, and grappling the as.
faffin, threw him to the ground. But the other
conspirators rulhing in, an old man, unarmed, and
alone, was unable long to sustain such an unequal
conflit, and funk under the wounds which he
received from so many hands. The Tranfylva-
nians were restrained by dread of the foreign troops
stationed in their country, from rising in arms, in
order to take vengeance on the murderers of a
prelate who had long been the obje& of their love

The effre as well as veneration. They spoke of the deed,
of that o-. however, with horror and execration ) and exclaim-
lUnt aition.

ed against Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for
recent and important services, nor reverence for a
character confidered as sacred and inviolable among
Chrif-ians, could restrain from ihedding the blood
of a man, whose only crime was attachment to
his native country. The nobles, detesting the
jealous as well as cruel policy of a court, which,
upon uncertain. and improbable surmises, had given
up a person, no less conspicuous for his merit than
his rank, to be butchered by affaffils, either

retired

retired to their own estates, or if they continued B o o K
with the Austrian army, grew cold to the service. -
The Turks, encouraged by the death of an enemy ss55-
whose abilities they knew and dreaded, prepared
to renew hostilities early in the spring; and instead
of the security which Ferdinand had expected from
the removal of Martinuzzi, it was evident that his
territories in Hungary were about to be attacked
with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal,
than ever .
BY this time, Maurice having almost finished Maurice

courts the

his intrigues and preparations, was on the point proteaion
of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking Frenth
the field against the Emperor. His first care, Kin".
after he came to this resolution, was to disclaim
that narrow and bigoted maxim of the confede-
rates of Smalkalde, which had led them to shun
all connexion with foreigners. He had observed
how fatal this had been to their cause; and, in-
ftru&ed by their error, he was as eager to court
the protetion of Henry II. as they had been so-
licitous to prevent the interposition of Francis I.
Happily for him, he found Henry in a difpofi-
tion to liften to the first overture on his part, and
in a situation which enabled him to bring the
whole force of the French monarchy into adion.
Henry had long observed the progress of the Em-
peror's arms with jealousy, and wifled to diflin-

Sleid. 535. Thuan. lib. ix. 309, &c. Ifutanh.ifli Hilt.

Regn. Hungarici, lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
871. Natalis Comitis Hifloria, lib. iv. 84, &L.

E 3 guini

B O O K guifh himself by entering the lifts against the fame

enemy, whom it had been the glory of his father's
1551. reign to oppose. He had laid hold on the first

opportunity in his power of thwarting the Empe.
ror's designs, by taking the Duke of Parma under
his protection; and hostilities were already begun,
not only in that dutchy but in Piedmont. Having
terminated the war with England by a peace, no
less advantageous to himself than honourable for his
allies the Scots, the restless and enterprising cou-
rage of his nobles was impatient to display itself on
some theatre of a&tion more conspicuous than the
petty operations in Parma or Piedmont afforded
them.

Histreaty JOHN DE FIENNE, bishop of Bayonne, whom
with him. Henry had sent into Germany, under pretence of

hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was em-
powered to conclude a treaty in form with Mau-
rice and his associates. As it would have been
very indecent in a King of France to have under-
taken the defence of ,the Protestant church, the
interests of religion, how much soever they might
be affected by the treaty, were not once mention-
ed in any of the articles. Religious concerns,
they pretended to commit entirely to the difpo-
fition of Divine Providence; the only motives
assigned for their present confederacy against
Charles, were to procure the Landgrave liberty,
and to prevent the subversion of the ancient con-
flitution and laws of the German Empire. In
order to accomplifli thele ends, it was agreedl

that

that all the contraaing parties should, at the fame B o o K
time, declare war against the Emperor; that
neither peace nor truce ihould be made but by 1551.
common consent, nor without including each of
the confederates; that, in order to guard against
the inconveniencies of anarchy, or of pretensions
to joint command, Maurice should be acknow-
ledged as head of the German confederates, with
absolute authority in all military affairs; that
Maurice and his associates should bring into the
field seven thousand horse, with a proportional
number of infantry; that, towards the subsistence
of this army, during the three first months of the
war, Henry should contribute two hundred and
forty thousand crowns, and afterwards sixty thou-
sand crowns a-month, as long as they continued
in arms; that Henry should attack the Emperor
on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful army;
that if it were found requisite to eleE a new Em-
peror, such a person should be nominated as shall
be agreeable to the King of Franceb. This
treaty was concluded on the fifth of Ocober,
some time before Magdeburg surrendered, and
the preparatory negociations were conducted with
such profound secrecy, that, of all the Princes
who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice commu-
nicated what he was carrying on to two only,
John Albert, the reigning Duke of Mecklen-
burg, and William of Hesse, the Landgrave's
eldest son. The league itself was no less anxiously

Recucil des Traitez, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.

E 4 concealed,

B 0 0 K concealed, and with such fortunate care, that no

. i-

rumour concerning it reached the ears of the
'553E Emperor or his ministers; nor do they seem to

have conceived the most distant suspicion of such a
tranfation,

$olicits AT the fame time, with a solicitude which was
the aid of
Edward V. careful to draw some accession of strength from

fE . every quarter, Maurice applied to Edward VI. of

England, and requested a subsidy of four hundred
thousand crowns for the support of a confederacy
formed in defence of the Protectant religion. But
the fa&ions which prevailed in the English court
during the minority of that Prince, and which de-
prived both the councils and arms of the nation of
their wonted vigour, left the English ministers nei-
ther time nor inclination to attend to foreign
affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that aid,
which their zeal for the Reformation would have
prompted them to grant him 9.

Demands MAURICF, however, having secured the pro.
once inore
that the tetion of such a powerful Monarch as Henry II
Lanudlgrbve proceeded with great confidence, but with equal
at liberty. caution, to execute his plan. As he judged it

necessary to make one effort more, in order to
obtain the Emperor's content that the Landgrave
Deccmber. fihould be set at liberty, he sent a solemn embalfy,

in his own name, and in that of the Elector of
Brandenbtllg, to Infpruck. After resuming, at

/ urnet' l-ift. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

great

great length, all the fa&s and arguments upon n oo K
which they founded their claim, and reprefentihg, -.
in the firongefl terms, the peculiar engagemetts s551.
which bound them to be so afliduous in their so-
licitations, they renewed the request in behalf of
the unfortunate prisoner, which they had so often
preferred in vain. The Elector Palatine, the
Duke of Wurtemberg, the Dukes of Mecklen-
burg, the Duke of Deuxponts, the Marquis of
Brandenburg Bareith, and the Marquis of Baden,
by their ambassadors, concurred with them in
their suit. Letters were likewise delivered to the
fame effect from the King of Denmark, the Duke
ofBavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even
the King of the Romans joined in this application,
being moved with compaflion towards the Land-
grave in his wretched situation, or influenced, per-
haps, by a fecretjealoufy of his brother's power ahd
designs, which, since his attempt to alter the order
offuccefion in the Empire, he had come to view
with other eyes than formerly, and dreaded to a
great degree,

BUT Charles, constant to his own fytem with
regard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand urged
by such powerful intercessors; and having de-
clared that he would communicate his resolution
concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as he
arrived at Infpruck, where he was every day ex-
pesed, he did not deign to descend into any more
Iarticular explication of his intentionsd. This

i Sleid. 531. Th urn. lib. viii. 80o.

applica-

B o o K application, though of no benefit to the Land.

X.
v^ . grave, was of great advantage to Maurice. It
s551. served to justify his subsequent proceedings, and

to demonstrate the necessity of employing arms
in order to extort that equitable conceftion, which
his mediation or intreaty could not obtain. It
was of use, too, to confirm the Emperor in his
security, as both the solemnity of the application,
and the solicitude with which so many Princes were
drawn in to enforce it, led him to conclude that
they placed all their hopes of restoring the Land-
grave to liberty, in gaining his consent to dismiss
him.

1552. MAURICE employed artifices still more refined

Maurice Mantinues to conceal his machinations, to amuse the Empe-
conainues o ó1ed to be mor
amuCethe ror, and to gain time. He asseted to be more

. olicitous than ever to find out some expedient for

removing the difficulties with regard to-the safe.
conduct for the Protestant divines appointed to
attend the council, so that they might repair
thither without any apprehension of danger. His
ambassadors at Trent had frequent conferences
concerning this matter with the Imperial ambaf-
fadors in that city, and laid open their sentiments
to them with the appearance of the mos unre-
served confidence. IHe was willing, at last, to
have it believed, that he thought all differences
with refpeat to this preliminary article were on
the point of being adjusted; and in order to give
credit to this opinion, he commanded Melanc-
thon, together with his brethren, to set out on

" (~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~tele

their journey to Trent. At the fame time, he B O o K
held a close correspondence with the Imperial 1*-
court at Infpruck, and renewed on every occasion ,ss-.
his profeifions not only of fidelity but of attach-
ment to the Emperor. He talked continually of
his intention of going to Infpruck in person; he
gave orders to hire a house for him in that city,
and to fit it up with the greatest dispatch for. his
reception '.
BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was in the The Empe.

ror con-

arts of deceit, and impenetrable as he thought ceves some
the veil to be, under which .he concealed his de- foceonng
signs, there were several things in his conduct his inten-

t5 tionl.

which alarmed the Emperor amidst his security,
and tempted him frequently to fufpet that he
was meditating something extraordinary. As
these fulpicions took their rife from circum-
flances inconsiderable in themselves, or of an am-
biguous as well as uncertain nature, they were
more than counterbalanced by Maurice's address;
and the Emperor would not, lightly, give up his
confidence in a man, whom he had once trusted
and loaded with favours. One particular alone
teemed to be of fich coniequence, that he thought
it necessary to demand an explanation with regard
to it. The troops, which George of Mecklen-
burg had taken into pay after the capitulation of
Magdeburg, having fixed their quarters in Thu-
ringla, lived at discretion on the lands of the rich

Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Mcnkcn, ii. z229.

ecclefi-

B o ox ecclesiastics in their neighbourhood. Their licence

X - _ and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as.felt
X55s. or dreaded their exactions, complained loudly to

the Emperor, and represented them as a bodyof
men kept in readiness for some desperate enter.
prize. But Maurice, partly by extenuating the
enormities of which they had been guilty, partly
by representing the impossibility of disbanding
these troops, or of keeping them to regulardifci.
pline, unless the arrears still due to them by the
Emperor were paid, either removed the apprehen.
sions which this had occasioned, or, as Charles
was not in a condition to satisfy the demands of
there soldiers, obliged him to be silent with regard
to the matter .

Maurice THE time of a&ion was now approaching,
ai so.. Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of Bran.

denburg to Paris, in order to confirm his league
with Henry, and to haften the march of the French
army. He had taken measures to bring his own
fubjets together on the first summons; he had
provided for the security of Saxony, while he
should be absent with the army; and he held the
troops in Thuringia, on which he chiefly de.
pended, ready to advance on a moment's warning.
All these complicated operations were carriedon
without being discovered by the court at Infpruck,
and the Emperor remained there in perfect tran-
quillity, busied entirely in counterating the in.

g Slcid. 549. Thuan. 339.

trig""s

trigues of the Pope's legate at Trent, and in B o o
fetding the conditions on which the Protestant .
divines should be admitted into the council, as if iss*-
there had not been any tranfadtion of greater mo-
ment in agitation.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, who, by circur-
his sagacity in observing the conduOt of all around which con
him, was commonly led to an excess of distrust, tibeuitvdtohe

deceive the

may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed Emperor,
to infatuation. But besides the exquisite address
with which Maurice concealed his intentions, two
circumstances contributed to the delusion. The
gout had returned upon Charles soon after his ar-
rival at Infpruck, with an increase of violence;
and his constitution being broken by such fre-
quent attacks, he was seldom able to exert his
natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs
with his usual vigilance and penetration ; and
Granvelle, bishop of Arras, his prime minister,
though one of the most subtle statesmen of that
orperhaps of any age, was on this occasion the
dupe of his own craft. He entertained such an
high opinion of his own abilities, and held the
political talents of the Germans in such contempt,
that he despised all the intimations given him adhis
concerning Maurice's secret machinations, or the
dangerous designs which he was carrying on.
When the Duke of Alva, whose dark suspicious
mind harboured many doubts concerning the
Eledor's sincerity, proposed calling him imme-
liatcly to court to answer for his conduct, Gran-

velle

B O O K velle replied with great scorn,- That these appre.

X.
I__ X' henrions were groundless, and that a drunken

1552. German head was too gross to form any scheme

which he could not easily penetrate and baffle,
Nor did he assume this peremptory tone merely
from confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and received
from them frequent and minute information con.
cerning all their matter's motions. But through
this very channel, by which he expected to gain
access to all Maurice's counsels, and even to his
thoughts, such intelligence was conveyed to him
as completed his deception. Maurice fortunately
discovered the correspondence of the two traitors
with Granvelle, but instead of punishing them
for their crime, he dexterously availed himfelfof
their fraud, and turned his own arts againf the
bishop. He affected to treat these ministers with
greater confidence than ever; he admitted them
to his consultations; he seemed to lay openhis
heart to them; and taking care all the while to
let them be acquainted with nothing but what it
was his interest should be known, they tranfinit'
ted to Infpruck such accounts as possessed Gran-
velle with a firmn belief of his sincerity as wellas
good intentions s. The Emperor himself, in the
fulness of ftcurity, was so little moved by a me"
rnorial, in name of the ecclefiaflical electors, ad-
monifliing him to be on his guard against .Mau
rice, that he made light of this intelligence;: and

e Mclvil's Memoirs, fol. edit. p. it.

Ills

his answer to them abounds with declarations of B o o K
his entire and confident reliance on the fidelity as_
well as attachment of that Prince h. s55s.
AT las Maurice's preparations were completed, Maurice

takes the

and he had the fatisfation to find that his intrigues field against
and designs were itill unknown. But, though rorEmp
now ready to take the field, he did not lay aside
the arts which he had hitherto employed; and by
one piece of craft more, he deceived his enemies
a few days longer. He gave out, that he was
about to begin that journey to Infpruck of which
he had io often talked, and he took one of the
ministers whom Granvelle had bribed, to attend
him thither. After travelling post a few stages,
e pretended to be indisposed by the fatigue-of
he journey, and dispatching the fufpe&ted mini-
ers to make his apology-to the Emperor. for this
delay, and to assure him that he would be at In-

spruck within a few days; he mounted on horse-

back, as soon as this spy on his acions was gone,

rode full speed towards Thuringia, joined his March ig.
!rmy, Which amounted to twenty thousand foot
ind five thousand horse, and put it immediatly
in motion i.

Sleid. 535
Melv. Men,. p. 13. There circumRlances concerning the
axon miniltcrs whom Granivelle had bribed, are not mentioned
ythe German historians; but as Sir James Melvil received
iinifisrm;tion from the Eletor Palatine, and as they are per-
:Ily agrecable to the relt of Mautice's conduS, they may be
"l/idcred as athentic.

AT

B o o K -AT the fame time he published a manifesto coil,

X*__ taining his rearons for taking arms. These were
p is5- three in number : That he might secure the Pro,

manifeia teftant religion, which was threatened with imme,
if 'd a. diate deftruaion; That he might maintain the

constitution and laws of the Empire) and save
Germany from being fubjeaed to the dominion
of an absolute monarch; That he might deliver
the Landgrave of Hesse from the miseries of a
long and unjust imprisonment. By the firfl, he
roused all the favourers of the Reformation, a
party formidable by their zeal as well as num.
bers, and rendered desperate by oppreflion. By
the second he interested all the friends of liberty,
Catholics no less than Protestants, and made it
their interest to unite with him in aflerting the
rights and privileges common to both. The
third, besides the glory which he acquired by his
zeal to fulfil his engagements to the unhappy pri.
toner, was become a cause of general concern,
not only from the compassion which the Land-
grave's sufferings excited, but from indignation
at the injustice and rigour of the Emperor's pro-
ceedings against him. Together with Maurice's
manifesto, another appeared in the name of Al-
bert Marquis of Brandenburg Culmbach, who
had joined him with a body of adventurers whom
he had drawn together. The fame grievances
which Maurice had pointed out are mentioned in
it, but with an excess of virulence and animosity
suitable to the characer of the Prince in whose
name it was published.

TIE

THE King of France added to these a manifesto. B 0 ,O.K
in his own name; in which, after tzking notice of .
the ancient alliance between the French and Ger- , iss2.
man nations, both descended from the fame an- fully up.

ported by

celtors; and after mentioning the applications, the French
which, in consequence of this, fqme of the most King.
illustrious among the German Princes had made
to him for his protection; he. declared, that he
now took arms to re-establish the ancient confti-
tution of the Empire, to deliver rome of its
Princes from captivity, and to secure the privi-
leges and independence of all the members of
the Germanic 'body. In this manifesto, Henry
alTumed the extraordinary title of ProteLtor of the
Liberties of Germany, and of its captive Princes;
and there was engraved on it a cap, the ancient
iymbol of freedom, placed between two daggers,
in order to intimate to the Germans, that this bless-
ingwas to be acquired and secured by force of
arms i

MAURICE had now to aft a part entirely new, Maurice's
but his flexible genius was capable of accommo- i theseld.
dating itself to every situation. The moment he
took arms, he was as bold and enterprising in the
field, as he had been cautious and crafty in the
cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards
the Upper Germany. All the towns in his way
opened their gates to him. H1-e reinstated the,

Sleid. 549. Thuan. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
371.

VoL. IV. 1 magi-

B-' o K magistrates whom the Emperor had deposed, and
._ gave potiefion of the churches to the Protestant

J'5's ministers whom he had ejected. He direOted his

march to Auglfurg, and as the Imperial garrison,
which was too inconsiderable to think of defending
it, retired immediately, he took possession of that
April . great city, and made the fame changes there as in

the towns through which he had passed .k

The Empe- No words can express the Emperor's aftonili.

0ror' aflo-
ii*mmenc' ment and consternation at events so unexpected.
and difirefs. He saw a great number of the German Princes in

arms against him, and the reft either ready to
join them, or wishing success to their enterprize.
lHe beheld a powerful Monarch united with them
in close league, seconding their operations in per.
son at the head of a formidable army, while he,
through negligence and credulity, which exposed
him no less to scorn than to danger, had neither
made, nor was in condition to make, any effec-
tual provision, either for crushing his rebellious
fubjets, or resisting the invasion of the foreign
enemy. Part of his Spanish troops had been or-
dered into Hungary against the Turks; the reft
had marched back to Italy upon occasion of the
war in the dutchy of Parma. The bands of ve-
teran Germans had been dismissed, because he
was not able to pay them; or liad entered into
Maurice's service after the siege of Magdeburg$
and he remained at Infpruck with a body of fol-

k Sleid. 555. Thuan. 342z.

diers

diers hardly strong enough to guard- his own per- B o 6 X
son. His treasury was as much exhausted, as his- --
army was reduced. He had received no remit- ssi.
tances for some time from the new world. He
had forfeited all credit with the merchants of Ge-
noa and Venice, who refused to lend him money,
though tempted by the offer of exorbitant inte-
reft. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the most
considerable potentate in Christendom, and ca-
pable of exerting the greaceft strength, his power,
notwithifanding the violent attack made upon it,
being still unimpaired, found himself in a situation
which rendered him unable to make such a fudderi
and vigorous effort as the juncure required, and
was necessary to have saved him from the pt-fent
danger.

IN this situation; the Emperor placed all his Endeavour.
hopes on negociating; the only resource of such by ,eg-
as are consciouS of their own weakness. But ciation.
thinking it inconsistent with his dignity to make
the first advances to fubjeEts who were in arms
against him, he avoided that indecorum by em-.
ploying the mediation of his brother Ferdinand.
Maurice confiding in his own talents to conduct
any negociation in such a manner as to derive ad-
vantage from it, and hoping that, by the appear-
ance of facility in hearkening to the fir-it overture
Of accommodation, he might amuse the Empe-
ror, and tempt him to flacken the activity with
which he was now preparing to defend himself,
readily agreed to an interview with Ferdinand in

IF 2 the

B 0 K the town of Lintz in Austria; and having left his

^ _. army to proceed on its march under the corn-
'ss2 mand of the duke of Mecklenburg, he repaired

thither.

progress of MEANWHILE the King of France puntually
athrm". fulfilled his engagements to his allies. He took

the field early, with a numerous and. well-ap.
pointed army, and marching direAly into Lorrain,
Toul and Verdun opened their gates at his ap-
proach. His forces appeared next before Metz,
and that city, by a fraudulent stratagem of the
Conftabie Montmorency, who having obtained
permission to pass through it with a fpiall guard,
introduced as many troops as were sufficient to
overpower the garrilon, was likewise seized with-
out bloodshed. Henry made his entry into all
these towns with great pomp; he obliged the in,
habitants to swear allegiance to him, and annexed
those important conquerts to the French Mo-
narchy. He left a strong garrison in Metz.
From thence he advanced towards Alsace, in order
to attempt new conquests, to which the success
that had hitherto attended his arms invited him'.

The nego. 1'4E conference at Lintz did not produce any
ciations be-
twen the accommodation. Maul ice, w hen he connted
Empeor to it, seems to have had, nothing in view but to
awidM~iirice ve CO
of no cce. amnufe the Emperor ; for he made luech demands,

both in behalf of his confederates and their ally

i Thuan. 3t9.

tile

the French King, as he knew would not be ac- B 0 o K
cepted by a Prince, too haughty to submit, at -' _j
once, to conditions dictated by an enemy. But, 'ss5
however firmly Maurice adhered during the ne-
g0ciation to the interests of his associates, or how
Readily soever he kept in view the objects which
had induced him to take arms, he often professed
a strong inclination to terminate the differences
with the Emperor in an amicable manner. En-
couraged by this appearance of a pacific difpofi-
tion, Ferdinand proposed a second interview at
Paflau on the twenty-fixth of May, and that a truce
ihould commence on that day, and continue to the
tenth of June, in order to give them leisure for ad-
jusing all the points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the Mauricead-
ninth of May, which had now advanced to Gun- SwadnIfr.
delfingen. He put his troops in motion next pude".
morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
action before the commencement of the truce, he
resolved, during that period, to venture upon an
enterprize, the success of which would be so de-
cifive, as to render the negociations at Pafiau
extremely Ihort, and entitle him to treat upon his
own terms. He foresaw that the prolipe6 of a
cessation of arms, which was to take place so
soon, together with the opinion of his earneftniefs
to re eftablilh peace, with which hi had artfully
amused Ferdinand, could hardly fail of inspiring
the Emperor with such falif hopes, that he would
naturally become remits, and rclapfc into lonme

'
3 degree

B o O K degree of that security which had already been so

x..-_ fatal to him. Relying on this conjecture, he
J55s. marched direaly at the head of his army towards

Inipruck, and advanced with the most rapid mo.
tion that could be given to so great a body of
troops. On the eighteenth, he arrived at Fieffen,
a post of great consequence, at the entrance into
the Tyrolefe. There he found a body of eight
hundred men, whom the Emperor had assembled,
strongly intrenched, in order to oppose his pro-
grefs. He attacked them instantly with fucih vio-
lence and impetuosity, that they abandoned their
lines precipitately, and, falling back on a second
body potled near Ruten, communicated the panic
terror with which they. themselves had been seized,
to those troops; so that they likewise took to flight,
after a feeble resistance.

T-kea the ELATED with this success, which exceeded his
Ehrcnbcrbg. most sanguine hopes, Maurice pressed forward to

Ehrenbergh, a castle situated on an high and
tleep precipice, which commanded the only pass
through the mountains. As this fort had been
surrendered to the Protestants at the beginning
of the Smalkaldic war, because the garrison was
then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, sensible
of its importance, had taken care, at this junc-
ture, to throw into it a body of troops sufficient
to maintain it against the greatest army. But a
Shepherd, in pursuing a goat which had strayed
from his flock, having discovered an unknown
path by which it was poflible to ascend to the top

of

of the rock, came with this seasonable piece of a oo Ko
intelligence to Maurice. A small band of chosen A.mp
soldiers, under the command of George of Meck- .^ss.
lenburg, was instantly ordered to follow this guide.
They sec out in the evening, and clambering up
the rugged track with infinite fatigue as well as
danger, they reached the summit unperceived;
and at an hour which had been agreed on, when
Maurice began the assault on the one fide of the
castle, they appeared on the other, ready to scale
the walls, which were feeble in that place, be-
cause it had been hitherto deemed inaccessible.
The garrison, struck with terror at the fight qs
anenemy on a quarter where they had thought
themselves perfectly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without blood-
shed, and which was of greater consequence to
him, without loss of time, took possession of a
place, the reducion of which might have retarded
him long, and have required the utmroft efforts of
his valour and skill a.

MAURICE was now only two days march from An utinyof
Infpruck, and without losing a moment he ordered retards hai
his infantry to advance thither, having left his marh.
cavalry, which was unserviceable in that moun.
tainous country, at FieGfen, to guard the mouth
of the pass. He propoled to advance with such
rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of the loss
Qs Ehrenbergh, and to surprise the Emperor, to-

'" Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1 3.

i' 4. ether

BO O K gether with his attendants, in an open town inca-
· 4.-..- pable of defence. But just as his troops began to

552' move, a battalion of mercenaries mutinied, de-

claring that they would not stir until they had
received the gratuity, which, according to the
custom of that age, they claimed as the recom.
pence due to them for having taken a place by
assault. It was with great difficulty, as well as
danger, and not without some considerable loss of
time, that Maurice quieted this infurretion, and
prevailed on the soldiers to follow him to a place
where he promised them such rich booty as would
be an ample reward for all their services.

The Empe- To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen ac-
ror flies in
confusion cident, the Emperor owed his safety. He was
from Ins-
ruck." informed of the approaching danger late in the

evening, and knowing that nothing could save
him but a speedy flight, he instantly left Infpruck,
without regarding the darkness of the night, or
the violence of the rain which happened to fall at
that time; and notwithstanding the debility oc-
cafioned by the gout, which rendered him unable
to bear any motion but that of a litter, he tra-
velled by the light of torches, taking his way
over the Alps, by roads almost impassable. His
courtiers and attendants followed him with equal
precipitation, rome of them on such horses as
they could haitily procure, many of them on foot,
and all in the ucntofl confifion. In this miserable
plight, very unlike the pomp with which Charles
had appeared during the five preceding years as

the

the conqueror of Germany, he arrived at length 3 o xK
with his dejeEted train at Villach in Carinthia, and --
scarcely thought himself secure even in that re- 5ssa.
mote inaccessible corner.
MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after Mauriceen-

ter'that

the Emperor and his attendants had left it; and town.
enraged that the prey should escape out of his
hands when he was just ready to seize it, he pur-
sued them some miles; but finding it impoflible
to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave
speed, he returned to the town, and abandoned
all the Emperor's baggage, together with that of
his ministers, to be plundered by the soldiers;
while he preserved untouched every thing belong-
ing to the King of the Rorans, either because
he had formed some friendly connexion with that
Prince, or because he wished to have it believed
that such a connexion subsisted between them.
As there now remained only three days to the
commencement of the truce (with iuch nicety
had Maurice calculated his operations), he set
out for Paffau, that he might meet Ferdinand on
the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew The Empe-
the guards placed on the degraded Eleaor of ETo, of

Saxonly at

Saxony, whom, during five years, he had car- Slibery.
lied about with him as a prisoner; and set him
entirely at liberty, either with an intention to em-
harrafs Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and dig-

nity,

n o o r niity, or from a sense of the indecency of detain,

^x .1 ing him a prisoner, while he himself run the rilf
,55z. of being deprived of his own liberty. But that

Prince, feeing no other way of escaping than
that which the Emperor took, and abhorring the
thoughts of falling into the hands of a kinsman,
whom he justly confidered as the author of all
his misfortunes, chose rather to accompany
Charles in his flight, and to expet the finalde-
cifion of his fate from the treaty which was now
approaching.

The council , THSE were not the only effe&s which Mau.
breaks u n rice's operations produced. It was no sooner
lreat con- known at Trent that he had taken arms, thana
Itenationo

general consternation seized the fathers of the
council. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the
safety of their refpeaive territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the
legate, who had hitherto disappointed all the en-
l.eavours of the Imperial ambassadors to procure
an audience in the council for the PrQteftantdi-
*·vines, laid hold with joy on such a plausible pre-
r.text for difmifling an assembly, which he had

- ,- found it so difficult to govern. In a congrega-
'..;:.ion held on the twenty-eighth of April, a decree

-. .was issued proroguing the council during two
,,^.ears, and appointing it to meet at the expiration

'f that time, if peice were then re-eltablilhed in
: .^urope". This prorogation, however, continued

'. ,,' F. paul, 353 no

no les than ten years; and the proceedings of the B o00
council, when re-assembled in the year one thou- _
sand five hundred and fixty-two, fall not within the '5ss-
period prescribed to this history.
THE convocation of this assembly had been The effe

-of its do-

passionately desired by all the States and Princes s,,.
in Christendom, who, from the wifdorn as well
as piety of prelates representing the whole body
of the faithful, expe&ed some charitable and effi-
cacious endeavours towards comporing the di£-
fenfions which unhappily had arisen in the church.
But the several Popes by whole authority it was
called, had other objecs in view. They exerted
alltheir power or policy to attain these; and by
the abilities as well as address of their legates,
by the ignorance of many of the prelates, and by
the servility of the indigent Italian bishops, ac-
quired such influence in the council, that they
dictated all its decrees, and framed them not with
an intention to restore unity and concord to the
church, but to establish their own dominion, or
to confirm those tenets, upon which they ima-
gined that dominion to be founded. Do&rines,
which had hitherto been admitted upon the credit
of tradition alone, and received with some latitude.
of interpretation, were defined with a fcrupu-
lous nicety, and confirmed by the fantion of
authority. Rites, which had formerly been ob- ;'
served only in deference to cultom fuippofed to be
ancient, were established by the decrees of the,.
church, and declared to be essential parts of its

worship,

B 0 0 K worship. The breach, instead of being clorfe

X.

w_ .as widened, and made irreparable. In place(
i55Z any attempt to reconcile the contending parties

a line was drawn with such fludied accuracy,
ascertained and marked out the diftinftion be
tween them. This fRill serves to keep them at
distance; and, without some signal interpofitio
of Divine Providence, must render the feparatio
perpetual.

Chara3cr OUR knowledge of the proceedings of thi
rians f his assembly, is derived from three different authors
council. Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of th

Council of Trent, while the memory of what ha
passed there was recent, and some who had bee
members of it were fill alive. He has expose
the intrigues and artifices by which it was con
du&ted, with a freedom and severity which hav
given a deep wound to the credit of the counci
He has described its deliberations, and explaine
its decrees, with such perspicuity and depth
thought, with such various erudition and fuc
force of realbn, as have jnftly entitled his wor
to be placed among the most admired hiRtoic;
compositions. About half a century thereafte
thle Jcfuit Pallavicini published his history of tlh
council, in oplofitcion thu at of Father Paul, an
by employinrg all riel force of an acute and refinin
genius to inv;itlidate the credir, or to confute thi
realullings of Ihis anla.tgoniit, he labours to prove
by atf'iil apologies for tlic proceedings of ti
gounci], and lubtile intcrprctations of its de

creeS

crees, that it deliberated with impartiality, and B o o K
decided with judgment as well as candour. Vargas, .
a Spanish doctor of laws, who was appointed to Isj2
attend the Imperial ambassadors at Trent, lent
the bishop of Arras a regular account of the
tranfaFtions there, explaining all the arts which
the Legate employed to influence or overawe
the council. His letters have been published, in
which he inveighs against the papal court with
that asperity of censure, which was natural to a
man whose situation enabled him to observe its in-
trigues thoroughly, and who was obliged to exert
allhis attention and talents in order to disappoint
them. But whichsoever of these authors an in-
telligent person takes for his guide, in forming a
judgment concerning the spirit of the council, he
must discover so much ambition as well as artifice
among some of the members, so much ignorance
and corruption among others; he must observe
such a large infusion of human policy and passions,
mingled with such a scanty portion of that fim-
plicity of heart, fanaity of manners, and love of
truth, which alone qualify men to determine what
doftrines are worthy of God, and what worship is
acceptable to him; that he will find it no easy
matter to believe, that any extraordinary influ-
ence of the Holy Ghost hovered over this afrem-
bly, and didated its decrees.

WmIII Maurice was employed in negociating 'he lrcrch
with the King of the Rlomans at Lintz, or in to frpiif
making war on the Emperor in the TIyrol, the sltr bu"hi

IFrench

B o o K French King had advanced into Alsace as far a

_X. Strafburgh; and having demanded leave of th(
s55s. Senate to march through the city, he hoped that,

by repeating the fame fraud which he had prac.
tifed at Metz, he might render himself master
of the place, and by that means secure a passage
over the Rhine into the heart of Germany. But
the Strafburghers, instructed and put on their
guard by the credulity and misfortune of their
neighbours, ihut their gates; and having assem.
bled a garrison of five thousand soldiers, repaired
their fortifications, rafed the houses in their
suburbs, and determined to defend themfelvesto
the utmof, At the fame time they sent a depu.
tation of their most refpecable citizens to the
King, in order to divert him from makingany
hostile attempt upon them. The Eletors of
Treves and Cologn, the Duke of Cleves, and
other Princes in the neighbourhood, interposed in
their behalf; beseeching Henry that he would
not forget so soon the title which he had geneA
roufly assumed; and instead of being the De.
liverer of Germany, become its Oppressor. The
Swiss Cantons seconded them with zeal, soliciting
Henry to spare a city which had long been
connected with their community in friendfhiip and
alliance.

ut without POWERFUL as this united intercession was, it
fucce"s would not have prevailed on Henry to forego a

prize of so much value, if he had been in a con-
dition to have seized it. But, in that age, the

methlod

method of subsisting numerous armies at a dif- B O°O K
tance from the frontiers of their own country, i-.--
was imperfetly understood, and -neither the re- l'
venues of Princes, nor their experience in the'
art of war, were equal to the great and compli-
ated efforts which such an undertaking required.
The French, though not far removed from their
own frontier, began already to susser from scar-
city of provisions, and had no sufficient maga-
zines collected to support them during a siege,
which must necefarily have been of great lengtho.
At the fame time, the Queen of Hungary, go-
vernefs of the Low Countries, had aflembled a
considerable body of troops, which, under the
command of Martin de Roffem, laid waste Cham-
pagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces of
France. These concurring circumstances obliged
the King, though with relutance, to abandon
the enterprize. But being willing to acquire
some merit with his allies, by this retreat which
he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss
thathe had taken the resolution merely in com-
pliance with their requeftP; and then, after giv-
ingorders that all the horses in his army should
be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his
having pushed his conquests so far, he marched
back towards Champagne.

WHILE the French King and the main army The or-r-
Of the confederates were thus employed, Albert bert ofA

Branden.

^"*.-^.ss^ burg.
Thuan351, 35 32 Brg.
'Slid. 557. lraiwtome, tom. vii. 39.

of

B OO K of Brandenburg was entrusted with the corn
a'_ _ mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,
r'551 consisting chiefly of mercenaries who had retort.

ed to his standard, rather from the hope of plun.
der, than the expeaation of regular pay. That
Prince, feeing himself at the head of such a
number of desperate adventurers, ready to follows
wherever he should lead them, soon began to dir.
dain a fiate of subordination, and to form such
extravagant schemes of aggrandiziog himself, as
seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unlei
when civil war or violent factions route them to
bold exertions, by alluring them with immediate
hopes of success. Full of these aspiring thoughts,
Albert made war in a manner very different from
the other confederates. He endeavoured to spread
the terror of his arms by the rapidity of his mo-
tions, as well as the extent and rigour of hisde-
vaftations3 he exacted contributions wherever he
came, in order to amass such a Tum of money, as
would put it in his power to keep his army to.
gether; he laboured to get possession of Nurem
berg, Ulm, or some other of the free cities ir
Upper Germany, in which, as a capital, he mighi
fix the feat of his power. But, finding theft
cities on their guard, and in a condition to refll
his attacks, he turned all his rage against tlh
popish ecclesiastics, whose territories he plun.
dered with such wanton and merciless barbarity
as gave them a very unfavourable imprelfion 0
the fpiric of that reformation in religion, Wit
zeal for which he pretended to be animated. Tle

biflWl!

bilhops of Bamburgh and Wurzburgh, by their B OOK z
situation, lay particularly exposed to his ravages; .
he obliged the former to transfer to him, in pro- J55s.
perry, almost one half of his extensive diocese; and
compelled the latter to advance a great fum of mo-
ney in order to save his'territories from ruin and
desolation. During all those wild sallies, Albert
paid no regard either to Maurice's orders, whose
commands as Generalissimo of the league he had
engaged to obey, or to the remonstrances of the
other confederates; and manifestly discovered,
that he attended only to his own private emolu-
ment, without any solicitude about the common
cause, or the general objeEts which had induced
them to take armsq.
MAURICE having ordered his army to march The nego-

ciations of

back into Bavaria, and having published a pro- paceatc
clamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and in- Pat.au.
ftrudors of youth, to resume the exercise of their
funftions in all the cities, schools, and univer-
fities from which they had been eje&ed, met
Ferdinand at Paffau on the twenty-fixth day of
May. As matters of the greatest consequence
to the future peace and independence of the Em-
pire were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes
of all Germany were fixed upon it. Besides
Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors, the
Duke of Bavaria, the bifiops of Saltzburgh and
Aichlfadt, the miniflers of all the E'leetors, to-

1 Slcid. 56t. Thuan. 357.
VL0. IV. G gcther

B O a c gether with deputies from most of the confider.

-' . able Princes and free cities, resorted to Paffau.
55ss. Maurice, in the name of his associates, and the

King of the Romans as the Emperor's reprefenta.
tive, opened the negociation. The Princes who
were present, together with the deputies of such as
were absent, acted as intercessors or mediators be.
tween them.

The terms MA.URICE, in a long discourse, explained the
which Maurice motives of his own conduct. After having enu-
proposed. merated all the unconstitutional and oppressive

aAs of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to the manifesto which he had published
when he took arms against him, limited his de.
mands to three articles: That the Landgrave
of Hesse should be immediately set at liberty;
That the grievances in the civil government of
the Empire should be redressed; and that the
Protestants should be allowed the public exercise
of their religion without molestation. Ferdinand
and the Imperial ambassadors diScovering their un-
willingness to gratify him with regard to all there
points, the mediators wrote a joint letter to the
Emperor, beseeching him to deliver Germany
from the calamities of a civil war, by giving such
fatisfation to Maurice and his party as might in-
duce them to lay down their arms; and at the fame
time they prevailed upon Maurice to grant a pro-
longation of the truce for a flort time, during which
they undertook to procure the Emperor's linal an-
ivwr to his demands.

THIS

THIS request was presented to the Emperor in B 0 IK
the name of all the Princes of the Empire, ,
Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of such p.sS5l
as had lent an helping hand to forward his am- fuppotedby
bitious schemes; as well as of those who had of the Em
viewed the progress of his power with jealodfy ire.
and dread. The uncommon and cordial unani-
mity with Which they concurred at this jun&ture
in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in recom-
mending peace, flowed from different causes.
Such as were most attached to the Roman Catho-
lic church could not help observing, that the
Protestant confederates were at the head of a
numerous army, while the Emperor was but just
beginning to provide for his own defence. They
foresaw that great efforts would be required of
them, and would be neceflary on their part, in
order to cope with enemies, who had been allowed
to get the start so far, and to attain such for-
midable power. Experience had taught them,
that the fruit of all there efforts would be reaped
by the Emperor alone, and the more complete
any vicaory proved which they should gain, the
rafter would they bind their own fetters, and
render them the more intolerable. These re-
flecions made them cautious how they contri-
buted a second time, by their indiscreet zeal, to
lut the Emperor in poffeflion of power which
would be fatal to the liberties of their country.
N0twithfl-anding the intolerant spirit of bigotry
in that age, they chose rather that the Protefltants
should acquire that security for their religion

G 2 which

B o O K which they demanded, than by assisting Charles

_ . ato oppress them, to give such additional force to
155s. the Imperial prerogative, as would overturn the

conititution of the Empire. To all these confider.
ations, the dread of feeing Germany laid waste by
a civil war added new force. Many states of the
Empire already felt the deftruaive rage of Albert's
arms, others dreaded it, and all wished for an ac-
commodation between the Emperor and Maurice,
which they hoped would save them from that cruel
scourge.

The mc- SUCH were the reasons that induced so many
tives which
inluenced, Princes, notwithstanding the variety of their po.
or t thi litical interests, and the opposition in their reli-
junaurc. gious sentiments, to unite in recommending to

the Emperor an accommodation with Maurice,
not only as a salutary, but as a necessary measure.
The motives which prompted Charles todefire it,
were not fewer or of less weight. He was per-
fetly sensible of the superiority which the confe.
derates had acquired through his own negligence;
and he now felt the insufficiency of his own re-
sources to oppose them. His Spanifi fubjeds,
disgusted at his long abfcnce, and weary of end-
less wars, which were of little benefit to their
country, refufted to furnifli him any considerable
fipply either of men or money; and although by
his address or importunity he might have hopIe
to draw firom them at lafl more eflfcieual aid;
that, he knew, was too diflant to be of any ser-
vice in the present exigency of his affairs. His

trca[fulY
A,/

treasury was drained; his veteran forces were dif- B o OK
perfed or disbanded, and he could not depend _X
much either on the fidelity or courage of the new s55z.
levied soldiers whom he was collecting. There
was no hope of repeating with success the fame
artifices which had weakened and ruined the
Smalkaldic league. As the end at which he
aimed was not known, he could no longer em-
ploy the specious pretexts which had formerly
concealed his ambitious designs. Every Prince
in Germany was alarmed and on his guard; and
it was vain to think of blinding them a second
time to such a degree, as to make one part of
them .inftrunents to enslave the other. The spirit
of a confederacy, whereof Maurice was the head,
experience had taught him to be very different
from that of the league of Smalkalde; and from
what he had already felt, he had no reason to flat-
ter himself that its counsels would be as irrefo-
lute, or its efforts as timid and feeble. If he
ihould resolve on continuing the war, he might
be assured, that the most considerable states in
Germany would take part in it against him; and
a dubious neutrality was the utmost he could ex-
pec fiom the reft. While the confederates found
fill employment for his arms in one quarter, the
King of -France would seize the favourable op-
portunity, and pu lh on his operations in another,
with almnolL certain success. 'That monarch liad al-
ready made conquests in the wlhmpire, wlich Charles
was no le's eager to recover, than irlpatient to
be revenged on him for aiding his maalcontent

G 3 luljcjs,

B 0 0 K fuibje&s. Though Henry had now retired from
,_ -, the banks of the Rhine, he had only varied the

,55s. scene of hostilities, having invaded the Low-

Countries with all his forces. The Turks, roused
by the solicitations of the French King, as well
as stimulated by resentment agailft Ferdinand for
having violated the truce in Hungary, had pre-
pared a powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of
Naples and Sicily, which he had left almost de.
fenceless, by calling thence the greatest part of the
regular troops to join the army which he was now
aflembling.

Ferdinana FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, in
paou toan order to lay before the Emperor the result of the
accommo- conferences at Paffau, had likewise reasons peculiar

to himself for desiring an accommodation. These
prompted him to second, with the greatest earnest-
ness, the arguments which the Princes assembled
there had employed in recommending it. He had
observed, not without secret fatisfadion, the fatal
blow that had been given to the despotic power
which his brother had usurped in the Empire. He
was extremely solicitous to prevent Charles from
recovering his former superiority, as he foresaw
that ambitious Prince would immediately resume,
with increased eagerness, and with a better chance
of success, his favourite scheme of tranfinitting
that power to his son, by excluding his brother from
the right of succession ro the Imperial throne. On
this account he was willing to contribute towards
circumtiribing the Imperial authority, in order

to

to render his own pofeffion of it certain. Be- B o o K
fides, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Tran- x
fylvania, and frill more at the fraudulent arts by 5ss.
which it had been seized, had ordered into the
field an army of an hundred thousand men, which
having defeated a great body of Ferdinand's troops,
and taken several places of importance, threatened
not only to complete the conquest of the province,
but to drive them out of that part of Hungary
which was still fubjeft to his jurifdition. He
was unable to resist such a mighty enemy; the
Emperor, while engaged in a domestic war, could
afford him no aid; and he could not even hope to
draw from Germany the contingent, either of
troops or money, usually furnished to repel the in-
vafions of the Infidels. Maurice, having observed
Ferdinand's perplexity with regard to this last
point, had offered, if peace were re-established on
a secure foundation, that he would march in per-
son with his troops into Hungary against the
Turks. Such was the effet of this well-timed
proposal, that Ferdinand, destitute of every other
profpedt of relief, became the most zealous advo-
cate whom the confederates could have employed
to urge their claims, and there was hardly any
thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have chosen to grant, rather than have
retarded a pacification, to which he trusted as the
only means of saving his Hungarian crown.

WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering circlm-
an accommodation eligible, it might have been which r-

G 4 expectd aridtl .

B °O K expeced that it would have taken place imme-
i _--L-' diately. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's

1552- temper, together with his unwillingness at once

to relinquish objects which he had long pursued
with such earnestness and assiduity, counterba-
lanced, for some time, the force of all the mo-
tives which disposed him to peace, and not only
put that event at a distance, but seemed to render
it uncertain. When Maurice's demands, to-
gether with the letter of the mediators at Paffau,
were presented to him, he peremptorily refused to
redress the grievances which were pointed out, nor
would he agree to any stipulation for the immediate
security of the Protestant religion, but proposed
referring both there to the determination of a future
diet. On his part, he required that instant repa-
ration should be made to all who, during the pre-
sent war, had suffered either by the licentiousness
of the confederate troops, or the exactions of their
leaders.

Maurice's MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the
vigorous
eperations Emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he
facilitate it. had nothing in view by these overtures but to

amuse and deceive; and therefore, without lif-
tening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau
abruptly, and joining his troops, which were en-
camped at Mergentheim, a city in Franconia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonic order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hoflilities.
As three thoufandc men in the Emperor's pay had
thrown thenmflves into Irankfort on the Maine,

and

and might from thence infest the neighbouring B o o K
country of Hesse, he marched towards that city, x.

X

and laid siege to it in form. The briskness of issz.
this enterprize, and the vigour with which Mau- Jy 7-
rice carried on his approaches against the town,
gave such an alarm to the Emperor, as disposed
him to lend a more favourable ear to Ferdinand's
arguments in behalf of an accommodation. Firm
and haughty as his nature was, he found it ne-
celfary to bend, and signified his willingness to
make concessions on his part, if Maurice, in re-
turn, would abate somewhat of the rigour of his
demands. Ferdinand, as Toon as he perceived
that his brother began to yield, did not desist
from his importunities, until he prevailed on him
to declare what was the utmost that he would grant
for the security of the confederates. Having gained
this difficult point, he inflantly dispatched a messen-
ger to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the
Emperor's final resolution, conjured him not to
frustrate his endeavours for the re-establishment of
peace; or, by an unseasonable obstinacy on his fide,
todifappoint the wishes of all Germany for that fa-
lutary event.

MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous situ- Matulle
ation of his affairs, was strongly inclined to liften dnia^'c"6M
to this advice. The Emperor, though over- mod-tion.
reached and surprised, had now begun to assemble
troops, and however flow his motions might be,
while the first effets of his consternation re-
mained, he was sensible that Charles mull at last

aft

B °x0 K a& with vigour proportional to the extent of his

X.
s , _- power and territories, and lead into Germany an

'55s. army formidable by its numbers, and fill more

by the terror of his name, as well as the remem-
brance of his past vicories. He could scarcely
hope that a confederacy composed of so many
members would continue to operate with union
and perseverance sufficient to resist the con-
fiftent and well-directed efforts of an army, at
the absolute disposal of a leader accultomed to
command and to conquer. He felt already, al-
though he had not hitherto experienced the Thock
of any adverfe,event, that he himfelfwas the head
of a disjointed body. He saw, from the example
of Albert of Brandenburg, how difficult it would
be, with all his address and credit, to prevent any
particular member from detaching himself from
the whole, and how impossible to recal him to
his proper rank and subordination. This filled
him with apprehensions for the common cause.
Another consideration gave him no less disquiet
with regard to his own particular interefis. By
setting at liberty the degraded El¢ctor, and by re-
pealing the as by which that Prince was deprived
of his hereditary honours and dominions, the Em-
peror had it in his power to wound him in the most
tender part. The efforts of a Prince beloved by
his ancient fubjeEts, and revered by all the Protefl-
ant party, in order to recover what had been un-
justly taken from him, could hardly have failed of
exciting commotions in Saxony, which would en-
danger all that he had acquired at the expence of

so

so much dilfimulation and artifice. It was no less in B o O K
the Emperor's power to render vain all the folicita- .
tions of the confederates in behalf of the Land- 5ss51
grave. He had only to add one at of violence
more to the injustice and rigour with which he had
already treated him; and he had accordingly
threatened the sons of that unfortunate Prince, that
if they persisted in their present enterprize, inltead
of feeing their father reitored to liberty, they
should hear of his having suffered the punishment
which his rebellion had merited .
HAVING deliberated upon all these points with The peace

of Religionl

his associates, Maurice thought it more prudent concluded
to accept of the conditions offered, though less atPaltr -
advantageous than those which he had proposed,
than again to commit all to the doubtful iiTue of
war . He repaired forthwith to Paffau, and
signed the treaty of peace; of which the chief
articles were, That before the twelfth day of
August, the confederates shall lay down their
arms, and disband their forces; That on or be- Aug6unf
fore that day the Landgrave shall be set at liberty,
and conveyed in safety to his cafile of Rheinfels;
That a diet shall be held within fix months, in
order to deliberate concerning the most proper
and effectual method of preventing for the future
all disputes and dissensions about religion; That,
in the mean time, neither the Elmperor, nor any
other Prince, shall, upon any pretext whatever,

Sleid. 571.
' Slid. ilt. 563, &c. Thuan. lib. x. 359, &c.

offer

o O K offer any injury or violence to such as adhered tt
x. the confession of Augsburg, but allow them to

155 enjoy the free and undisturbed exercise of their

religion; That, in return, the Protestants shall
not molelt the Catholics either in the exercise of
their ecclesiastical jurifdiaion, or in performing
their religious ceremonies That the Imperial
chamber shall administer justice impartially ta
persons of both parties, and Protestants be admit.
ted indiscriminately with the Catholics to fit as
judges in that court; That if the next diet
should not be able to terminate the disputes with
regard to religion, the stipulations in the present
treaty in behalf of the Protestants shall continue
for ever in full force and vigour; That noneof
the confederates flall be liable to any adtion on
account of what had happened during the course
of the war; That the consideration of those en.
croachments which had been made, as Maurice
pretended, upon the constitution and liberties of
the Empire, shall be remitted to the approaching
diet; That Albert of Brandenburg shall be com-
prehended in the treaty, provided he fllall accede
to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth of
August .

R.fRi,,n Sucii was'the memorable tr-aty of Pafau, that
'.c.'..". overturned the vast fabrick, in erecting which

.

...^C 'f Charles had employed lo many years, andl ad
M"cllc, CexCrted thC uitmoll eiborts of his power and policyi

t Receuil dcs Traitcz, ii. 261.

that

that annulled all his regulations with regard to B oo K
religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the .
Imperial authority. absolute and hereditary in his ,55.
family; and efftablifhed the Proteflant church,
which had hitherto subsisted precariously in Ger-
many, through connivance, or by expedients,
upon a firm and secure basis. Maurice reaped all
the glory of having concerted and completed this
unexpected revolution. It is a singular cir-
cumftance, that the Reformation' should be in-
debted for its security and full eftablilhment
in Germany, to the fame hand which had
brought it to the brink of deftrudtion, and that
both events should have been accomplished by
the fame arts of dissimulation. The ends, how-
ever, which Maurice had in view, at those dif-
ferent junctures, seem to have been more. attended
to than the means by which he attained them;
and he was now as universally extolled for his
zeal and public spirit as he had lately been
condemned for his indifference and interested
policy. It is no leTs worthy of observation, that
the French King, a monarch zealous for the
Catholic faith, should employ his power in order
to protect and maintain the Reformation in the
Empire, at the very time when he was perse-
cuting his own Protestant fubjeEts with all the
fierceness of bigotry, and that the league for this
pulrpofe, which proved so fatal to the Rominll
church, should be negociated and fignedl by a
Rom-an Catholic bishop. So wonderfully doth

the

B o o K the wifdorn of God superintend and regulate the

X.
^' _s caprice of human passions, and render them sub.
1s55s servient towards the accomplishment of his owd

purposes.

Little at- LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of
tent.bn paid
to the the French King during the negociations at Pas:
Kingt nhis. f Mau Marice and his afrociates, having gained
treaty. what they had in view, discovered no great so.

licitude about an ally, whom, perhaps, they
reckoned to be overpaid for the assistance which
he had given them, by his acquisitions in Lor-
rain. A short clause which they procured to be
inserted in the treaty, importing that the King ol
France might communicate to the confederates
his particular pretensions or causes of hostility/
which they would lay before the Emperor, was
the only sign that they gave of their remembering
how much they had been indebted to him for
their success. Henry experienced the fame treat-
ment, which every Prince who lends his aid to
the authors of a civil war may expect. As soon
as the rage of faction began to subside, and an)
prospeCt of accommodation to open, his services
were forgotten, and his associates made a merit
with their sovereign, of the ingratitude with
which they abandoned their protetor. But how
much soever Henry might be enraged- at the per-
fidy of his allies, or at the impatience with which
they hastened to make their peace with the Em-
peror, at his expence, he was perfectly sensible that

it

it was more his interest to keep well with the Ger- B o o K
manic body, than to resent the indignities offered X'
him by any particular members of it. For that rea- s55s.
ion he dismissed the hostages which he had receiv-
ed from Maurice and his associates, and affected
to talk in the fame strain as formerly, concerning
his zeal for maintaining the ancient constitution
and liberties of the Empire.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XI.

THE
H I STORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XI.
A S oon as the treaty of Paffau was signed, B o o K

Maurice, in consequence of his engage- x

ments with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary at Iss-.
the head of twenty thousand men. But the great Maurice
superiority of the Turkish armies, the frequent ""r'hein
mutinies both of the Spanish and German fol- a3inftthe

'I urks.

diers, occasioned by their want of pay, together
with the dissentions between Maurice and Caftal-
do, who was piqued at being obliged to resign the
chief command to him, prevented his performing
any thing in that country suitable to his former
fame, or of great benefit to the King of the
Romans :'.

Iltuanhaffii Hit. Hungar. 288. Thuan. lib. x. 371.
VOL. IV'. H W I-r.EN

B o0 K WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the

XI.
-v- --' Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
The and. under his command, and marched back into his
graveof own -country, that he might be ready to receive
Hefie re-
covers his his father upon his return, and give up to him
libcr7. the reins of government which he had held dur-

ing his absence. But fortune was not yet weary
of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of
mercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg their colo-
nel, a soldier of fortune, ready to engage in any
enterprise, secretly withdrew from the young
Prince as he was marching homewards, and join-
ed Albert of Brandenburgh, who still continued
in arms against the Emperor, refuting to be in-
cluded-in the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily for
the Landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was dismissed from the
citadel of Mechlin where he had been confined,
but before he had got beyond the frontiers of that
country. The Queen of Hungary, who governed
there in her brother's name, incenfid at such
an open violation of the treaty to which he owed
his liberty, issued orders to arrest him, and conm
mitted him again to the custody of the fame
Spanish captain who had guarded him for five years
with the most severe vigilance. Philip beheld
all the horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and
his spirits subsiding in the fame proportion as they
had risen during the short interval in which hi
had enjoyed liberty; he funk into despair, and
believed himself to be doomed to perpetual cap

tivity

tivity. But the matter being so explained to the B O o K
Emperor, as fully satisfied him that the revolt of -
Reifenberg's mercenaries could be imputed neither Jss55
to the Landgrave nor to his son, he gave orders
for his release; and Philip at last obtained the
liberty for which he had so long languished b. But
though he recovered his freedom, and was re-
instated in his dominions, his sufferings seem to
have broken the vigour, and to have extinguiflh-
ed the aaivity of his mind: From being the
boldest as well as xnoft enterprising Prince in the
Empire, he became the moed timid and cautious,
and passed the remainder of his days in a pacific
indolence.

THE degraded Ele&or of Saxony, likewise, Likewise

the Ele&or

procured his liberty in consequence of the treaty ss Saxony.
of Paffau. The Emperor having been obliged
to relinquish all his schemes for extirpating the
Protestant religion, had no longer any motive for
detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely
felicitous, at that juncture, to recover the confi-
dence and good-will of the Germans, whose as-
fiftance was essential to the success of the enter-
prise which he meditated against the King of
France, he, among other expedients for that pur-
pose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a
Prince whose merit entitled him no less to esteem,
than his sufferings rendered him the object of
C0mpaflion. John Frederick took poffeflion ac-

b Slcid. 573. Belcarii Comment. 834.

H 2 cordingly

B °X0 K cordingly of that part of his territories which had

XI.
v_--.' been reserved for him, when Maurice was invested
lS5" With the Elecoral dignity. As in this situation, he

continued to display the fame virtuous magnanimity
for which he had been conspicuous in a more prof-
perous and splendid state, and which he had re-
tained amidst all his sufferings, he maintained dur-
ing the remainder of his life that high reputation to
which he had so just a title.

rTre olPs? THE loss of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had
to make made a deep impression on the Emperor. Ac-
war upon
France. culorned to terminate all his operations against

France with advantage to himself, he thought
that it nearly concerned his honour not to allow
Henry the superiority in this war, or to susser his
own administration to be slained with the infamy
of having permitted territories of such confe-
quence to be dismembered from the Empire.
This was no less a point of interest than of ho-
nour. As the frontier of Champagne was more
naked, and lay more exposed than that of any
province in France, Charles had frequently, during
his wars with that kingdom, made inroads upon
that quarter with great success and effeEt; butif
Henry were allowed to retain his late conqueRs,
France would gain such a formidable barrier on that
fide, as to be altogether secure, where formerly ihe
had been weakest. On the other hand, the Em-
pire had now loft as much, in point of security,
as France had acquired ; and being flripped of
the defence which those cities afforded it, lay opel

to be invaded on a quarter, where all the towns E °0 K
having been hitherto confidered as interior, and re- i
mote from any enemy, were but slightly fortified. '55
These considerations determined Charles to attempt
recovering the three towns of which Henry had
made himself master; and the' preparations which
he had made against Maurice and his associates,
enabled him to carry his resolution into immediate
execution.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at Hi prepa-

ratione for

Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach, thispurpofe.
and advanced to Augsburg, at the head of a con-
fiderable body of Germans which he had levied,
together with all the troops which he had drawn
out of Italy and Spain. To these he added several
battalions, which having been in the pay of the
confederates, entered into his service when dif-
miffed by them; and he prevailed likewise on some
Princes of the Empire to join him with their vas-
fals. In order to conceal the destination of this
formidable army, and to guard against alarming the
French King, io as to put him on preparing for the
defence of his late conquests, he gave out that he
was to march forthwith into Hungary, in order to
second Maurice in his operations against the In-
fidels. When he began to advance towards the
Rhine, and could no longer employ that pretext,
he tried a new artifice, and spread a report, that
he took this route in order to chaftifi Albert of
Brandenburg, whose cruel exactions in that part

H 3 of

B X0 K of the Empire called loudly for his interposition to

XI.
V -J check them.

1551.

Theprecau- BUT the French having grown acquainted, at
tions of the
French for last, with arts by which they had been so often
the defence
of Metz. deceived, viewed all Charles's motions with dif-

trust. Henry immediately discerned the true ob-
je&t of his vast preparations, and resolved to
defend the important conquests which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which they
were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that
the whole weight of the war would be turned
against Metz, by whose fate that of Toul and
Verdun would be determined, he nominated

The Duke Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, to take the
of Gifed command in that city during the siege, the issue
governor of of which would equally affect the honour and in-
tbc town.

terest of his country. His choice could not have
fallen upon any person more worthy of that trust.
The Duke of Guise poffeifed, in a high degree,
all the talents of courage, sagacity, and presence
of mind, which render men eminent in military
command. He was largely endowed with that
magnanimity of foul which delights in bold enter-
prises, and aspires to fame by splendid and extra-
ordinary actions. He repaired with joy to the
dangerous ifation assigned him, as to a theatre
on which he might display his great qualities un-
der the immediate eye of his countrymen, all
ready to applaud him. The martial genius 0o
the French nobility in that age, which considered
it as the greatest reproach to remain inactive,

when

when there was any opportunity of signalising B o I K
their courage, prompted great numbers to follow -_
a leader who was the darling as well as the pattern 1552s
of every one that courted military fame. Several
Princes of the blood, many noblemen of the
highest rank, and all the young officers who could
obtain the King's permission, entered Metz as
volunteers. By their pretence they added spirit
to the garrison, and enabled the Duke of Guise
to employ, on every emergency, persons eager to
distinguish themselves, and fit to conduct any
service.

BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise Prepares for
undertook the defence of Metz, he found every dcfenc.
thing, upon his arrival there, in such a situation,
as might have induced any person of less intrepid
courage to despair of defending it with success.
The city was of great extent, with large suburbs;
the walls were in many places feeble and without
ramparts; the ditch narrow; and the old towers,
which projected instead of bastions, were at too
great distance from each other to defend the space
between them. For all these defects he endea-
voured to provide the best remedy which the
time would permit. He ordered the suburbs,
without sparing the monasteries or churches, not
even that of S.t. Arnulph, in which several Kings
of France had been buried, to be levelled with
the ground; but in order to guard against the
imputation of impiety, to which such a violation

H 4 of

B o° K of so many sacred edifices, as well as of the afles

XI.

q--o_ *
v of the dead, might expose him, he executed this

1552. with much religious ceremony. Having ordered

all the holy vestments and utensils, togetherwith
the bones of the Kings, and other persons de-
posited in these churches, to be removed, they
were carried in solemn proceflion to a church
within the walls, he hitfelf walking before them
bare-headed, with a torch in his hand. He then
pulled down such houses as flood near the walls,
cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired the
ruinous fortifications, and erected new ones. As
it was necessary that all there works should be
finished with the utmost expedition, he laboured
at them with his own hands: the officers and vo-
lunteers imitated his example, and the soldiers
submitted with cheerfulness to the most revere
and fatiguing service, when they saw that their
superiors did not decline to bear a part in it.
At the fame time he compelled all useless per-
sons to leave the place; he filled the magazines
with provisions and military stores; he burnt
the mills, and destroyed the corn and forage for
several miles round the town. Such were his
popular talents, as well as his arts of acquiring
an ascendant over the minds of men, that the citi-
zens seconded him with no less ardour than the
soldiers; and every other passion being swallowed
up in the zeal to repulse the enemy, with which
he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their
efltates, together with the havoc which he made

among

among their public and private buildings, without B °0 K
any emotion of resentment. c.

'551.
MEANTIME the Emperor, having collected all Charlesad-

vances to-

his forces, continued his march towards Metz. wardsMetz.
As he passed through the cities on the Rhine, he
saw the dismal effects of that licentious and waste-
fisi war which Albert had carried on in there
parts. Upon his approach, that Prince, though
at the head of twenty thousand men, withdrew
into Lorrain, as if he had intended to join the
French King, whose arms he had quartered with
his own in all his itandards and ensigns. Albert
was not in a condition to cope with the Imperial
troops , which amounted at least to sixty thou-
sand men, forming one of the most numerous and
belt appointed armies which had been brought into
the field during that age, in any of the wars among
Christian Princes.

THE chief command, under the Emperor, was InveRsthe
committed to the Duke of Alva, assisted by the towns'
Marquis de Marignano, together with the most
experienced of the Italian and Spanish generals.
As it was now towards the end of Otober, these
intelligent officers represented the great danger of
beginning, at such an advanced season, a siege
which could not fail to prove very tedious. But
Charles adhered to his own opinion with his usual
obstinacy, and being confident that he had made
c Thuan, xi. 387. d Natal. Comitis, Hidl. 127.

such

B O O K such preparations, and taken such precautions, as

.-. would ensure success, he ordered the city to be
'55s' invested. As soon as the Duke of Alva appeared,
oa. 19. a large body of the French sallied out and at-

tacked his van-guard with great vigour, put it
in confusion, and killed or took prisoners a con-
fiderable number of men. By this early specimen
which they gave of the conduct of their officers,
as well as the valour of their troops, they ihewed
the Imperialists what an enemy they had to en-
counter, and how dear every advantage must cos
them. The place, however, was completely in-
vested, the trenches were opened, and the other
works begun.

Both parties THE attention both of the besiegers and be-
gain Albert fieged was turned for some time towards Albert
of Branden. of Brandenburg, and they strove with emulation

ur. which should gain that Prince, who fRill hovered

in the neighbourhood, fluctuating in all the un-
certainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who,
being swayed by no principle, was allured dif-
ferent ways by contrary views of interest. The
French tempted him with offers extremely bene-
ficial; the Imperialists scrupled at no promise
which they thought might allure him. After
much hesitation he was gained by the Emperor,
from whom he expected to receive advantages
which were both more immediate and more per-
manent. As the French King, who began to
fufpeft his intentions, had appointed a body of
troops under the Duke of Aumale, brother to the

Duke

Duke of Guise, to watch his motions, Albert fell B 0O K
upon them unexpe&edly with such vigour that he ---
routed them entirely, killed many of the officers, N,52.
wounded Aumale himself, and took him prisoner.
Immediately after this vi&ory, he marched in
triumph to Metz, and joined his army to that of
the Emperor. Charles, in reward for this service,
and the great accession of strength which he
brought him, granted Albert a formal pardon of
all past offences, and confirmed him in the pof-
feflion of the territories which he had violently
usurped during the war e.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affeced The gallant
with his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in the Dukeof
any degree, the vigour with which he defended huifeaand

-he town. his garrison.

the town. He harassed the besiegers by frequent
sallies, in which his officers were so eager to dif-
tinguifh themselves, that his authority being hardly
ufficient to restrain the impetuosity of their
courage, he was obliged at different times to shut
the gates, and to conceal the keys, in order to
prevent the Princes of the blood, and noblemen
of the first rank, from exposing themselves to
danger in every sally. He repaired in the night
what the enemy's artillery had beat down during
the day, or erected behind the ruined works new
frtifications of almost equal strength. The Im-
perialifts, on their part, pufned on the attack
with great spirit, and carried forward, at once,

' Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

approaches

B o0 K approaches against different parts of the town
'--v--. But the art of attacking fortified places was no

155'. then arrived at that degree of perfection to whici

it was carried towards the close of the sixteentd
century, during the long war in the Netherlands
The besiegers, after the unwearied labour of man,
weeks, found that they had made but little pro
grefs; and although their batteries had mad(
breaches in different places, they saw, to thei
astonishment, works suddenly appear, in demo
lifhing which their fatigues and dangers would be
renewed. The Emperor, enraged at the obstinate
resistance which his army met with, left Thion
ville, where he had been confined by a violent fit
of the gout, and though fRill so infirm that he wa!
Nov. a6. obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired to the

camp; that, by his presence, he might animate
the soldiers, and urge on the attack with greater
spirit. Upon his arrival, new batteries wer
erected, and new efforts were made with redoublec
ardour.

The difref BUT, by this time, winter had set in witd
peral army. great rigour; the camp was alternately deluget

with rain or covered with snow; at the famt
time provisions were become extremely scarce, a!
a body of French cavalry which hovered in tht
neighbourhood, often interrupted the convoys:
or rendered their arrival difficult and uncertain.
Diseases began to spread among the soldiers, efpe-
cially among the Italians and Spaniards, lllnc-
cufftomed to such inclement weather; great lnum-

ber!

bels were disabled from serving, and many died. B 0 x K
Ar length, such breaches were made as seemed -Y
practicable, and Charles resolved to hazard a ge- 'ss.2
neral assault, in spite of all the remonstrances of
his generals against the imprudence of attack-
ing a numerous garrison, condueted and animated
by the most gallant of the French nobility, with
an army weakened by diseases, and disheartened
with ill success. The Duke of Guise, fufpeting
the Emperor's intentions from the extraordinary
movements which he observed in the enemy's
camp, ordered all his troops to their refpedive
posts. They appeared immediately on the walls,
and behind the breaches, with such a determined
countenance, so eager for the combat, and so well
prepared to give the assailants a warm reception,
that the Imperialists, instead of advancing to the
charge when the word of command was given,
stood motionless in a timid dejeted silence. The
Emperor, perceiving that he could not trust troops
whole spirits were so much broken, retired abruptly
to his quarters, complaining that he was now de-
terted by his soldiers, who deserved no longer the
name of mens.

DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops morti- Thctmpe-

rot changes

fled and affeEted Charles, he would not hear of thC method
abandoning the liege, though he saw the neclsity ofatack.
Ofchanging the method of attack. He fulpended

f Thuan. 397.

the

B 0 0 K the fury of his batteries, and proposed to pro.

I--v-- ceed by the more secure but tedious method o
1552. Tapping. But as it fill continued to rain or to

snow almost inceflantly, such as were employed in
this service endured incredible hardflips: and the
Duke of Guise, whole industry was not inferior to
his valour, discovering all their mines, counter.
worked them, and prevented their effeet. At last,
Charles finding it impossible to contend any longer
with the severity of the season, and with enemies
whom he could neither overpower by force, nor
subdue by art, while at the fame time a contagious
distemper raged among his troops, and cut offdaily
great numbers of the officers as well as soldiers,
yielded to the solicitations of his generals, whc
conjured him to save the remains of his army by X
timely retreat; "' Fortune," fays he, (' I now per.
ceive, resembles other females, and choofes to confer
her favours on young men, while she turns her back
on those who are advanced in years."

Dec. 26. UPON this, he gave orders immediately to raif(
Obliged to
aife he the siege, and submitted to the disgrace of aban.
fi'gC. doning the enterprise, after having continuec

fifty-fix days before the town, during which tiint
he had loft upwards of thirty thousand men, wh(
died of diseases, or were killed by the enemy
The Duke of Guise, as loon as he perceivec
the intention of the Imperialists, sent out fe.
veral bodies both of cavalry and infantry to in.
fell their rear, to pick up itragglers, and to feiz(

~~~~~~~b7 ever)

every opportunity of attacking them with advan- B °0 K
tage. Such was the confusion with which they -
made their retreat, that the French might have 'ss5
liaraffed them in the most cruel manner. But
when they rallied out, a fpe&acle presented itself Ruin she
to their view, which extinguished at once all armyand

humanity of

hostile rage, and melted them into tenderness thhemFrn.f
and compalffon. The Imperial camp was filled
with the sick and wounded, with the dead and the
dying. In all the different roads by which the
army retired, numbers were found, who, having
made an effort to escape, beyond. their strength,
were left, when they could go no farther, to perish
without assistance. This they received from their
enemies, and were indebted to them for all the
kind offices which their friends had not the power
to perform. The Duke of Guise immediately
ordered proper refreshments for such as were
dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons to at-
tend the sick and wounded; he removed such as
could bear it into the adjacent villages; and
those who would have suffered by being carried
so far, he admitted into the hospitals which he
had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers. As
soon as they recovered, he sent them home under
anefcort of soldiers, and with money to bear their
charges. By these acts of humanity, which were
uncommon in that age, when war was carried on
with greater rancour and ferocity than at present,
the Duke of Guise completed the fame which he
had acquired by his gallant and successful defence
of Metz, and engaged those whom he had van-

quiflhed

B °xo K quifhed to vie with his own countrymen in extolling

A _ his name g.
1552.

Bid fitua- To there calamities in Germany, were added
tion of the
Emperor's such unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered this the
ffirs in most disastrous year in the Emperor's life. Dur-

ing his residence at Villach, Charles had applied
to Cosmo di Medici for the loan of two hundred
thousand crowns. But his credit at that time was
so low, that in order to obtain this inconsiderable
fum, he was obliged to put him in possession of the
principality of Piombino, and by giving up that,
he loft the footing which he had hitherto maintained
in Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo to assume, for the
future, the tone and deportment of a Prince alto-
gether independent. Much about the time that
his indigence confirained him to part with this va-
luable territory, he loft Siena, which was of till
greater consequence, through the ill conduct of Don
Diego de Mendoza h

The revolt SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy,
f Sicna. had long enjoyed a republican government, under

the protection of the Empire; but being torn in
pieces by the dissentions between the nobility and
the people, which divided all the Italian common-
wealths, the faction of the people, which gained

g Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel,

Hist. de France, tom. iii. 392. Pcre Daniel's account ofthil
siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac, whi
was present. Natal. Comit. Hil. 129.

h 'huan. lib, xi. 376.

the

the ascendant, besought the Emperor to become B 0 O
the guardian of the administration which they x-
had effablifhed, ard admitted into their city a 15s'
small body of Spanish soldiers, whom he had sent
to countenance the execution of the laws, and to
preserve tranquillity among them. The com-
mand of there troops was given to Mendoza, at
that time ambassador for the Emperor at Rome,
who persuaded the credulous multitude, that it
was necessary for their security against any future
attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a
citadel in Siena; and as he flattered himself that
by means of this fortress he might render the Em-
peror master of the city, he puffed on the works
with all possible dispatch. But he threw off the
mask too soon. Before the fortifications were
completed, he began to indulge his natural
haughtiness and severity of temper, and to treat
the citizens with great insolence. At the fame
time the soldiers in garrison being paid as irre-
gularly as the Emperor's troops usually were,
lived almofi at discretion upon the inhabitants,
and were guilty of many ats of licence and op-
preflion.
THESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a sensen Tht Sienecr

¢{Il rt ilie

of their danger. As they saw the necefiity of n;ftIce of
exerting themselves, while the unfinished fortifi- Fr"cC'
cations of the citadel left them any hopes of fuc-
cess, they applied to the French ambiafiador at
Rome, who readily promnifed them his mafler's
protection and afiftancc. At the fame time, fbr-

VOL. IV. I g:tting

oB o° K getting their domestic animofities when such a

--. mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and existence
1552. of the republic, they sent agents to the exiled

nobles, and invited them to concur with them in
saving their country from the servitude with which
it was threatened. As there was not a moment
to lose, measures were concerted speedily, but
with great prudence; and were executed with
equal vigour. The citizens rose suddenly in
arms; the exiles flocked into the town from dif-
ferent parts with all their partisans, and what
troops they could draw together; and several
bodies of mercenaries ifi the pay of France ap-
peared to support them. The Spaniards, though
surprised, and much inferior in number, defended
themselves with great courage; but feeing no
profpe& of relief, and having no hopes of main-
taining their station long in a half-finifhed for-
trefs, they soon gave it up. The Sienefe, with
the utmost alacrity, levelled it with the ground,
that no monument might remain of that odious
ftrudure, which had been raised in order toen-
save them. At the fame time renouncing all
connexion with the Emperor, they sent ambaf-
fadors to thank the king of France as the restorer
of their liberty, and to entreat that he would
1fcure to them the perpetual enjoyment of that
blefling, by continuing his protecion to their re.
public '.

1 Pecci Memorie de Siena, vol. iii. p. 230. 261. Thuan.

375. 377, &c. Paruta. Hilt. Vencc. z67. Mem. do RibitI
424, &c.

To

To these misfortunes, one fill more fatal had B O0O

XI.

almost succeeded. The severe administration of I
Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples, having Def',StOf
filled that kingdom with murmuring and difaffec- the Turks

in the king-

tion, the Prince of Salerno, the head of the male- dom of Na-
contents, had fled to the court of France, where all pl"'
who bore ill-will to the Emperor or his ministers
were sure of finding protection and affiflance.
That nobleman, in the usual flyle of exiles, boast-
ing much of the number and power of his partisans,
and of his great influence with them, prevailed on
Henry to think of invading Naples, from an ex-
petation of being joined by all those with whom
the Prince of Salerno held correspondence, or who
were dissatisfied with Toledo's government. But
though the firRf hint of this enterprise was suggested
bythe Prince of Salerno, Henry did not choose
that its success should entirely depend upon his be-
ing able to fulfil the promises which he had made.
He applied for aid to Solyman, whom he courted,.
after his father's example, as his most vigor-
ous auxiliary against the Emperor, and solicited
him to second his operations, by fending a power-
ful fleet into the Mediterranean. It was not dif-
ficult to obtain what he requested of the Sultan,
who, at this time, was highly incensed against the
house of Austria, on account of the proceedings
in Hungary. He ordered an. hundred and fifty
Ihips to be equipped, that they might fail towards
the coast of Naples, at whatever time Henry
flould name, and might co-operate with the
French troops in their attempts upon that king-

I 2 dom.

B o x K dom. The command of this fleet was given to
_--v-- the corlair Dragut, an officer trained up under

S55s* Barbarossa, and scarcely inferior to his maiter in

courage, in talents, or in good fortune. He ap-
peared on the coast of Calabria at the time which
had been agreed on, landed at several places,
plundered and burnt several villages; and at lat,
casting anchor in the bay ocf Naples, filled that
city with consternation. But as the French fleer,
detained by some accident, which the contempo.
rary historians have not explained, did not join
the Turks according to concert, they, after wait-
ing twenty days, without hearing any tidingsof
it, set fail for Constantinople, and thus delivered
the viceroy of Naples from the terror of an in-
vafion which he was not in a condition to have re-
fifled k.

5hes. As the French had never given so severe a

The Empe-
tor nfibly check to the Emperor in any former campaign,
waiththe they expressed immoderate joy at the success of
fftirsf their arms. Charles himself, accustomed to a

long series of prosperity, felt the calamity most
sensibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-
Countries, much dejeced with the cruel reverse of
fortune which asse(ted him in his declining age,
when the violence of the gout had increased to
such a pitch, as entirely broke the vigour of his
conflitution, and rendered him peevish, difficult
of access, and often incapable of applying to
k Thuan. 375. 380. Mcm. dc Ribier, ii. 403, Gianon.

buGcnes.

buhinefs. But whenever he enjoyed any interval B 0 :0 K:
of ease, all his thoughts were bent on revenge;
and he deliberated, with the greatest solicitude, 1553.
concerning the most proper means of annoying
France, and of effacing the stain which had ob-
lcured the reputation and glory of his arms. All
the Ichemes concerning Germany, which had en-
grossed him so long, being disconcerted by the
peace of Paflau, the affairs of the empire became
only secondary objets of attention; and enmity to
France was the predominant pafion which chiefly
occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran- Theiolent

proc adings
denburg excited violent commotions, which dif- of jertof

BM hden-

turbed the Empire during this year. That Prince's burg.
troops having shared in the calamities of the siege
of Metz, were greatly reduced in number. But
the Emperor, prompted by gratitude for his dif-
tinguilhed services on that occasion, or perhaps
with a secret view of fomenting divisions among
the Princes of the Empire, having paid up all
the money due to him, he was enabled with that
fum to hire so many of the soldiers difmiifed from
the Imperial army, that he was soon at the head
of a body of men as numerous as ever. The
bifiops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg having so-
licited the Imperial chamber to annul, by its au-
thority, the iniquitous conditions which Albert
had compelled them to sign, that court unani-
noufly found all their engagements with him to
be void in their own nature, because they had

I 3 been

3 o o K been extorted by force; enjoined Albeit to re-

Xr.
- _t nounce all claim to the performance of them;
1553- and, if he should persist in such an unjust de-

mand, exhorted all the Princes of the Empire to
take arms againfc him as a disturber of the pub-
lic tranquillity. To this decision, Albert op-
posed the confirmation of his tranfaEtions with
the twb prelates, which the Emperor had granted
him as the reward of his having joined the Impe-
rial army at Metz; and in order to intimidate
his antagonists, as well as to convince them of
his resolution not to relinquish his pretensions, he
put his troops in motion, that he might secure
the territory in question. Various endeavours
were employed, and many expedients proposed,
in order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the fame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enterpriz-
ing, inspiring him with the most sanguine hopes
of success, even in his wildest undertakings, he
disdainfully rejected all reasonable overtures of ac-
commodation.

e iscon- UPON this, the Imperial chamber issued its
demn-d by decree against him, and required the Elector of

the Impeii.il Ci
chimbcr. Saxony, together with several other Princes men-

tioned by name, to take arms in order to carry it
into execution. Maurice, and those alfociated
with him, were not unwilling to undertake this
service. They were extremely solicitous to main-
tain public order by Supporting the authority of
the Imperial chamber, and saw the necessity of

2. giving

giving a timely check to the usurpations of an B oxO

;

ambitious Prince, who had no principle of action --.
but regard to his own interest, and no motive to I553'
direct him but the impulse of ungovernable pas-
lions. They had good reason to fufpeat, that the
Emperor encouraged Albert in his extravagant
and irregular proceedings, and secretly afforded
him assistance, that, by raising him up to rival
Maurice in power, he might, in any future broil,
make use of his afiftance to counterbalance and
control the authority which the other had acquired
in the Empire '

April zo

THESE considerations united the most powerful A^ nfede-
Princes in Germany in a league againlt Albert, racy formed

against him,

of which Maurice was declared generalihfmo. of which
This formidable confederacy, however, wrought washa.
no change in Albert's sentiments; but as he knew
that he could not refill so many Princes, if he
should allow them time to assemble their forces,
he endeavoured, by his activity, to deprive them
of all the advantages which they might derive
from their united power and numbers; and for
that reason marched directly against Maurice, the
enemy whom he dreaded most. It was happy for
the allies that the conduct of their affairs was
committed to a Prince of such abilities. He, by
his authority and example, had inspired them with
vigour and having carried on their preparations

Sleid. 58. Memr. de Ribicr, ii. 4.12. Arnoldi vita
Maurit. ap. Menkcn, ii. z1 2.

I 4 with

B 0 0 K with a degree of rapidity of which confederate

XI.
L^, bodies are seldom capable, he was in condition to

face Albert before he could make any considerable
progress.
He attacks THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in

number, each consisting of twenty-four thousand
men, met at Sieverhaufen, in the duchy of Lu-
nenburgh; and the violent animosity against each
other, which possessed the two leaders, did not
susser them to continue long inaEtive. The troops,
inflamed with the fame hostile rage, marched
June o. fiercely to the combat;. they fought with the

greatest obstinacy; and as both generals were
capable of availing themielves of every favour-
able occurrence, the battle remained long doubt-
ful, each gaining ground upon the other alter-

and defeats nately. At last victory declared for Maurice,
i5army i who was superior in cavalry, and Albert's army

fled in confusion, leaving four thousand dead in
the field, and their camp, baggage, and artillery,
in the hands of the conquerors. The allies
bought their viEtory dear, .their best troops sus-
sered greatly, two sons of the Duke of Brunswick,
a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many other persons
of diftinAion, were among the number of the

ut is killed slain"'. But all these were soon forgotten; for
thb Maurice himself, as he led up to a iecond charge

a body of horse which had been broken, receiv-

l HFiftoria pugna: infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thom.

W intzcro lauilorc ;piid Scard. ii. 159. Sleid. S3. RuLcclli
:,illrca aU !ii ncc:s 15 l. Arnoldi vita Maurit. i2z-.
e

eCO

ed a wound with a piftol-bullet in the belly, of B o o K
which he died two days after the battle, in the -m
thirty-fecond year of his age, and in the sixth after 5ss3.
his attaining the eleAoral dignity.

OF all the personages who have appeared in the His cha.
history of this active age, when great occur- raacr
rences and sudden revolutions called forth extra-
ordinary talents to view, and afforded them full
opportunity to display themselves, Maurice may
justly be confidered as the most remarkable. If
his exorbitant ambition, his profound diflimula-
tion, and his unwarrantable usurpation of his
kinsman's honours and dominions, exclude him
from being praised as a virtuous man; his pru-
dence in concerting his measures, his vigour in
executing them, and the uniform success with
which they were attended, entitle him to the ap-
pellation of a great Prince. At an age when
impetuosity of spirit commonly predominates over
political wisdom, when the highest effort even of
a genius of the first order is to fix on a bold
scheme, and to execute it with promptitude and
courage, he formed and condu6ted an intricate
plan of policy, which deceived the most artful
Monarch in Europe. At the very juncture when
the Emperor had attained to almost unlimited
delpotifm, Maurice, with power seemingly inade-
quate to such an undertaking, compelled him
to relinquifi all his usurpations, and eftablifed
n"t only the religious but civil liberties of Ger-
many on fiuch foundations as have hitherto re-

mained

B 0 0 K mained unshaken. Although, at one period of

XI v--_. his life, his conduct excited the jealousy of the
'553. Proteflants, and at another drew on him there-

fentment of the Roman Catholics, such was his
masterly address, that he was the only Prince of the
age who, in any degree, possessed the confidence of
both, and whom both lamented as the most able as
well as faithful guardian of the conffitution and laws
of his country.

Albert con- THE conflernation which Maurice's death oc.
tinues the
^ste cafioned among his troops, prevented them from

making the proper improvement of the viEtory
which they had gained. Alber.t, whose a&ive
courage, and profuse liberality, rendered him the
darling of such military adventurers as were little
Solicitous about the justice of his cause, soon re-
aflembled his broken forces, and made fresh levies
with such success, that he was quickly at the head
of fifteen thousand men, and renewed his depre-
dations with additional fury. But Henry of
Brunswick having taken the command of the al-
Sept. 11. lied troops, defeated him in a second battle,

scarcely less bloody than the former. Even then
his courage did not fink, nor were his resources
exhauffed. He made several efforts, and some
of them very vigorous, to retrieve his affairs:
But being laid under the ban of the Empire by
the Imperial chamber; being driven by degrees
out of all his hereditary territories, as well as
those which he had usurped; being forsaken by
many of his officers, and overpowered by the

number

number of his enemies, he fled for refuge into B o o K.
France. After having been, for a considerable a
time, the terror and scourge of Germany, he HeiSSd3iv
lingered out iome years in an indigent and de- utofGer-
pendent state of exile, the miseries of which his
restless and arrogant spirit endured with the most
indignant impatience. Upon his death without January xa
issue, his territories, which had been seized by the s5
Princes who took arms against him, were restored,
by a decree of the Emperor, to his collateral heirs
of the house of Brandenburgh ".

MAURICE having left only one daughter, who Maurices

brother An-

was afterwards married to William Prince of guus fuc
Orange, by whom Ihe had a son who bore his dtheeleitora
grandfather's name, and inherited the great ta- diwuty.
lents for which he was conspicuous, a violent dif-
pute arose concerning the succession to his ho-
nours and territories. John Frederick, the de-
graded elector, claimed the eletoral dignity, and
that part of his patrimonial estate of which he
had been violently firipped after the Smalkal-
dick war. Augustus, Maurice's only brother,
pleaded his right not only to the hereditary pof-
feflions of their family, but to the ele&oral dig-
nity, and to the territories which Maurice had
acquired. As Augustus was a Prince of con-
fiderable abilities, as well as of great candour
and gentleness of manners, the flates of Saxony,
forgetting the merits and sufferings of their for-

Slid. 592. 594. 599. Struv. Corp. Hill. Germ. 1075.

mer

B 0 0 K mer matter, declared warmly in his favour. His

XI.
_- , ppretenfions were powerfully supported by the King
553- of Denmark, whose daughter he had married, and

zealously espoused by the King of the Romans,
out of regard to Maurice's memory. The de-
graded Ele&tor, though secretly favoured by his
ancient enemy the Emperor, was at last obliged to
relinquish his claim, upon obtaining a small ad.
dition to the territories which had been allotted to
him, together with a stipulation, securing to his
family the eventual succession, upon a failure of
male heirs in the Albertine line. That unfortunate,
but magnanimous Prince, died next year, soon after
ratifying this treaty of agreement; and the eleEtoral
dignity is still poffeised by the descendants of
Augustus °.

Thn;llties DURING these tranfations in Germany, war
in the Low-
Countries. was carried on in the Low-Countries with con-

fiderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the stain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an
army early in the field, and laid siege to Terouane.
Though the town was of such importance, that
Francis used to call it one of the two pillows on
which a King of France might sleep with security,
the fortifications were in bad repair: Henry, trutt-
ing to what had happened at Metz, thought no-
thing more was necessary to render all the efforts
of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce the gar-

"Slcid. 587. Thuan. 409. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ.

rifon

rifon with a considerable number of the young B O o K
nobility. But d'Efse, a veteran officer who com- x-
manded them, being killed, and the Imperialists Z553.
pushing the siege with great vigour and perse-
verance, the place was taken by aflault. That it June 23.
night not fall again into the hands of the French,
Charles ordered not only the fortifications but the
town itself to be rated, and the inhabitants to be
lifperfed in the adjacent cities. Elated with this
success, the Imperialists immediately invetfed
I-leidin, which, though defended with great bra-
very, was likewise taken by assault, and such of
the garrison as escaped the sword were made
prisoners. The Emperor entrusted the conduft of
this siege to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of
Piedmont, who, on that occasion, gave the first
display of those great talents for military command,
which soon entitled him to be ranked among the
first generals of the age, and facilitated his re-
eflablilhment in his hereditary dominions, the
greater part of which having been over-run by
Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were still re-
tained by Henry p.

THE loss of these towns, together with so many The progrerf
persons of diftinAion, either killed or taken by p''i,,s-
the enemy, was no inconsiderable calamity to dirquict.tab
France, and Henry felt it very sensibly; but he K'ing.
was fill more mortified at the Emperor's having
recovered his wonted superiority in the field tb soon

v Thuan, 411. Ilaraxi Annalcs Brabant. 669.

after

B O 0 K after the blow at Metz, which the French had re-

XI. -%-__ presented as fatal to his power. He was ashamed

553 too, of his own remissness and exceffve security at

the opening of the campaign; and in order to repair
that error, he assembled a numerous army, and led
it into the Low-Countries.

ROUSED at the approach of such a formidable

enemy, Charles left Brussels, where he had been
shut up so closely during seven months, that it
came to be believed in many parts of Europe that
he was dead; and though he was so much de.
bilitated by the gout that he could hardly bear the
motion of a litter, he haffened to join his army.
The eyes of all Europe were turned with expe&a-
tion towards those mighty and exasperated rivals,
between whom a decisive battle was now thought
unavoidable. But Charles having prudently de-
clined to hazard a general engagement, and the
violence of the autumnal rains rendering it im-
poflible for the French to undertake any siege,
they retired, without having performed any thing
suitable to the great preparations which they had
made q.

The Im- THE Imperial arms were not attended with the
Ierialifin unrfcctcrul fame success in Italy. The narrowness of theEm
°Italy, peror's finances seldom allowed him to ad with

vigour in two different places at the fame time;
and having exerted himself to the utnoft in order

q II-arveus, 672. Thuan. 414.

to make a great effort in the Low-Countries, his B O o K
operations on the other fide of the Alps were pro- X.
portionally feeble. The viceroy of Naples, in 's
conjunaion with Cosmo di Medici, who was
greatly alarmed at the introduEtion of French
troops into Siena, endeavoured to become malter
of that city. But, intfead of reducing the Sienefe,
the Imperialists were obliged to retire abruptly,
in order to defend their own country, upon the
appearance of the Turkish fleet, which threatened
the coast of Naples; and the French not only
eltablifhed themselves more firmly in Tuscany, bur,
by the assistance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, fubje& at that time to
the Genoefer.
THE affairs of the house of Austria declined no and in

Hungaryl

less in Hungary during the course of this year.
As the troops which Ferdinand kept in Tranfyl.
vania received their pay very irregularly, they
lived almost at discretion upon the inhabitants;
and their insolence and rapaciousness greatly dif-
gusted all ranks of men, and alienated them
from their new sovereign, who, instead of pro-
teting, plundered his fubjets. Their indigna-
tion at this, added to their desire of revenging
Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much upon a tur-
bulent nobility impatient of injury, and upon a
fierce people prone to change, that they were
ripe for a revolt. At that very junture, their

r Thuan. 417.

late

B 0 0 K late Queen Isabella, together with her son, ap;

XI.
L-- peared in Transylvania. Her ambitious mind

1553* could not bear the solitude and inactivity of a

private life; and repenting quickly of the cession
which ihe had made of the crown in the year one
thousand five hundred and fifty-one, she left the
place of her retreat, hoping that the diffatisfation
of the Hungarians with the Austrian government
would prompt them once more to recognise her
son's right to the crown. Some noblemen of great
eminence declared immediately in his favour. The
Bafha of Belgrade, by Solyman's order, espoused
his cause, in opposition to Ferdinand; the Spanilh
and German soldiers, instead of advancing against
the enemy, mutinied for want of pay, declaring
that they would march back to Vienna; so that

Ferdinand Caftaldo, their general, was obliged to abandon
abandon Transylvania to Isabella and the Turks, and to
,rnia place himself at the head of the mutineers, that

by his authority he might restrain them from plun-
dering the Austrian territories through which they
passed .

Solyman's FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entirely
dittre. towards the affairs of Germany, and his treasures

so much exhausted by his late efforts in Hungary,
that he made no attempt to recover this valuable
province, although a favourable opportunity for
that purpose presented itself, as Solyman was then
engaged in a war with Persia, and involved be-

o Thuan. 430.

aides

fides in domestic calamities which engrossed and B 0 0 K
disturbed his mind. Solyman, though diftin- --.-
guifhed by many accomplishments from the 1553.
other Ottoman Princes, had all the passions pe-
culiar to that violent and haughty race. He was
jealous of his authority, sudden as well'as furious
in his anger, and susceptible of all that rage and
love, which reigns in the East, and often pro-
duces the wildest and most tragical effects. His 'rhe tragial

history of

favourite miftl-efs was a Circaflian slave of ex- his son
quifite beauty, who bore him a son called Muf- lufapha.
tapha, whom, both on account of his birth-right and
his merit, he destined to be the heir of his crown.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, soon supplanted
the Circafflan, and gained the Sultan's heart.
Having the address to retain the conquest which
fle had made, The kept possession of his love
without any rival for many years, during which
lhe brought him several sons and one daughter.
All the happiness, however, which she derived
from the unbounded sway that she had acquired
over a monarch whom one half of the world re-
vered or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual
refletions on Muftapha's accession to the throne,
and the certain death of her sons, who, she fore-
I1iw, would be immediately sacrificed, according
to the barbarous jealousy of Turkifl policy, to
the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling
continually on this melancholy idea, she came
gradually to view Muftapha as the enemy of her
children, and to hate him with more than a flep-
olther's ill-will. This prompted her to wiflh his

i. 1 V. K deflruc-

B O K deftluction, in order to secure for one of her own

v'i_' sons the throne which was destined for him. Nor
'5533 did she want either ambition to attempt such a

high enterprize, or the arts requisite for carrying
it into execution. Having prevailed on the Sul-
tan to give her only daughter in marriage to
Ruftan the Grand Vifier, she disclosed her scheme
to that crafty minister, who perceiving that it was
his own interest to co-operate with her, readily
promised his assistance towards aggrandizing that
branch of the royal line to which he was so nearly
allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her mea.

fures with this able confident, she began to affedt
a wonderful zeal for the Mahometan religion, to
which Solyman was superstitiously attached, and
proposed to found and endow a royal mosque, a
work of great expence, but deemed by the Turks
meritorious in the highest degree. The Mufti
whom flhe consulted, approved much of her
pious intention; but, having been gained and in.
ftirned by Ruftan, told her, that she being a
slave could derive no benefit herself from that
holy deed, for all the merit of it would accrue to
Solyman, the matter whole property she was.
t'pon this she seemed to be overwhelmed wit'
sorrow, and to fink into the deepelt melancholy,
as if she had been difCgufcd with life and all its
enjoyments. Solyman, who was absent with the
army, being informed of this dejetiion of mind,
and of the cause frorn which it proceeded, dil-

covered

covered all the solicitude of a lover to remove it, B o o K
and by a writing under his hand declared her a -
siee woman. Roxalana having gained this point, '553
proceeded to build the mosque, and re-affumed
her usual gaiety of spirit. But when Solyman,
on his return to Constantinople, sent an eunuch,
according to the custom of the seraglio, to bring
her to partake of his bed, she, seemingly with
deep regret, but in the most peremptory manner,
declined to follow the eunuch, declaring that
what had been an honour to her while a slave, be-
came a crime as she was now a free woman, and
that the would not involve either the Sultan or
herself in the guilt that must be contrated by
such an open violation of the law of their prophet.
Solyman, whose passion this difficulty, as well as
the asseted delicacy which gave rife to it, height-
ened and inflamed, had recourse immediately to
the Mufti for his direction. He replied, agree-
ably to the Koran, that Roxalana's scruples were
well founded; but added, artfully, in words
which Ruflan had taught him to use, that it was
in the Sultan's power to remove there difficulties,
by espousing her as his lawful wife. The amorous
monarch closed eagerly with the proposal, and
oblemnly married her, according to the form of
the Mahometan ritual; though, by doing so, he
disregarded a maxim of policy which the pride of
the Ottoman blood had taught all the Sultans
fitce Bajazet I. to confider as inviolable. From
his time, none of the 'iTurkifl monarchs had
"arried, because, when he was vanquishcd and

K 2 tlkcri

B 0 0 K taken prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been

XI.
'----' abused with barbarous insolence by the Tartars.

'553. That no similar calamity might again fubje& the

Ottoman family to the fame disgrace, the Sultans
admitted none to their beds but slaves, whose dif-
honour could not bring any such stain upon their
house.

BUT the more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it convinced Roxalana, of the unbounded
influence which she had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute,
with greater hope of success, the scheme that ihe
had formed in order to destroy Muftapha. This
young Prince having been entruffed by his father,
according to the practice of the Sultans in that
age, with the government of several different pro-
vinces, was at that time invested with the admi.
niftration in Diarbequir, the ancient Mesopotamia,
which Solynan had wrested from the Persians, and
added to his empire. In all there different com-
mands, Muitapha had conducted himself with such
cautious prudence as could give no offence to his
father, though, at the fame time, he governed with
so much moderation as well as justice, and displaycd
such valour and generosity, as rendered hhn equally
the favourite of the people and the darling of the
soldiery.

TIIH.RE was no room to lay any folly or vice to

his charge, that could impair the iJigh opinion
which his father entertained of him. Roxalanas

male-

malevolence was more refined; she turned his B 0° o
virtues against him, and made use of there as en- -
gines for his deftrution. She often mentioned, '53
in Solyman's presence, the splendid qualities of
hisfon; she celebrated his courage, his liberality,
his popular arts, with malicious and exaggerated
praise. As soon as she perceived that the Sultan
heard there encomiums, which were often repeated,
with uneasiness; that suspicion of his son be-
gan to mingle itself with his former esteem; and
that by degrees he came to view him with jealousy
and fear; she introduced, as by accident, some
discourse concerning the rebellion of his father
Selim against Bajazet his grandfather: she took
notice of the bravery of the veteran troops un-
der Muftapha's command, and of the neighbour-
hood of Diarbequir to the territories of the Per-
fian Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy. By there
arts, whatever remained of paternal tendernels
was gradually extinguished, and such paflions were
kindled in the breaff of the Sultan, as gave all
Roxalana's malignant suggestions the colour not
only of probability but of truth. His suspicions
and fear of Muftapha fettled into deep-rooted
hatred. He appointed spies to observe and report
allhis words and actions; he watched and flood
on his guard against him as his most dangerous
enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart from
Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon another flep.

K 3 Slh

B .0 K She entreated Solyman to allow her own fonsthe

XI.

t ,.
-.o liberty of appearing at court, hoping that by

1553. gaining access to their father, they might, by

their good qualities and dutiful deportment, in.
sinuate themselves into that place in his affedions
which Muftapha had formerly held; and, though
what she demanded was contrary to the practice
of the Ottoman family in that age, the uxorious
monarch granted her request. To all there fe-
male intrigues Ruftan added an artifice still more
subtle, which completed the Sultan's delusion,
and heightened his jealousy and fear. He wrote
to the Bashaws of the provinces adjacent to
Diarbequir, inftrucing them to fend him regular
intelligence of Muftapha's proceedings in his
government, and to each of them he gave a
private hint, flowing in appearance from his zeal
for their interest, that nothing would be more
acceptable to the Sultan than to receive favour-
able accounts of a son whom he destined to sus-
tain the glory of the Ottoman name. The
Bashaws, ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and
eager to pay court to their sovereign at such an
easy price, filled their letters with studied but fatal
panegyrics of Muftapha, representing him as
a Prince worthy to. succeed such an illustrious
father, and as endowed with talents which might
enable him to emulate, perhaps to equal, his
fame. These letters were industriously shewn to
Solyman, at the seasons when it was known that
they would make the deepell impression. Lvery

expreflion

exprefion in recommendation of his son wounded B 'o o K
him to the heart; he fufpec'ed his principal of- -
ficers of being ready to favour the molt desperate Is53
attempts of a Prince whom they were so fond of
praising; and fancying that he saw them already
assaulting his throne with rebellious arms, he de-
termined, while it was yet in his power, to anticipate
the blow, and to secure his own safety by his son's
death.

FOR this purpose, though under pretence of
renewing the war against Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
of a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
whole life he deemed inconsistent with his own
safety. But that crafty minister did not choose to
be loaded with the odium of having executed this
cruel order. As soon as he arrived in Syria he
wrote to Solyman, that the danger was so immi-
nent as called for his immediate pretence; that
the camp was full of Muftapha's emiflaries; that
many of the soldiers were corrupted; that the
affetions of all leaned towards him ; that he had
discovered a negociation which had been carried
on with the Sophi of Persia in order to marry
Muflapha with one of his daughters that he al-
ready felt his own talents as well as authority to
be inadequate to the exigencies of such an arduous
conjuncure; that the Sultan alone had sagacity to
discern what resolution should be taken in those cir-
curmfances, and power to carry that reiblution into
execution.

K 4. l

1 O0 K THIS charge of courting the friendship of the

Sophi, Roxalana and Ruftan had reserved as the
I553. last and most envenomed of all their calumnies.

It operated with the violence which they expected
from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of the Per.
fans, and threw him into the wildest transports
of rage. He set out instantly for Syria, and
hastened thither with all the precipitation and
impatience of fear and revenge. As soon as he
joined his army near Aleppo, and had concerted
measures with Ruftan, he sent a Chiaus, or mef-
fenger of the court, to his son, requiring him to
repair immediately to his pretence. Muftapha,
though no firanger to his ilep-mother's machina-
tions, or to Ruftan's malice, or to his father's
violent temper, yet relying on his own innocence,
and hoping to discredit the accusations of his ene-
mies by the promptitude of his obedience, fol-
lowed the messenger without delay to Aleppo.
The moment he arrived in the. camp, he was in-
troduced into the Sultan's tent. As he entered
it, he observed nothing that could give him any
alarm; no additional crowd of attendants, no
body of armed guards, but the fame order and
silence which always reign in the Sulcan's apart-
ments. In a few minutes, however, several mutes
appeared, at the fight of whom Muftapha, know-
ing what was his doom, cried with a loud voice,
"Lo, my death !" and attempted to fly. 1he
mutes rushed forward to seize him; he refiflcd
and struggled, dieanding with the utmolf car-
ncefnefs to fee the Sultan; and delpair, together

with

with the hope of finding protection f-om the fol- B o o K
diers, if he could escape out of the tent, animat- x-
ed him with such extraordinary strength, that, 'ss53
for some time, he baffled all the efforts of the
executioners. Solyman was within hearing of his
son's cries, as well as of the noise which the
itruggle occasioned. Impatient of this delay of
his revenge, and ftlruck with terror at the thoughts
of Miufbphla's escaping, he drew aside the curtain
which divided the rent, and thrusting in his head,
daited a fierce look towards the Inutes, and, with
wild and threatening gellures, seemed to condemn
their sloth and timidity. At fight of his father's
furious and unrelenting countenance, Muftapha's
strength failed, and his courage forbfok him; the
mutes faitened the bow-string about his neck, and
iin a moment put an end to his life.

THE dead body was exposed before the Sultan's
tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and con-
templating that mournfl . obje&t with afonifh-
ment, and sorrow, and indignation, were ready,
if a leader had not been' wanting, to have broke
out into the wildest excefes of rage. After giv-
ing vent to the first exprellons of their grief, they
etired each man to his tent, and fl-itting them-
selves up, bewailed in secret the cruel fate of
their favourite ; nor was there one of them who
tallted food, or even water, during the renmainder
ofthat day. Next morning the ifame solitude and
silence reigned in the camp; and Solyman, being
afivid that tfme dreadful Itormn would follow this

fullten
I

B oXI K fullen calm, in order to appease the enraged fol.

'--- diers, deprived Ruftan of the feals, ordered him

55 to leave the camp, and raised Achmet, a gallant

officer much beloved in the army, to the dignity
of Vifier. This change, however, was made in
concert with Ruftan himself; that crafty minister
suggesting it as the only expedient which could
save himtnelf or his master. But within a fem
months, when the resentment of the soldiers be.
gan to subside, and the name of Muftapha to be
forgotten, Achmet was strangled by the Sultan's
command, and Ruftan reinflated in the officeo
Vifier. Together with his former power, he re.
assumed the plan for exterminating the race o
Muftapha which he had concerted with Roxa-
lana; and as they were afraid that an only for
whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to
avenge his death, they redoubled their aftivity
and by employing the fame arts against him whici
they had praEtifed against his father, they inspired
Solyman with the fame fears, and prevailed or
him to ifTue orders for putting to death that young
innocent Prince. These orders were executed witl
barbarous zeal, by an eunuch, who was dispatchel
to Bursa, the place where the Prince resided; and
no rival was left to difpurte the Ottoman thron
with the sons of Roxalana '

t Augcrii Gtflenii Bufbequii Legationis Turcica: pil

lJc iv. Franc. 16 5. p. 37. Tlhuan. lib. 12. p. 432. M"
de Ribicr, ii. 457 Mauroccni tillor. Vcneta, lib. vi
p. Gu.

Sute

SUCH tragical scenes, produEive of so deep B 0 0 K
distress, seldom occur but in the history of the '-
great monarchies of the East, where the warmth charss3p-
of the climate seems to give every emotion of the jeasamar-
heart its greatest force, and the absolute power of tweenhi
sovereigns accustoms and enables them to gratify Mardf
all their passions without controul. While this England.
interesting tranfation in the court of Solyman
engaged his whole attention, Charles was pursuing,
with the utmost ardour, a new Ichene for aggran-
dizing his family. About this time, Edward the
Sixth of England, after a short reign, in which
he displayed such virtues as filled his fubjeEts with
sanguine hopes of being happy under his govern-
ment, and made them bear with patience all that
they suffered from the weakness, the dissensions,
and the ambition of the ministers who afiumed
the administration during his minority, was seized
with a lingering distemper which threatened his
life. The Emperor no sooner received an ac-
count of this, than his ambition, always atten-
tive to seize every opportunity of acquiring an
increase of power, or of territories, to his son,
suggested the thought of adding England to his
other kingdoms, by the marriage of Philip with
the Princess Mary, the heir of Edward's crown.
Being apprehensive however, that his son, who
was then in Spain, might decline a match with a
Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven
years older than hirnfelf ; Charles determined

Palav. Hist. Concil. Trid. v. ii. c. 13. p. i go.

I notwith-

B 0 0 K notwithlfanding his own age and infirmities, to

XI.

- make offer of himself as a husband to his cousin.

1553-

To which BUT though Mary was so far advanced in years,
Philip gives
his, cnten and destitute of every charm either of person or

of manners that could win affection, or command
esteem, Philip, without hesitation, gave his con.
sent to the match proposed by his father, and was
willing, according to the usual maxim of Princes,
to sacrifice his inclination to his ambition. In
order to ensure the success of his scheme, the
Emperor, even before Edward's death, began to
take such steps as might facilitate it. Upon
Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of
England; the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray
proving as unfortunate as they were ill founded'.
Charles sent immediately a pompous embassy to
London to congratulate Mary on her acceflion to
the throne, and to propose the alliance with his

The feni- son. The Queen, dazzled with the profpe& of
entof, marrying the heir of the greatest Monarch in Eu-
Mary and of marryin

* i

the Erli(h rope; fond of uniting more closely with her mo-
to it. ther's family, to which she had been always warm.

ly attached; and eager to secure the powerful aid
which she knew would be necessary towards car-
rying on her favourite fcheine of rc-eftabliflling
the Romifll religion in England, liflened in the
most favourable manner to the proposal. Among
her fubjeEts, it met with a very different recep-
tion. Philip, it was well known, contended for

X Carte's ILift. of England, iii. 2z7.

alll

all the tenets of the church of Rome-with a fan- B 00 K
guinary zeal which exceeded the measure even of _
Spanilh bigotry: this alarmed all the numerous 1553.
partilans of the Reformation. The Castilian
haughtiness and reserve were far from being ac-
ceptable to the English, who, having several
times seen their throne occupied by persons who
were born fubjets, had become accuftorned to
an unceremonious and familiar intercourse with
their sovereigns. They could not think, without
the utmost uneasiness, of admitting a foreign
Prince to that influence in their councils, which
the husband of their Queen would naturally pof-
fess. They dreaded, both from Philip's over-
bearing temper, and from the maxims of the
Spanish monarchy which he had imbibed, that
he would infuse ideas into the Queen's mind,
dangerous to the liberties of the nation, and
would introduce foreign troops and money into
the kingdom, to assist her in any attempt against
them.

FULL of these apprehensions, the House of The Iourc
Commons, though in that age extremely obfe- mons re-
quious to the will of their Monarchs, presented a'onflat
a warm address againit the Spanish match; many
pamphlets were published, representing the dan-
gerous conftcuecnces of the alliance with Spain,
and defcribin:?, Philip's bigotry and arrogance in
the mofll odious colours. But Mary, inflexible
il all helr rcolutions, paid no regard to the re-
"o0ll'ances of her Commons, or to the fcnti-

mcnts

«

B X0 K ments of the people. The Emperor, having

_ _ secured, by various arts, the ministers whom she
s5S3- trusted most, they approved warmly of the match,

and large fums were remitted by him in orderto
gain the reft of the council. Cardinal Pole,
whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's ac.
cession, had dispatched as his legate into England,
in order to reconcile his native country to the fee
of Rome, was detained by the Emperor's corn.
mand at Dillinghen in Germany, left by his pre.
fence he should thwart Philip's pretensions, and
employ his interest in favour, of his kinsman
Courtnay Earl of Devonshire, whom the English
ardently wished their Sovereign to choose for a
bufband Y.

The mar- As the negociation did not admit of delay,
cigcluded, it was carried forward with the greatest rapidity,

the Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to every
article in favour of England, which Mary's mi-
nilters either represented as necessary to soothe the
people and reconcile them to the match, or that
was suggested by their own fears and jealousy of
a foreign master. The chief articles were, that

1554. Philip, during his marriage with the Queen,
January f. ould bear the title of King of England, but the

entire administration of affairs, as well as the sole
clifpofal of all revenues, offices, and benefices,
fnouild remain with the Queen; that the heirs of
the marriage fliould, together with the crown of

' Carte, iii. 288.

Englandl,

England, inherit the dutchy of Burgundy and B 0° K
the Low-Countries ; that if Prince Charles, Phi- _
lip's only son by a former marriage, should die ,554.
without issue, his children by the Queen, whether
male or female, should succeed to the crown of
Spain, and all the Emperor's hereditary domi-
nions; that, before the confumnation of the
marriage, Philip should swear solemnly, that he
would retain no domestic who was not a fubjeft
of the Queen, and would bring no foreigners
into the kingdom that might give umbrage to
the English; that he would make no alteration
in the constitution or laws of England; that he
would not carry the Queen, or any of the chil-
dren born of this marriage, out of the kingdom;
that if the Queen should die before him without
issue, he would immediately leave the crown to
the lawful heir, without claiming any right of
administration whatever; that in consequence of
this marriage, England should not be engaged
in anv war fubfifling between France and Spain;
and that the alliance between France and England
ihould remain in full force ".

ILUT this treaty, though both the Emperor and Dircsntnnt
M.ary's miniiters employed their utmost address hens^, Ppf
in framing it so as to please the Englif, was far the Lx"Iilt.
from quieting their fears and jealousies. They
fiw that words and promises were a feeble fecu-

ymci'5s Fuc.J. vol. xv. 377. 393. Mem. de Ribicr, ii.

~~~49g~~~~S.~rity

rity

B 0 O K rity against the encroachments of an ambitious

XI.
L X.- _ Prince, who, as soon as he got poffefflon of the

I554. power and advantages which the Queen's husband

must necessarily enjoy, could easily evade any of
the articles which either limited his authority or
obtlruded his schemes. 'They were convinced
that the more favourable the conditions of the
present treaty were to England, the more Philip
would be tempted hereafter to violate them. They
dreaded that England, like Naples, Milan, and
the other countries annexed to Spain, would soon
feel the dominion of that crown to be intolerably
oppressive, and be constrained, as they had
been, to waste its wealth and vigour in wars
wherein it had no interest, and from which it
could derive no advantage. These sentiments
prevailed so generally, tlat every part of the
kingdotn was filled with difcpntent at the match,
and with indignation against the advisers of it.
wy,,'s in- Sir Thomas Wyat, a gentleman of some note,

fci. and of good intentions towards the public, took

advantage of this, and routed the inhabitants of
Kent to arms, in order to save their country from
a foreign yoke. (;reat nulbers retorted in a short
time to his flandard l he marched to london
with such rapidity, and the Queen was so utterly
unprovicded for dlcence, that the aspe&t of affairs
was extremely threatening ; and if any noblemall
of diltinElion had joined the malecontcnts, 01
had \Vyat rpofl talents equal, in any degre,
to the boldness of his enterprize, the inli'rlc-
tion mufln have proved lftal to Mary's power,

]3Bul

But all Wyat's measures were concerted with so B 0 0 K
little prudence, and executed with such irrefo-
lution, that many of his followers forsook him ; the '554s
reft were dilperfed by an handful of soldiers;
and he himfelfwas taken prisoner, without having
made any effort worthy of the cause that he had
undertaken, or suitable to the ardour with which he
engaged in it. He suffered the punifhtnent due to
hisrathnefs and rebellion. The Queen's authority
was confirmed and increased by her success in de-
feating this inconsiderate attempt to abridge it.
The lady Jane Gray, whose title the ambition of
her relations had set up in opposition to that of the
Queen, was, notwithstanding her youth and inno-
cence, brought to the scaffold. The lady Elizabeth,
the Queen's iftier, was observed with the most jealous
attention. The treaty of marriage was ratified by
the parliament.
PHILIP landed in England with a magnificent The mar-

riage cele-

retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great folem- brated.
nity; and though he could not lay aside his na-
tural severity and pride, or assume gracious and
popular manners, he endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the English nobility by his extra-
ordinary liberality. Left that should fail of ac-
quiring him such influence in the government
of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining, the
Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand men on
the coast of Slanders, in readiness to embark for
Ingland, and to support his ion in all his enter-
prizes.

V0ol, IV. I EMBOLD-

B 0 K EMBOLDENED by all these favourable circum.

XI.
_-_-c- stances, Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating
Mary'' the Protestant religion out of her dominions, with
meafurs tho the mofl precipitate zeal. The laws of Edward
overturn the
Proteliant the Sixth, in favour of the Reformation, were
religion in
England. repealed; the Protestant clergy ejected; all the

forms and rites of the Popish worship were
re-established; the nation was solemnly absolved
from the guilt which it had contracted during the
period of its apoftacy, and was publicly recon-
ciled to the church of Rome by Cardinal Pole,
who, immediately after the Queen's marriage,
was .permitted to continue his journey to Eng-
land, and to exercise his legatine functions with
the most ample power. Not satisfied with having
overturned the Proteflant church, and re-establish-
ing the ancient system on its ruins, Mary in-
sifted that all her subjects should conform to the
fame mode of worship which fle preferred;
thould profess their faith in the fame creed which
she had approved; and abjure every praaice or
opinion that was deemed repugnant to either of
them. Powers altogether unknown in the Eng-
lifh constitution, were vefled in certain persons
appointed to take cognizance of heresy, and they
proceeded to exercise them with more than inqui-
fitorial severity. The prospect of danger, how-
ever, did not intimidate the principal teachers of
the Protestant doctrines, who believed that they
were contending for truths of the utlnoft confe-
qucnce to the happiness of mankind. They bold-
ly avowed their lintiments, and were condemned

to

to that cruel death which the church of Rome re- B o0° o
serves for its enemies. This shocking punishment -,
was inflited with that barbarity which the rancour 1554,
of false zeal alone can inspire. The English, who
are inferior in humanity to no people in Europe,
and remarkable for the mildness of their public
executions, beheld, with astonishment and horror,
persons who had filled the most refpestable fta-
tions in their church, and who were venerable on
account of their age, their piety, and their lite-
rature, condemned to endure torments to which
their laws did not subjec even the most atrocious
criminals.

THIS extreme rigour did not accomplish the The obilah

~~~~~~~~0 r~cles which

end at which Mary aimed. The patience and she had to
fortitude with which these martyrs for the Reform- uroun
ation submitted to their sufferings, the heroic
contempt of death expressed by persons of every
rank, and age, and fcx, confirmed many more
in the Protestant faith, than the threats of their
enraged persecutors could frighten into apoftacy.
The business of such as were entrusted with
trying heretics multiplied continually, and ap-
peared to be as endless as it was odious. The
Queen's ablest ministers became sensible how im-
politic, as well as dangerous, it was to irritate
the people by the frequent fpe6tacle of public
executions, which they detested as no less unjust
than cruel. Even Philip was so thoroughly con-
vinced of her having run to an excess of rigour,
that on this occasion he assumed a part to which

L 2 he

B o0 K he was little accustomed, becoming an advocate for

moderation and lenity '.

1554-

ThecEnUfol BUT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingratiate
Philip. himself with the English, they discovered a con.

ftant jealousy and distrust of all his intentions; and
when some members, who had been gained by the
court, ventured to move in the House of Com.
mons that the nation ought to aflift the Emperor,
the Queen's father-in-law, in his war against
France, the proposal was rejeted with general dif-
fatisfation. A motion which was made, that the
parliament should give its content that Philip
might be publicly crowned as the Queen's hulband,
met with such a cold reception, that it was instantly
withdrawn b

The French THE King of France had observed she progress
d Knt1tar of the Emperor's negociation in England with
match be- much uneasiness. The great accession of terri-
tween Phi-
lip and tories as well as reputation which his enemy
Mairy. would acquire by the marriage of his son with

the Queen of such a powerful kingdom, wasob-
vious and formidable. He easily foresaw that the
Englifi, notwithstanding all their fears and precau-
tions, would be soon drawn in to take part in the
quarrels on the continent, and be compelled to
at in subserviency to the l. mperor's ambitious
Ichernes. For this reason, IHenry had given it

a Godwin's Annals of Q( Mary ap. Kennet, v .

ii. 39'
Inrnct's Ifilt. of Refor. ii. 298. 3o0.

i Carte's Hill. of England, iii. 314. in

in charge to his ambassador at the court of Lon- B O o K
don, to employ all his address in order to defeat x_
or retard the treaty of marriage ; and as there was 's54.
not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in
France, whom he could propose to the Queen as
a husband, he inftru&ed him to co-operate with
such of the English as wished their sovereign to
marry one of her own subjects. But the Queen's
ardour and precipitation in cloting with the first
overtures in favour of Philip, having rendered all
his endeavours ineffetual, Henry was so far from
thinking it prudent to give any aid to the Eng-
lifh malecontents, though earnestly solicited by
Wyat and their other leaders, who tempted him
to take them under his protetion, by offers of
great advantage to France, that he commanded
his ambassador to congratulate the Queen in the
warmest terms upon the fupprefflon of the infur-
redion.

NOTWITHSTANDING these external professions, Hisprepa.
Henry dreaded so much the consequence of tpvS,,oo
this alliance, which more than compensated for cmpaiEn.
all the Emperor had loft in Germany, that he
determined to carry on his military operations,
both in the Low-Countries and in Italy, with
extraordinary vigour, in order that he might com-
pel Charles to accept of an equitable peace, be-
fore his daughter-in-law could surmount the
aversion of her fubjets to a war on the continent,
and prevail on them to afIift the Emperor either
with money or troops. For this purpose he ex-

L 3 ertcd

B 0° K erted himself to the utmost in order to have a nu.

XI.
a--_ merous army early aiffmbled on the frontiers of the

55 Netherlands, and while one part of it laid waste the

open country of Artois, the main body, under the
Constable Montmorency, advanced towards the
provinces of Liege and Hainault by the foret of
Ardennes.

The pro- THE campaign was opened with the siege of
grefs of his
armo. Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen of Hun-

gary, the governess of the Low-Countries, had
fortified at great expence; but, being destitute
of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in fix days.
June as. Henry, elated with this success, put himself at

the head of his army, and investing Bouvines,
took it by afault, after a ihort refiltance. With
equal facility he became master of Dinant; and
then turning to the left, bent his march towards

rThe Epe- the province of Artois. The large iums which the
ror little
able to ob- Emperor had remitted into England had so ex-
frua it. haufted his treasury, as to render his preparations

at this junture flower and more dilatory than
usual. He had no body of troops to make head
against the French at their first entrance into his
territories; and though he drew together all the
forces in the country in the utmost hurry, and
gave the command of them to Emanuel Philibert
of Savoy, they were in no condition to face an
enemy so far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his activity and good con-
dlut, made up for his want of troops. By
watching all the motions of the French at a dif-

tance,

tance, and by chufing his own posts with skill, B O K
he put it out of their power either to form any X
siege of consequence, or to attack him. Want '554s
of subsistence soon obliged them to fall back to-
wards their own frontiers, after having burnt all
the open towns, and having plundered the
country through which they marched with a
cruelty and licence more becoming a body of
light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.
BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his army The French

invest Renti.

without attempting some conquest adequate to
the great preparations, as well as sanguine hopes,
with which he had opened the campaign, invested
Renti, a place deemed in that age of great im-
portance, as, by its situation on the confines of
Artois and the Boulonnois, it covered the former
province, and proteted the parties which made
incursions into the latter. The town, which was
strongly fortified and provided with a numerous
garrison, made a gallant defence; but being
warmly pressed by a powerful army, it muff loon
have yielded. The Emperor, who at that time
enjoyed a short interval of eale from the gout,
was so solicitous to save it, that, although he
could bear no other motion but that of a litter,
he instantly put himself at the head of his army,
which having received several reinforcements was
now strong enough to approach the enemy. The
French were eager to decide the fate of Renti by

L 4 a battle,

B 0 0 K erted himself to the utmost in order to have a nu.

Xl.
.c.-.-.. merous army early assembled on the frontiers of the

55 Netherlands, and while one part of it laid waste the

open country of Artois, the main body, under the
Constable Montmorency, advanced towards the
provinces of Liege and Hainault by the forest of
Ardennes.

The pro- THE campaign was opened with the siege of
grers of his
arms. Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen of Hun-

gary, the governess of the Low-Countries, had
fortified at great expence; but, being destitute
of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in fix days.
June as. Henry, elated with this success, put himself at

the head of his army, and investing Bouvines,
took it by aflault, after a ihort resistance. With
equal facility he became master of Dinant; and
then turning to the left, bent his march towards

'The Eii'- the province of Artois. The large fums which the
able to ob- Emperor had remitted into England had so ex-

haufted his treasury, as to render his preparations
at this juncture flower and more dilatory than
usual. He had no body of troops to make head
against the French at their first entrance into his
territories; and though he drew together all the
forces in the country in the utmost hurry, and
gave the command of them to Emanuel Philibert
of Savoy, they were in no condition to face an
enemy so far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his activity and good con-
duEt, made up for his want of troops. By
watching all the motions of the French at a dif-

tance,

tance, and by chufing his own posts with ikill, B o o0
he put it out of their power either to form any -
siege of consequence, or to attack him. Want '554*
of subsistence soon obliged them to fall back to-
wards their own frontiers, after having burnt all
the open towns, and having plundered the
country through which they marched with a
cruelty and licence more becoming a body of
light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.
BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his army The French

'invct Rcnti.

without attempting tome conquest adequate to
the great preparations, as well as sanguine hopes,
with which he had opened the campaign, invested
Renti, a place deemed in that age of great im-
portance, as, by its situation on the confines of
Artois and the Boulonnois, it covered the former
province, and prote&ted the parties which made
incursions into the latter. The town, which was
strongly fortified and provided with a numerous
garrison, made a gallant defence; but being
warmly pressed by a powerful army, it must soon
have yielded. The Emperor, who at that time
enjoyed a short interval of ease from the gout,
was so solicitous to save it, that, although he
could bear no other motion but that of a litter,
he instantly put himself at the head of his army,
which having received several reinforcements was
now frong enough to approach the enemy. The
French were eager to decide the fate of Renti by

L 4 a battle,

B o0 K a battle, and expected it from the Emperor's

Xi.
<L - arrival in his camp; but Charles avoided a ge-
3554. neral action with great industry, and as he had

nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped
to accomplish that, without exposing himself to
the consequences of such a dangerous and doubtful

event.

Anaaeion NOTWITHSTANDrNG all his precautions, a dif-
between the
two armies. pute, about a post which both armies endea-
Aug. 13. voured to seize, brought on an engagement which

proved almost general. The Duke of Guise,
who commanded the wing of the French which
stood the brunt of the combat, displayed valour
and condu& worthy of the defender of Metz;
the Imperialists after an obstinate firuggle were
repulsed; the French remained masters of the
post in dispute, and if the Constable, either from
his natural caution and slowness, or from unwil-
lingnefs to support a rival whom he hated, had
not delayed bringing up the main body to second
the imprefflon which Guise had made, the route
of the enemy muff have been complete. The
Emperor, notwithstanding the loss which he had
sustained, continued in the fame camp; and the
French, being straightened for provisions, and
finding it impoflible to carry on the siege in the
face of an hostile army, quitted their intrench-
ments. They retired openly, courting the'enemy
to approach, rather than shunning an engage-
ment.

BUT

BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered B O o K
them to march off unmolested. As soon as his k--
troops entered their own country, Henry threw Th,55pc-
garrisons into the frontier towns, and difmiifed the iaits in-
reftof the army. This encouraged the Imperialifls cardy.
to push forward with a considerable body of troops
into Picardy, and by laying waste the country with
fire and sword, they endeavoured to revenge them-
selves for the ravages which the French had com-
mitted in Hainault and Artois . But, as they
were not able to reduce any place of importance,
they gained nothing more than the enemy had done
by this cruel and inglorious method of carrying on
the war.

THE arms of France were still more unsuccess- Affirs of
fulin Italy. The footing which the French had Itly.
acquired in Siena, occasioned much uneasiness to
Cosmo di Medici, the mofl sagacious and enter-
prizing of all the Italian Princes. He dreaded
the neighbourhood of a powerful people, to
whom all who favoured the ancient republican
government in Florence would have recourse, as
to their natural proteaors, against that absolute
authority which the Emperor had enabled him
to usurp; he knew how odious he was to the COefo0 d

Medici's
French, on account of his attachment to the Im- schemes

with regard

perial party, and he foresaw that, if they were toSicna.
permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tuscany
would soon feel the effeds of their resentment.

' Thuan. 460, &c. Haraei Ann. Brab. 674.

For

B x° K For these reasons, he wished with the utmost so.

XI.

_ v ^ licitude for the expulsion of the French out of
'5594 the Sienefe, before they had time to efablilh

themselves thoroughly in the country, or to receive
such reinforcements from France as would render
it dangerous to attack them. As this, however,
was properly the Emperor's business, who was
called by his interest as well as honour to dif-
lodge those formidable intruders into the heart of
his dominions, Cofiio laboured to throw the whole
burden of the enterprize on him; and on that ac-
count had given no assistance, during the former
campaign, but by advancing some finall furns of
money towards the payment of the Imperial
troops.

He negoci- BUT as the defence of the Netherlands en-
ares with
the Erpe- grossed all the Emperor's attention, and his re-
ror. mittances into England had drained his treasury,

it was obvious that his operations in Italy would
be extremely feeble; and Cofmio plainly per-
ceived, that if he himself did not take part openly
in the war, and aft with vigour, the French
would scarcely meet with any annoyance. As his
situation rendered this resolution necessary and
unavoidable, his next care was to execute it in
such a manner, that he might derive from it some
other advantage, betide that of driving the
French out of his neighbourhood. With this
view, he dispatched an envoy to Charles, oflfr-
ing to declare war against France, and to reduce
Siena at his own charges, on condition that he

flaoukl

fould be repaid whatever he ihould expend in B O Kz
the enterprize, and be permitted to retain all his ----
conquests until his demands were fully satisfied. I554
Charles, to whom, at this junaure, the war against
Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had
neither expedient nor resource that could enable
him to carry it on with proper vigour, closed
gladly with this overture; and Cosmo, well ac-
quainted with the low state of the Imperial sinan-
ces, flattered himself that the Emperor, finding it
impossible to reimburse him, would susser him to
keep quiet possession of whatever places he ihould
conquer d

FULL of these hopes, he made great prepara- Enters into
tions for war, and as the French King had turned France
the strength of his arms against the Netherlands,
he did not despair of assembling such a body of
men as would prove more than a sufficient match
for any force which Henry could bring into the
field in Italy. He endeavoured, by giving one of
his daughters to the Pope's nephew, to obtain
alitance from the holy fee, or at least to secure
his remaining neutral. He attempted to de-
tach the Duke of Orsini, whose family had been
long attached to the French party, from his ancient
confederates, by bestowing on him another of his
daughters; and what was of greater consequence civesthe

e *s ,

i r- i i i cnmmnrid of

than either of these, he engaged John James Me- his army to
decino, Marquis of Marignano, to take the Medecino.

d Adriani Iforia de faoi tempi, vol. i, 662.

command

B 0 0 v- command of his army . This officer, from a
-v-.- very low condition in life, had raised himself,
1554' through all the ranks of service, to high com-

mand, and had displayed talents, and acquired
reputation in war, which entitled him to be placed
on a level with the greatest generals in that mar.
tial age. Having attained a flation of eminence
so disproportionate to his birth, he labouredwith
a fond solicitude to conceal his original obfcu-
rity, by giving out that he was descended of the
family of Medici, to which honour the casual
resemblance of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such
an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point,
acknowledged him as a relation, and permitted
him to assume the arms of his family: Medecino,
eager to serve the head of that family of which he
now confidered himself as a branch, applied with
wonderful zeal and afliduity to raise troops; and
as, during his long service, he had acquired great
credit with the leaders of those mercenary bands
which formed the strength of Italian arnmies, he en-
gaged the most eminent of them to follow Cosmo's
fiandard.

Peter Stroz- To oppose this able general, and the formid-
ie.trhued able army which he had assembled, the King of
command of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Floren-
the French
army in tine nobleman, who had resided long in France
Italy. as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to

e Adriani Illoria, vol. i, p. 663.

hiigh

bigh reputation, as well as command in the army. B O° KE
He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who, in the -
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-feven, ls5
had concurred with such ardour in the attempt to
expel the family of Medici out of Florence, in
order to re-establish the ancient republican form
of government; and who had perished in the
undertaking. The son inherited the implacable
aversion to the Medici, as well as the fame en-
thufiaftic zeal for the liberty of Florence, which
had animated his father, whose death he was im-
patient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that
his army would make rapid progress under a ge-
neral whose zeal -to promote his interest was
roused and seconded by such powerful passions;
especially as he had allotted him, for the scene of
ation, his native country, in which he had many
powerful partisans, ready to facilitate all his ope-
rations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might The impru-
appear which induced Henry to make this choice, choie.f
itproved fatal to the interests of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal enemy
of his family was appointed to take the com-
mand in Tuscany, concluded that the King of
France aimed at something more than the pro-
tedfion of the Sienefe, and saw the neceflity of
making extraordinary efforts, not merely to re-
duce Siena, but to save himself from defiruCtion f.

f Pccci Mcmorie di Sicna, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.

2 At

B o O K At the fame time, the Cardinal of Ferrara, who

xI.
-. had the entire direction of the French affairs in
5s54* Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formidable rival in

power, and in order to prevent his acquiring any
increase of authority from success, he was ex-
tremely remiss in supplying him either with
money to pay his troops, or with provisions to
support them. Strozzi himself, blinded by his
resentment againit the Medici, pushed on his ope-
rations with the impetuosity of revenge, rather
than with the caution and prudence becoming a
great general.

The battle AT first, however, he attacked several towns in
aOo." the territory of Florence with such vigour as

obliged Medecino, in order to check his pro-
grefs, to withdraw the greater part of his army
from Siena, which he had inveRted before Strozzi's
arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained the whole
burden of military operations, the expence of
which must soon have exhausted his revenues; as
neither the viceroy of Naples nor governor
of Milan were in condition to afford him any es-
fectual aid; and as the troops which Medecino
had left in the camp before Siena could attempt
nothing againift it during his absence; it was
Strozzi's business to have protracted the war, and
to have transferred the feat of it into the territo-
ries of Florence; but the hope of ruining his
enemy by one decisive blow, precipitated him
Auguf 3. into a general engagement not far fiom Mar-

ciano. The armies were nearly equal in num-

ber;

ber; but a body of Italian cavalry, in which B 0 0 K
Strozzi placed great confidence, having fled - a
without making any resistance, either through In ,h54h
the treachery or cowardice of the officers who the French

,are dcfcated.

commanded it, his infantry remained exposed to
the attacks of all Medecino's troops. Encou-
raged, however, by Strozzi's pretence and ex-
ample, who, after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed him-
self at the head of the infantry, and manifested
anadmirable pretence of mind, as well as extra-
ordinary valour, they flood their ground with
great firmness, and repulsed such of the enemy
asventured to approach them. But those gallant
troops being surrounded at last on every fide, and
torn in pieces by a battery of cannon which Me-
decino brought to bear upon them, the Floren-
tine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a gene-
ral rout ensued. Strozzi, faint with the lots of
blood, and deeply asseted with the fatal con-
iequences of his own rashness, found the utmost
dificulty in making his escape with a handful of

menl .

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege of Melecino
Siena with his victorious forces, and as Strozzi si,:"
could not, after the greatest efforts of acivity,
collect as many men as to form the appearance
of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on his
approaches against the town without molestation.

* Pecci Memoric della Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.

But

B X0 K But the Sienefe, instead of finking into despair

XI.
__ A upon this cruel disappointment of their only hope

whchS4 of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves
gallantly to the utmost extremity, with that undaunted for-
defended by
the citizens titude which the love of liberty alone can inspire.

Mon. This generous resolution was warmly seconded by

Monluc, who commanded the French garrifonin
the town. The active and enterprising courage
which he had displayed on many occasions, had
procured him this command; and as he had am-
bition which aspired at the highest military dig-
nities, without any pretensions to attain them but
what he could derive from merit, he determined
to distinguish his defence of Siena by extraordi.
nary efforts of valour and perseverance. For this
purpose, he repaired and strengthened the fortifi-
cations with unwearied industry; he trained the
citizens to the use of arms, and accustomed them
to go through the fatigues and dangers of service
in common with the soldiers; and as the enemy
were extremely strict in guarding all the avenues
to the city, he husbanded the provisions in the
magazines with the most parsimonious ceconomy,
and prevailed on the soldiers, as well as the ci-
tizens, to rettrict themselves to a very moderate
daily allowance for their subsistence. Medecino,
though his army was not numerous enough to
fto-nr the town by open force,. ventured twice to
af.iule it by furprifie; but he was received each
time with lo muich spirit, and repulsed with such
loss, as discouraged him from repeating the at

tcllilpt

tempt, and left him no hopes of reducing the B 0 0 K
town but by famine.

'554.

WITH this view, he fortified his own camp Medecino
with great care, occupied all the posts of fftrength ^,glVr ti
round the place, and having entirely cut off the blockade.
besieged from any communication with the ad-
jacent country, he waited patiently until necessity
Ihould compel them to open their gates. But
their enthusiastic zeal for liberty made the citi-
zens derpife the distresses occasioned by the scar-
city of provisions, and supported them long un-
der all the miseries of famine: Monluc, by his
example and exhortations, taught his soldiers to
vie with them in patience and abstinence; and it
was not until they had withstood a siege of ten
months, until they had eaten up all the horses,
dogs, and other animals in the place, and were
reduced almost to their last morsel of bread, that
they proposed a capitulation. Even then they ,5ss.
demanded honourable terms ; and as Cosmo,
though no stranger to the extremity of their con-
dition, was afraid that despair might prompt them
to venture upon some wild enterprize, he immedi-
ately granted them conditions more favourable
than they could have expeted.

THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's April2z.
name, who engaged to take the republic of Siena obligei by
under the protetion of the Empire; he promised df',t.
to maintain the ancient liberties of the city, to
VOL. IV. M allow

B 0 0 K allow the magistrates the full exercise of their for-

XI.
--' mer authority, to secure the citizens in the undif.
s 55- turbed possession of their privileges and property;

he granted an ample and unlimited pardon toall
who had born arms against him; he reserved to
himself the right of placing a garrison in the town,
but engaged not to rebuild the citadel without the
consent of the citizens. Monluc and his French
garrison were allowed to march out with all the
honours of war.

MIEDECINO observed the articles of capitula-

tion, as far as depended on him, with great ex-
acnefs. No violence or insult whatever was of-
sered to the inhabitants, and the French garrison
was treated with all the relpea due to their spirit

NMan ofrhe and bravery. But many of the citizens fuspeking,
tiroMr- from the extraordinary facility with which they
.-Alcin, j had obtained such favourable conditions, that the

Emperors as well as Cosmo, would take the first
opportunity of violating them, and disdaining to/
pofTefs a precarious liberty, which depended on
the will of another, abandoned the place of their
nativity, and accompanied the French to Montó-
Alcino, Porto Ercole, and other finall towns in

n:iefatbli'h the territory of the republic. They established, in
atnri..t Montc-Alcino, the fame model of government to
*hcrc. Vwhich they had been accustomed at Siena, and ap-

pointing magistrates with the fame titles andjurif-
diction, solaced themfc'lves with this image of their
ancient liberty.

TiHE

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate of B o0 K
their country were not imaginary, or their fufpi- Li -
cion of the Emperor and Cosmo ill-founded; for Hi'dSipsto
no sooner had the Imperial troops taken poffeflion cizhnthef
of the town, than Cosmo, without regarding the iena were
articles of capitulation, not only diplaced the .
magiltrates who were in office, and nominated
new ones devoted to his own interest, but com-
manded all the citizens to deliver up their arms
to persons whom he appointed to receive them.
They submitted to the former from necefflty,
though with all the reluAance and regret which
men accustomed to liberty feel in obeying the
first commands of a master. They did not yield
the fame tame obedience to the latter; and many
persons of diflinction, rather than degrade them-
selves from the rank of freemen to the condition
of slaves, by surrendering their arms, fled to their
countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and chore to en-
dure all the hardships, and encounter all the
dangers which they had reason to expe& in that
new station, where they had fixed the feat of their
republic.

CosMO, not reckoning himself secure while such C'mo at-

tacks those

numbers of implacable and desperate enemies whohadre.
were fettled in his neighbourhood, and retained tired.
any degree of power, solicited Medecino to at-
tack them in their different places of retreat, be-
fore they had time to recruit their strength and
spirits, after the many calamities which they had
suffered. He prevailed on him, though his army

M 2 was

1 o o K was much weakened by hard duty during the

XI.
XI_ _ , siege of Siena, ,to invest Porto Ercole; and the
'555. fortifications being both flight and incomplete,

the besieged were soon compelled to open their
June 13. gates. An unexpected order, which Medecino

received from the Emperor to detach the greater
part of his troops into Piedmont, prevented far-
ther operations, and permitted the Sienefe exiles
to reside for some time undisturbed in Monte
Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen who re-
mained at Siena, were not yet at the end of-their
sufferings; for the Emperor, instead of adhering
to the articles of capitulation, granted his son
Philip the investiture of that city and all its de.
pendencies; and Francis'de Toledo, in the name
of their new makier, proceeded to fettle the civil
and military government, treated them like a
conquered people, and fubje&ed them to the
Spanish yoke, without paying any regard whatever
to their privileges or ancient form of govern-
ment h

Operations THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been to
mont. i feeble for some time, and its commander so in-

active, that the Emperor, in order to give vigour
to his operations in that quarter, found it necef-
fary not only to recal Medecino's troops from
Tuscany while in the career of conquest, but to

h Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 526. 537. Joan. Camec

rarii adnot. rcr. przucipuarum ab anno i 5o ad 1561 ap.
Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564.. 'ecci Memoric dclla Siena, iv.
6, &c. employ

employ in Piedmont a general of such reputa- B O o K
tion and abilities, as might counterbalance the x
great military talents of the Marechal Briffac, 'sss555.
who was at the head of the French forces in that
country.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that pur- Charles ap-

points the

pose; but that choice was as much the effect of a Duke of
court intrigue, as of his opinion with refpea to ealieiose
the Duke's merit. Alva had long made court there.
to Philip with the utmost assiduity, and had
endeavoured to work himself into his confidence
by all the insinuating arts of which his haughty
and inflexible nature was capable. As he nearly
resembled that Prince in many features of his
character, he began to gain much of his good-
will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite,
who dreaded the progress which this formidable
rival made in his master's affecions, had the ad-
dress to prevail with the Emperor to name Alva
to this command. The Duke, though sensible
that he owed this distinction to the malicious arts
of an enemy, who had no other aim than to re-
move him at a distance from court, was of luch
punCtilious honour, that he would not decline a
command that appeared dangerous and difficult,
but, at the fame time, was so haughty, that he
would not accept of it but on his own terms, in-
sifting on being appointed the Emperor's Vicar-
general in Italy, with the supreme military com-
mand in all the Imperial and Spanifl territories in
that country. Charles granted all his demands;

M 3 and

B 0 O K and he took possession of his new dignity with al-

XI. a__-,-.* most unlimited authority.

3555.
His opera- His first operations, however, were neither

nhconda. proportioned to his former reputation and the ex.
abl'. tensive powers with which he was invested, nor

did they come up to the Emperor's expectations.
Briflac had under his command an army which,
though inferior in number to the Imperialists,
was composed of chosen troops, which having
grown old in service in that country, where every
town was fortified, and every castle capable of be-
ing defended, were perfeEtly acquainted with the
manner of carrying on war there. By their va.
lour, and his own good conduct, Briffac not only
defeated all the attempts of the Imperialists, but
added new conquests to the territories of which he
was formerly master. Alva, after having boasted,
with his usual arrogance, that he would drive the
French out of Piedmont, in a few weeks, was
obliged to retire into winter-quarters, with the
mortification of being unable to preserve entire that
part of the country of which the Emperor had hi-
therto kept possession .

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
were inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor
King of France being able to bring into the field
an army strong enough to undertake any enter-

I Thuan, lib. xv. 529, Guichenon Hist. dc Savoyei
tom. i. 670.p

pnze

prize of moment. But what Charles wanted in n O°° K
force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold strata- _-,
gem, the success of which would have been A , i-
equal to that of the most vigorous campaign. racyto be-

tray Metz

During the liege of Metz, Leonard, Father Guar- to he Im-
dian of a convent of Franciscans in that city, P"1,"'.n
had insinuated himself far into the esteem and
favour of the Duke of Guise, by his attachment
to the French. Being a man of an active and in-
triguing fpirir, he had been extremely useful both
in animating the inhabitants to sustain with pa-
tience all the hardships of the siege, and in pro-
curing intelligence of the enemies designs and
motions. The merit of those important services,
together with the warm recommendations of the
Duke of Guise, secured him such high confi-
dence with Vielleville, who was appointed gover-
nor of Metz when Guise left the town, that he
was permitted to converse or correspond with
whatever persons he thought fit, and nothing that
he did created any suspicion. This monk, from
the levity natural to bold and projecting adven-
turers; or from resentment against the French,
who had not bestowed on him such rewards as
he thought due to his own merit; or tempted
by the unlimited confidence which was placed
in him, to imagine that he might carry on and
accomplish any scheme with perfect security,
formed a design of betraying Metz to the Im-
perialilts.

M4 Hs

B 0 0 K HE communicated, his intention to the Queen.
- -- dowager of Hungary, who governed the Low-
Ths^n Countries in the name of her brother. She ap-
of it. proving, without any scruple, an act of treachery,

from which the Emperor might derive such fig-
nal advantage, assisted the Father Guardian in
concerting the most proper plan for ensuring its
success. They agreed, that the Father Guar-
'dian should endeavour to gain his monks to con-
cur in promoting the design; that he should in-
troduce into the convent a certain number of
chosen soldiers, disguised in the habit of friars;
that when every thing was ripe for execution, the
governor of Thionville should march towards
Metz in the night with a confideaable body
of troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts;
that while the garrison was employed in refit-
ing the assailants, the monks Ihould set fireto
the town in different places; that the soldiers
who lay concealed should tally out of the con-
vent, and attack those who defended the ram-
parts in the rear. Amidfl the universal terror
and confusion which events so uncxpetcd would
occasion, it was not doubted but that the Im-
perialills might become malters of the town. As
a recoinpence for this service the Father Guardian
stipulated that he should be appointed bilhop of
Metz, and ample rewards were promised to fuich of
his monks as should be most active in co-operating
with him.

'1llE

THE Father Guardian accomplished what he B 0 K

XI.

had undertaken to perform with great secrecy and _
dispatch. By his authority and arguments, as well itlp5,o5g,.
as by the profpe: of wealth or honours which he
ser before his monks, he prevailed on all of them
toenter into the conspiracy. He introduced into
the convent, without being fufpeated, as many fol-
diersas were thought sufficient. The governor of
Thionville, apprized in due time of the design, had
aflembled a proper number of troops for executing
it; and the moment approached, which probably
would have wrested from Henry the most important
of all his conquests.

BUT, happily for France, on the very day that Is dircover-
was fixed for striking the blow, Vielleville, an d
able and vigilant officer, received information
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionville,
tiat certain Franciscan friars retorted frequently
thither, and were admitted to many private con-
ferences with the governor, who was carrying on
preparations for some military enterprize with
great dispatch, but with a moit mysterious
ecrecy. This was sufficient to awaken Vielle-
ville's fuipicions. \Vithout communicating there
toany perlbn, he instantly visited the convent of
FIancillcats detected the soldiers who were con-
cealed there; and forced them to discover as
much as they knew concerning the nature of the
teterprize. The Father Guardian, who had gone

7 to

o o K to Thionville that he might put the las handtohis

XI.,, machinations, was seized at the gate as he returned;
'5J55 and he, in order to save himself from the rack, re.

vealed all the circumstances of the conspiracy.

A body of VIELLEVILLE, not satisfied with having seized
impdeaifel' the traitors, and having frustrated their schemes,

was solicitous to take advantage of the discoveries
which he had made, so as to be revenged on the
Imperialists. For this purpose he marched out
with the best troops in his garrison, and placing
these in ambush near the road, by which the Father
Guardian had informed him that the governorof
Thionville would approach Metz, he fell upon the
Imperialists with great fury, as they advanced in
perfect security, without fufpeaing any danger to
be near. Confounded at this sudden attack, by an
enemy whom they expected to surprise, they made
little resistance; and a great part of the troops em.
ployed in this service, among whom were many
persons of diftinaion, was killed or taken prisoners.
Before next morning, Vielleville returned to Metz
in triumph.

The con- No resolution was taken for some time con-
ppiraore. cerning the fate of the Father Guardian and his

monks, the framers and conductors of this dan-
gerous conspiracy. Regard for the honour of a
body so numerous and refpeaable as the Francis-
cans, and unwillingness to afford a fubje& of

triumph

triumph to the enemies of the Romish church by B 0°°

o

their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this delay. _
But at length, the necessity of infli&ing exem- 'sss.
plary punilhment upon them, in order to deter
others from venturing to commit the fame crime,
became so evident, that orders were issued to pro-
ceed to their trial. The guilt was made apparent
by the clearest evidence; and sentence of death
was passed upon the Father Guardian, together
with twenty monks. On the evening previous to
the day fixed for their execution, the gaoler took
them out of the dungeons in which they had
hitherto been confined separately, and {hut them
all up in one great room, that they might con-
fess their fins one to another, and join together in
preparing for a future slate. But as soon as they
were left alone, instead of employing themselves
in the religious exercises suitable to their con-
dition, they began to reproach the Father Guar-
dian, and four of the senior monks who had been
most active in seducing them, for their inordi-
nate ambition, which had brought such misery
on them, and such disgrace upon their order.
From reproaches they proceeded to curses and
execrations, and at last, in a frenzy of rage and
derpair, they fell upon them with such violence,
that they murdered the Father Guardian on the
spot, and so disabled the other four, that it be-
came necessary to carry them next morning in a
cart, together with the dead body of the Father
Gurdclian, to the place of execution. Six of the

2 youngest

Bo o OK youngest were pardoned, the reft suffered the pu
ok- k-_ nifhment which their crime merited .

1555-

A frutrlef THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the leng
negociation of the war, carried it on in this languifiin
in order to
eitabiih manner, neither of them shewed any difpofitio
peace. to liften to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pol

indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming hi
piety and humanity, to re-eftablilh concord amon
the Princes of Christendom. He had not onl
persuaded his mistress, the Queen of Englan
to enter warmly into his sentiments, and to offe
her mediation to the contending powers, but ha
prevailed both on the Emperor and King o
France to fend their plenipotentiaries to a villa
between Gravelines and Ardres. He himsel
together with Gardiner bishop of Winchester, re
paired thither in order to preside as mediators
the conferences which were to be held for adjuf
ing all the points in difference. But thoug
each of the monarchs committed this negociatio
to some of their ministers, in whom they place
the greatest confidence, it was soon evident tha
they came together with no sincere desire of ac
Mad) i. commodation. Each proposed articles so extra

vagant that they could have no hopes of thei
being accepted. Pole, after exerting in vai
all his zeal and address, in order to perfuadd

'I Thuan. lib. xv. p. 522. Belcar. Cor. Rer. Gal. 866,

Memoirs du Marcch. Viellcville, par M. Charloix, tomi. i'
p. 249 &c. p. 347. Par. 1757. them

them to relinquilh such extravagant demands, and B O 0 K
to content to the substitution of more equal con- .--...
ditions, became sensible of the folly of wafting '555,
jime, in attempting to re-establish concord be-
tween those, whom their obflinacy rendered irre-
concilable, broke off the conference, and returned
to England '.

DURING these tranfaeions in other parts of AfFirs of
Europe, Germany enjoyed such profound tran- Grmin"'
quillity, as afforded the Diet full leisure to deli-
berate, and to establish proper regulations cbn-
cerning a point of the greatest consequence to the
internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty of
Paflau in one thousand five hundred and fifty-two,
ithad been referred to the next Diet of the Em-
pire to confirm and perseEt the plan of religious
pacification, which was there agreed upon. The
terror and confusion with which the violent com-
motions excited by Albert of Brandenburg had
filled Germany, as well as the constant atten-
tion which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the
affairs of Hungary, had hitherto prevented the
holding a Diet, though it had been summoned,
soon after the conclusion of the treaty, to meet ac
Augiburg.

BUT as a Diet was now necessary on many ac- nicth. Iit
counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this .rld'
year had repaired to Augsburg. Though few of "",l,r

r0 L.)oo~ o fpee;cii in it.

Thuan. lib. xv. p. 523. Mem. Ide Ribier, tom. ii.
P. 6 3.

the

B o0 K the Princes were present either in person or b

X-I.-' their deputies, he opened the assembly by
555ss speech, in which he proposed a termination of th

dissensions to which the new tenets and contro
verfies with regard to religion had given rife, no
only as the first and great business of the Die
but as the point which both the Emperor and h
had most at heart. He represented the innume
rable obstacles which the Emperor had to fur
mount before he could procure the convocatio
of a general council, as well as the fatal accident
which had for some time retarded, and had a
]aft suspended the consultations of that assembly.
He observed, that experience had already taugh
them how vain it was to expect any remedy for
evils, which demanded immediate redress from a
general council, the assembling of which would
either be prevented, or its deliberations be inter-
rupted by the dissensions and hostilities of the
Princes of Christendom: That a national council
in Germany, which, as some imagined, might
be called with greater ease, and deliberate with
more perseEt security, was an assembly of an un-
precedented nature, the jurifdition of which was
uncertain in its extent, and the form of its pro-
ceedings undefined: That in his opinion there
remained but one method for composing their un-
happy differences, which, though it had been
often tried without success, might yet prove es-
fectual if it were attempted with a better and more
pacific spirit than had appeared on former occa-
sions, and that was to choose a few men of learn-

ing,

ing, abilities, and moderation, who, by difcufling B O o K-
the disputed articles, in an amicable conference, _,
might explain them in such a manner as to bring '555'
the contending parties either to unite in sentiment,
or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, Sufptcions
and dispersed over the Empire, revived the fears the Pro-f
andjealoufies of the Protestants; Ferdinand, they testa"e.
observed with much surprise, had not once men-
tioned, in his address to the Diet, the treaty of
Paffau, the stipulations which they confidered as
the great security of their religious liberty. The
suspicions to which this gave rife were confirmed
by the accounts which they daily received of the
extreme severity with which Ferdinand treated their
Protestant brethren in his hereditary dominions;
and, as it was natural to confider his actions as
the surest indication of his intentions, this dinmi-
niled their confidence in those pompous profeflions
of moderation and of zeal for the re-establishment
of concord, to which his practice seemed to be so
repugnant.
THE arrival of the cardinal Morone, whom the Therein-

creased by

Pope had appointed to attend the Diet as his thearrival
nuncio, completed their conviction, and left them frolthe
no room to doubt that some dangerous machi- Diet°'.
nation was forming against the peace or safety
of the Protestant church. Julius, elated with
the unexpeced return of the English nation from
apoftacy, began to flatter himself, that the lpirit

of

B °0 K of mutiny and revolt having now spent its forc

XI.
-- - the happy period was come when the churc
1555 might relume its ancient authority, and be obey.

ed by the people with the fame tame fubmiion
as formerly. Full of these hopes he had fen
Morone to Augsburg, with inftruftions to em
ploy his eloquence to excite the Germans t
imitate the laudable example of the English,
and his political address in order to prevent any
decree of the Diet to the. detriment of the catho.
lic faith. As Morone inherited from his father,
the chancellor of Milan, uncommon talents for
negociation and intrigue, he could hardly have
failed of embarrassing the measures of the Pro-
teftants in the Diet, or of defeating whatever
they aimed at obtaining in it for their farther
security.
Thedeath BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from

Jui. all the danger which they had reason to apprehend

from Morone's pretence. Julius, by abandoning
himself to pleasures and amusements, no less
unbecoming his age than his charaaer, having
contracted such habits of dissipation, that any
serious occupation, especially if attended with
difficulty, became an intolerable burden to him,
had long refilted the solicitations of his nephew
to hold a confiflory, because he expected there a
violent opposition to his fchcmes in favour of that
young man. But when all the pretexts which he
could invent for eluding this requcft were ex-
haufled, and at the fame time his indolent aver-

sion

sion to business continued to grow upon him, he B o
feigned indifpofitiorl rather than yield to his ne- _-
phew's importunity, and that he might give the 1555.
deceit a.greater colour of probability, he not only
confined himself to his apartment, but changed his
usual diet and manner of life. By persisting too
long in afting this ridiculbus part, he contrated a
real disease, of Which he died in a feW days, leav-
ing his infamous minion the Cardinal de Monte March23.
to bear his name, and to disgrace the dignity which
he had conferred upon him m. As soon as Morone Thenuncio

lets out for

heard of his death, he set out abruptly from Rome.
Augsburg, where he had resided only a few days,
that he might be present at the eletion of a new
Pontiff.
ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being Ferdinand's

reasons for
thus removed, the Protestants' soon became fen- wifhingto

fatdify the

lible that their conjectures concerning Ferdinand's Proteflants.
intentions, however specious, were ill-founded,
and that he had, no thoughts of violating the
articles favourable to them in the treaty of Paffau.
Charles, from the time that Maurice had defeated
all his schemes in the Empire, and overturned
the great system of religious and civil defpotifi,
which he had almost established there, gave
little attention to the internal government of
Germany, and permitted his brother to pursue

" Onuphr. Panvinius de -Vitis Pontificum, p. 3zo.
TI"an lib. xv. 517.
\Tr. 1 V. N whatever

bo o
0 whatever measures he judged most salutary and

X!.

_
XI expedient. Ferdinand, less ambitious and en-
, terprifing than the Emperor, inread of resuming

a plan, which he, with power and resources so
far superior, had failed of accomplishing, en.
deavoured to attach the Princes of the Empire
to his family by an administration uniformly
moderate and equitable. To this he gave, at
present, particular attention, because his fitua-
tion at this juncture rendered it necessary to court
their favour and support with more than usual
assiduity.

Charles had CHARLES had again resumed his favourite prd-
elfunmed ahis je of acquiring the Imperial crown for his son
ering the Philip, the prosecution of which, the reception it
eth ire,. had met with when firfl proposed had obliged him

to suspend, but had not induced him to relinquish.
This led him warmly to renew his request to his
brother, that he would accept of some compensation
for his prior right of fucceflion, and sacrifice that
to the grandeur of the house of Aiftria. Ferdi-
nand, who was as little disposed as formerly to
give such an extraordinary proof of felf-denial,
being sensible that, in order to defeat this scheme,
not only the most inflexible firmness on his part,
but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the
Empire in behalf of his title, were requifte;
was willing to purchase their favour by gratifying
them in every point that they deemed intererling
or eiffntial.

AT

AT the fame time he stood in need of immediate B O K
and extraordinary aid from the Germanic body, as
the Turks, after having wrested from him great ThesSurk'
part of his Hungarian territories, were ready to at- wcready
tack the provinces still fubje& to his authority Hungary,
with a formidable army, against which he could
bring no equal force into the field., For this aid
from Germany he could not hope, if the internal.
peace of the Empire were not established on a foun-
dation solid in itself, and which ihould appear, even
to the Protetants, so secure and so permanent, as
might not only allow them to engage in a distant
war with safety, but might encourage them to acd
in it with vigour.

A STEP taken by the Protefants themselves, Ueisaalari
alhort time after the opening of the Diet, ren- dpk, ,
dered him still more cautious of giving them any by fthnt,,o
new cause of offencei As soon as the publica-
tion of Ferdinand's speech awakened the fears
and suspicions which have been mentioned, the
Eleftors of Saxony and Brandenburg, together
with the Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naum-
burgh, and confirming the ancient treaty of con-
fraternity which had long united their families,
they added to it a new article, by which the
contradting parties bound themselves to adhere to
the confefflion of Augsburg, and to maintain the
ldotrine which it contained in their respective
dominions ".

) Chytr;ri Saxonia, 42q.

N 2 Farn

B o O K FERDINAND, influenced by all these confider-
.-.v-- . ations, employed his utmost address in conducting
,Ferd5an the deliberations of the diet, so as not to excite the

pzalou tto jealousy of a party on whose friendship he de-
accommo- pended, and whose enmity, as they had not only

taken the alarm, but had begun to prepare for
their defence, he had so much reason to dread.
The members of the Diet readily agreed to Ser-
dinand's proposal of taking the state of religion
into consideration, previous to any other business.
But, as loon as they entered upon it, both parties
discovered all the zeal and animosity which a sub-
ject so interesting naturally engenders, and which
the rancour of controversy, together with the vi-
olence of civil war, had inflamed to the highest
pitch.

Thepreten- THE Protestants contended, that the security
Catholic's which they claimed in consequence of the treaty
andPt'otci- of Paffau should extend, without limitation, to

all who had hitherto embraced the doctrine of
Luther, or who should hereafter embrace it. The
Catholics, having first of all afierted the Pope's
right as the flipreme and final judge with refpeR
to all articles of faith, declared, that though, on
account of the present situation of the Empire, and
for the fake of peace, they were willing to confirm
the toleration granted by the treaty of Paffau, to
fulch as lhad aleady adopted the new opinions;
they mutil infil that this indulgence should not be
extended either to thote cities which had con-
folrinelL to the Intelrim, or co such ecclefiasics

as ihould for the future apostatize from the church B 00 KIa
of Rome. It was no easy matter to reconcile such -
opposite pretensions, which were supported, on '555
each fide, by the most elaborate arguments, and
the greatest acrimony of expression, that the abili-
ties or zeal of theologians long exercised in difpu-
tation could suggest. Ferdinand however, by his
address and perseverance; by softening rome things
on each fide; by putting a favourable meaning
upon others; by representing inceflantly the ne-
cefity as well as the advantages of concord; and
by threatening, on some occasions, when all other
considerations were disregarded, to dissolve the Diet,
brought them at length to a conclusion in which
they all agreed.

CONFORMABLY to this, a Recess was framed, Sept. z5.

approved of, and published with the usual for- ofreigion
malities. The following are the chief articles cltablilhed.
which it contained: That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confession of Augsburg, flall be permitted to
profess the docrine and exercise the worship
which it authorises, without interruption or mo-
lcfiation fiom the Emperor, the King of the Ro-
mans, or any power or person whatobever; That
the Protestants, on their part, flall give no dif-
quiet to the Princes and States who adhere to the
tenets and rites of the church of Rome; That,
for the future, no attempt hfall be made towards
ltiminating religious differences, but by the

N 3 gentle

B oXO K gentle and pacific methods of persuasion and con-

'_*_ ference; That the Popish ecclesiastics shall claim
s no spiritual jurifdiaion in such states as receive the

Confession of Augsburg; That such as had seized
-the benefices or revenues of the church, previous to
the treaty of Paffau, shall retain possession of them,
and be liable to no prosecution in the Imperial
chamber on that account; That the supreme civil
power in every state shall have right to establish
what form of doctrine and worship it shall deem
proper, and if any of its fubjeQs refuse to conform
to these, shall permit them to remove with all their
effects whithersoever they shall please; That if any
prelate or ecclesiastic shall hereafter abandon the
Romish religion, he shall inflantly relinquish his
diocese or benefice, and it Ihall be lawful for those
in whom the right of nomination is vested, to pro-
ceed immediately to an election, as if the office
were vacant by death or translation, and to appoint
a successor of undoubted attachment to the ancient
system .

Reflraeonq Such are the capital articles in this famous
refs ofhe Recess, which is the basis of religious peace in
pcn,,iop,. Germany, and the bond of union among its va-

rious fates, the sentiments of which are so ex-
tremely different with respect to points the most
interefling as well as important. In our age and
nation, to which the idea of Toleration is fa,

Slcid. 6zo. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. 1l. 16i.

miliarj

miliar, and its beneficial effects well known, it may B OX K
seem strange, that a method of terminating their '---
dissensions, so suitable to the mild and charitable '55s
spirit of the Christian religion, did not sooner occur
to the contending parties. But this expedient,
however salutary, was so repugnant to the senti-
ments and practice of Christians during many ages,
that it did not lie obvious to discovery. Among
the ancient heathens, all whose deities were local
and tutelary, diversity of sentiment concerning the
objeEt or rites of religious worship seems to have
been no source of animosity, because the acknow-
ledging veneration to be due to any one God, did
not imply denial of the existence or the power of
any other God; nor were the modes and rites of
worship established in one country incompatible
with those which other nations approved of and
observed. Thus the errors in their system of
theology were of such a nature as to be productive
of concord; and notwithstanding the amazing num-
ber of their deities, as well as the infinite variety
of their ceremonies, a sociable and tolerating
spirit subsisted almost universally in the pagan
world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared one

Supreme Being to be the sole object of religious
veneration, and prescribed the form Qfworflip most
acceptable to him, whoever admitted the truth of
it held, of consequence, every other ilyllcne of re-
ligion, as a deviation from what was efit:bliihed
by divine authority, to be false and impious.

N 4 l-Ielnc

B 0 0 K Hence arose the zeal of the firit converts to the
L-_J Christian faith in propagating its do&trines, and

'55$5 the ardour with which they laboured to overturn

every other form of wolrfhip. They employed,
however, for this purpose no methods but such
as suited the nature of religion. By the force of
powerful arguments, they convinced the under-
standings of men by the charms of superior
virtue, they allured and captivated their hearts.
At length the civil power declared in favour of
Christianity; and though numbers, imitating the
example of their superiors, crowded into the
church, many st-ill adhered to their ancient super-
ftitions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the mi-
nifters of religion, whose zeal was fRill unabated,
though their fanótity and virtue were much
diminished, forgot so far the nature of their own
mission, and of the arguments which they ought
to have employed, that they armed the Imperial
power against these unhappy men, and as they
could not persuade, they tried to compel them to
believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among Christians themselves, and the fame un-
hallowed weapons which had first been used
against the enemies of their religion, were turned
againlt each other. Every zealous disputant en-
deavoured to interest the civil magistrate in his
cautli, and each in his turn employed the secular
arm to crufl or to exterminate his opponents.

Not

Not long after, the bishops of Rome put in their B o K
claim to infallibility in explaining articles of faith, -
and deciding points in controversy; and, bold as '555s
the pretension was, they, by their artifices and
perseverance, imposed on the credulity of man-
kind, and brought them to recognise it. To
doubt or to deny any doftrine to which these un-
erring inftrutors had given the sanCtion of their
approbation, was held to be not only a resisting
oftruth, but an at of rebellion against their iacred
authority: and the secular power, of which by
various arts they had acquired the absolute direc-
tion, was instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during
many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force ; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth, were forgotten,
the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the idea
of toleration, but even the word itself, in the
sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A right
to extirpate error by force, was universally al-
lowed to be the prerogative of lfch as poffelfed
the knowledge of truth ; and as each party of
Chlrilians believed that they had got polinffion of
this invaluable attainment, they all claimed and
exerciscd, as far as they were able, the rights
w"Iich it was supposed to convey. The Roman
Catholics, as their system riefted on the decisions
1 tn infallible judge, never doubted that truth was

~I ~on

B 0 0 K on their fide, and openly called on the civil
,o- v. power to repel the impious and heretical innova.
555' tors who had risen up against it. The Protestants,

no lets confident that their doctrine was well
founded, required, with equal ardour, the Princes
of their party to check such as presumed to im-
pugn it, Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the
founders of the reformed church in their refpec-
tive countries, as far as they had power and op.,
portunity, inflited the fame punishments upon!
such as called in qugftion any article in their creeds,
which were denouoted against their own disciples
by the church of Rome. To their followers, and
perhaps to their opponents, it would have appeared
a symptom of diffidence in the goodness of their
cause, or an acknowledgment that it was not well
founded, if they had not employed in its defence
all those means which it was supposed truth had a
fight to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth cen-

tury before Toleration, under its present form,
was admitted first into the republic of the United
Provinces, and from thence introduced into Eng-
land. Long experience of the calamities flow-
ing from mutual persecution, the influence of
free government, the light and humanity acquired
by the progress of science, together with the pru-
dence and authority of the civil magistrate, were
all requisite in order to establish a regulation, so
repugnant to the ideas which all the diffirent
seas had adopted, from mistaken conceptions con-

ocl W rai

terning the nature of religion and the rights of B ,00 -
truth, or which all of them had derived from
the erroneous maxims established by the church of 'sss5
Rome.
THE Recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was Advantages

o£ the rti-

founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti- gious pea
ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry, to thedL.
or the nature of Toleration. It was nothing
more than a scheme of pacification, which poli-
tical considerations alone had suggested to the
contending parties, and regard for their mutual
tranquillity and safety had rendered necessary.
Of this there can be no stronger proof than an
article in the Recess itself, by which the benefits
of the pacification are declared to extend only to
the Catholics on the pne fide, and to such as ad-
hered to the confefion of Augsburg on the other.
The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin remained,
in consequence of that exclusion, without any
protection from the rigour of the laws denounced
against heretics. Nor did they obtain any legal
security, until the treaty of Westphalia, near a
century after this period, provided, that they
lhould be admitted to enjoy, in as ample a man-
ner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and pro-
tetion which the Recess of Augsburg affords.

BuT if the followers of Luther were highly ,ni to ,ic,
pleased with the security which they acquired by Cd0ol"'is
this Recels, such as adhered to the ancient fyf-eem
!iald no less reason to be satisfied with that article

in

B 0 X K in it, which preserved entire to the Roman Ca.

XI.
' ---- tholic church the benefices of such ecclefiafics

s- as should hereafter renounce its docrines. This

article, known in Germany by the name of the
EJcclefiajZical ReJervation, was apparently so con.:
formable to the idea and to the rights of an efta-
blifhed church, and it seemed so equitable to|
prevent revenues, which had been originally ap.
propriated for the maintenance of persons attached
to a certain system, from being alienated to
any other purpose, that the Protestants, though
they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to
relinquish their opposition to it. As the Roman
Catholic Princes of the Empire have taken care
to fee this article exactly observed in every cafe
where there was an opportunity of putting it in
execution, it has proved the great barrier of the
Romiff church in Germany against the Reforma-
tion; and as, from this period, the fame tempta-
tion of interest did not allure ecclefiallics to
relinquish the established system, there have been
few of that order, who have loved truth with such
disinterested and ardent affection, as, for its fiake,
to abandon the rich benefices which they had in
poffefion.
MrrceIius DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cer-

,cic vino, Cardinal of Santo Ci-oce, was elected Pope
Ayri 9' in room of Julius. I-e, in imitation of Adrian,

did not change his name on being exalted to the
h1i cha. papal chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in pu-

racr. rity of intention, while lie excelled him much in

thel

the arts of government, and still more in know- B 00 K
ledge of the state and genius of the papal court;
ashehad capacity to discern what reformation it '555'
needed, as well as what it could bear; such re-
gulations were expected from his virtue and wis-
dom, as would have removed many of its grossest
and most flagrant corruptions, and have contri-
buted towards reconciling to the church such as,
from indignation at thele enormities, had aban-
doned its communion. But this excellent Pontiff
was only shown to the church, and immediately
snatched away. The confinement in the conclave dis death.
had impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious
ceremonies upon his accession, together with too in-
tense and anxious application of mind to the schemes
of improvement which he meditated, exhausted so
entirely the vigour of his feeble constitution, that
he sickened on the twelfth, and died on the twentieth
day after his election P.
ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, pe- Theeleeior.

of Paul IV.

coliar to conclaves, were displayed in that which
was held for electing a successor to Marcellus;
the Cardinals of the Imperial and French factions
labouring, with equal ardour, to gain the necef-
liry number of suffrages for one of their own
party. But, after a struggle of no long duration,
though conducted with all the warmlth and eager-
Iefs natural to men contending for so great an
Objeft, they united in chufing John Peter Caralfa, May 23.
P Thuan. 520, F. Paul, 365. Onuph. Panvin. 321, &c.

the

0 01 K the eldest member of the sacred college, and
XI.

-. the son of Count Montorioi a nobleman of art
5?s' illustrious family in the kingdom of Naples,

The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese,
who favoured his pretenGionsy Caraffa's own merit,
and perhaps his great age, which soothed all the,
disappointed candidates with the near profpe&f
of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing about
this speedy union of suffrages. In order to teffify
his refpeat for the memory of Paul III. by whom
he had been created Cardinal, as well as his grati-
tude to the family of Farnese, he assumed the name
of Paul IV.
;s trre and THE choice of a prelate of such a singular cha-

raaer, and who had long held a course extremely
different from that which usually led to the dig-
nity now conferred upon him, filled the Italians,
who had nearef' access to observe his manners and
deportment, with aftoniflmnent, and kept them in
suspense and solicitude with regard to his future
conduct. Paul, though born in a rank of life
which, without any other merit, might have fe-
cured to him the highest ecclesiastical prefer-
ments, Iad, from his early years, applied to ltudy
with all the assiduity of a man who had nothing
but his personal attainments to render him con-
fpicuous. By means of this, he not only ac-
quired profound ikill in scholastic theology, but
added to that a considerable knowledge of the
learned languages and of polite literature, the
fludy of which had been lately revived in Italy,

7 and

and was pursued at this time with great ardour. 1B 0 0 o;
His mind however, naturally gloomy and severe,
was more formed to imbibe the four spirit of the 's5.
former, than to receive any tincture of elegance
orliberality of sentiment from the latter; so that
he acquired rather the qualities and passions of a
reclufi ecclesiastic, than the talents necessary for
the conduc of great affairs. Accordingly, where
heentered into orders, although several rich be-
nefices were bestowed upon him, and he was early
employed as nuncio in different courts, he soon
became difguffed with that course of life, and lan-
guifhed to be in a situation more suited to his taste
and temper. With this view, he resigned at once
all his ecclefiaflical preferments, and having infti-
tuted an order of regular prieffs, whom he denomi-
nated Theatines, from the name of the archbishopric
which he had held, he associated himself as a mem-
ber of their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which he had fubjeEted them, and preferred
the solitude of a monastic life, with the honour of
being the founder of a new order, to all the great
objects which the court of Rome presented to his
ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until
Paul III. induced by the fame of his sanctity and
knowledge, called him to Rome, in order to con.
fult with him concerning the measures which
might be most proper and effcEual for sip-
prelling heresy, and re-eflablifhing the ancient
authority of the chuich. 1-laving thus allured

him

B °0 KI him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his

XI.
v----» entreaties, and partly by his authority, prevailed

55 on him to accept of a Cardinal's hat, to re-affume

the benefices which he had resigned, and to re-
turn again into the usual path of ecclesiastical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquished.
But, during two fucceflive Pontificates, under the
first of which the court of Rome was the most
artful and interested, and under the second the
nmoft dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained
his monastic austerity. He was an avowed and
bitter enemy not only of all innovation in opi-
nion, but of every irregularity in practice; he
was the chief instrument in eftablilhing the for-
midable and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in
the papal territories; he appeared a violent ad-
vocate on all occasions for the jurifdition and
discipline of the church, and a fevere-cenfurer of
every measure which seemed to flow from motives
of policy or interest, rather than from zeal for
the honour of the ecclesiastical order, and the
dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate of
itich a character, the Roman courtiers expected a
severe and violent Pontificate, during which the
principles of found policy would be sacrificed to
the narrow prejudices of priestly zeal; while the
people of Rome were apprehensive of feeing
the forclid and forbidding rigour of monaltic
manners fulbftituted in place of the magni-
ficence to which they had long been accuftomedl
in the palpal court. These apprehensions Paul
was extremely solicitous to remove. At his firit

entrance

entrance upon the adminiflration, he laid aside that B Oo K
auflerity which had hitherto distinguished his per-
fonand family, and when the master of his house- The si,5
hold inquired in what manner he would chute to tepsifhis

adminiftra.

live, he haughtily replied, " As becomes a great tion.
Prince." He ordered the ceremony of his coro-
nation to be conduEted with more than usual pomp;
and endeavoured to render himself popular by fe-
veral ads of liberality and indulgence towards the
inhabitants of Rome q.

His natural severity of temper, however, would TheexcerJ
have soon returned upon him, and would have tachment tt
justified the conjeaures of the courtiers, as well phie,.
as the fears of the people, if he had not, imme-
diately after his election, called to Rome two of
his nephews, the sons of his brother the Count
of Montorio. The eldest he promoted to be Go-
vernor of Rome. The youngest, who had hither-
to served as a soldier of fortune in the armies of
Spain or France, and whose disposition as well as
manners were still more foreign from the clerical
characer than his profession, he created a Car-
(linal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the
second office in power and dignity which a Pope
can bePLow. These marks of favour, no less siud-
den than extravagant, he accompanied with the
mall: unbounded confidence and attachment, and
forgctting all his former revere maxims, he icmed

Platina, p. 327. Cafalldo Vita di Paolo IV. Rom. 16i5.
Vor.. IV. 0 to

B 0 K to have no other object than tne aggrandizing o

XI.
-_--^-. his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately for
Ti isi- Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any mo-
bidiouspro- derate acquisition. They had seen the family of

Medici railed by the interest of the Popes of that
house to supreme power in Tuscany; Paul III. had,
by his abilities and address, secured the dutchies of
Parma and Placentia to the family of Farnese. They'
aimed at some establishment for themselves, no less
considerable and independent; and as they could'
not expe&t that the Pope would carry his indul.
gence towards them so far as to secularize any partl
of the patrimony of the church, they had no profJ-
peEt of attaining what they wished, but by dif-|
membering the Imperial dominions in Italy, in!
hopes of seizing some portion of them. This alone!
they would have deemed a sufficient reason for sow-!
ing the feeds of discord between their uncle and then
Emperor.

Reafonsof BUT Cardinal Caraffa had, besides, private rea-
their dirguu t:
wir:hth sons which filled him with hatred and enmity tol
Emperor the Emperor. While he served in the Spanish

troops he had not received such marks of honouri
and diftintion as he thought due to his birth and
merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had
abruptly quitted the Imperial service; and enter-
ing into that of France, he had not only met with
such a reception as soothed his vanity, and at:
tachcd him to the French interest, but by con-
trafting an intimate fiicndflip with Strozzi, who
commandeda the ltrench army in Tuscany, he had

imbibed

i

imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor as the B O o K

xi.

great enemy to the liberty and independence of --
the Italian flates. Nor was the Pope himself in- s555.
disposed to receive impressions unfavourable to the
Emperor. The opposition given to his eleEtion
by the Cardinals of the Imperial faCtion, left in his
mind deep resentment, which was heightened by the
remembrance of ancient injuries from Charles or his
ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and em- They en
ployed various devices, in order to exasperate him eienu Oh
beyond a possibility of reconciliation. They ag- 'ope from
gravated every circumstance which could be deem- tor.
ed any indication of the Emperor's diffatisfaEtion
with his promotion they read to him an inter-
cepted letter, in which Charles taxed the Cardi-
nals of his party with negligence or incapacity in
not having defeated Paul's eletion: They pre-
tended, at one time, to have discovered a con-
fpiracy formed by the Imperial minister and
Cofino di Medici against the Pope's life; they
alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a plot
for assassinating themselves. By these artifices,
they kept his mind, which was naturally violent,
and become suspicious from old age, in such per-
petual agitation, as precipitated him into measures
which otherwise he would have been the first per-
son to condemn'. He seized some of the Cardi-

' Ripamontii Hilt. Patrix, lib. iii. 1146. ap. Grxav. TheC.
v01. ii, Mem. dc Ribier, ii. 615. Adriani llltor. i. 906.

0 2 nals

B X0 K nals who were molf attached to the Emperor, and

XI.

_-~-c- confined them in the cattle of St. Angelo; he
'555. persecuted the Colonnas and other Roman barons,

the ancient retainers to the Imperial faction, with
the utmost severity; and discovering on all oc-
cafions his distrust, fear, or hatred of the Empe-
ror, he began at last to court the friendship of
the French King, and seemed willing to throw
himself absolutely upon him for support and pro-
tection.

JTnucehim THIS was the very point to which his nephews
to court the
Kinghof wished to bring him as most favourable to their
France, ambitious schemes; and as the accomplilhment

of these depended on their uncle's life, whose ad-
vanced age did not admit of losing a moment
unnecessarily in negociations, inflead of treating
at second-hand with the French ambassador at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a
person of confidence diretly to the court of
France, with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rejeEted. He proposed an
alliance offensive and defensive between Henry
and the Pope; that they flhould attack the dutchy
of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with their
united forces; and if their arms should prove fuc-
cefsful, that the ancient republican form of go-
vernmcnt fhlould be re-eftablifecd in the former,
and the invcfliture of the latter fiould be granted
to one of the French Kin's sons, after reserving
a certain territory which fliould be annexed to the
patrimony of the church, together with an inde-

pendentlt

pendent and princely establishment for each of the B °o K
pope's nephews.

1555,
THE King, allured by these specious projecs, Confable

Montmo-

gave a most favourable audience to the envoy. rencyop-
But when the matter was proposed in council, the lince with
constable Montmorency, whose natural caution the Pope's
and aversion to daring enterprises increased with
age and experience, remonstrated with great ve-
hemence againif the alliance. He put Henry in
mind how fatal to France every expedition into
Italy had been during three successive reigns, and
if such an enterprise had proved too great for
the nation even when its strength and finances
were entire, there was no reason to hope for fuc-
cess, if it ihould be attempted now, when both
were exhausted by extraordinary efforts during
wars, which had lasted, with little interruption,
almost half a century. He represented the ma-
nifeft imprudence of entering into engagements
with a Pope of fourscore, as any system which
refted on no better foundation than his life, mult
be extremely precarious, and upon the event of
his death, which could not be distant, the face
of things, together with the inclination of the
Italian States, must instantly change, and the
whole weight of the war be left upon the King
alione. To these considerations he added the near
profpcEt which they now had of a final accom-
modation with the Lmperor, who, having taken
the resolution of retiring from the world, wified
to tranfinit his kingdoms in peace to his son; and

03 " he

B ^0 K he concluded with representing the absolute cer-

--V tainty of drawing the arms of England upon France,
1555. if it should appear that the re-eflablifhment of tran-

quillity in Europe was prevented by the ambition
of its Monarch.

Th- Duke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and
of Guise
favouI it. urged by a minister of great authority, would pro-

bably have determined the King to decline any
connexion with the Pope. But the Duke of
Guise, and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain,
who delighted no less in bold and dangerous un-
dertakings than Montmorency shunned them, de-
clared warmly for an alliance with the Pope. The
Cardinal expected to be entrusted with the conduct
of the negociations in the court of Rome to which
this alliance would give rife; the Duke hoped to
obtain the command of the army which would
be appointed to invade Naples; and confidering
themselves as already in there stations, vast pro-
jeds opened to their aspiring and unbounded am-
bition. Their credit, together with the influence
of the King's mistress, the famous Diana of
Poitiers, who was, at that time, entirely devoted
to the interest of the family of Guise, more than
counterbalanced all Montmorency's prudent re-
monstrances, and prevailed on an inconsiderate
Prince to liften to the overtures of the Pope's
envoy.

CArdinalnf THE Cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected,
Inrrain f'nt
,onciJ,= was immediately lent to Rome with full powers
will) tha
hPal. !.

to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures B o 0 K
for carrying it into execution. Before he could _
reach that city, the Pope, either from refleting '555
on the danger and uncertain issue of all military
operations, or through the address of the Impe-
rial ambassador, who had been at great pains to
soothe him, had not only begun to lose much of
the ardour with which he had commenced the ne-
gociation with France, but even discovered great
unwillingness to continue it. In order to rouse
him from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle
his former rage, his nephews had recourse to the
arts which they had already praaifed with so much
success. They alarmed him with new reprefenta-
tions of the Emperor's hostile intentions, with fresh
accounts which they had received of threats uttered
againrt him by the Imperial ministers, and with
new discoveries which they pretended to have made
ofconfpiracies formed, and just ready to take effect
against his life.
BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, Paul en-

raged at the
would not have operated a second time with the proceedings

of the Diet

fame force, nor have made the impreffon which of^ugf'
they wished, if Paul had not been excited by an burg'
offence of that kind which he was least able to
bear. He received advice of the Recess of the
Diet of Augsburg, and of the toleration which
was thereby granted to the Protestants; and this
threw him at once into such transports of paflion
againit the Emperor and King of the Romans, as
Carried him headlong into all the violent measures

0 I of

B o o K of his nephews. Full of high ideas with rerpea

XI.
,- __ to the papal prerogative, and animated with the
'555' fiercest zeal against heresy, he confidered the li-

berty of deciding concerning religious matters,
which had been assumed by an assembly composed
chiefly of laymen, as a presumptuous and unpar.
donable encroachment on that jurifdition which
belonged to him alone; and regarded the indul-
gence which had been given to the Protestants as
an impious ad of that power which the Diet had
usurped. He complained loudly of both to the
Imperial ambassador. He infilted that the Recess
of the Diet should immediately be declared illegal
and void. He threatened the Emperor and King
of the Romans, in cafe they should either refute
or delay to gratify him in this particular, with
the severest effects of his vengeance. He talked
in a tone of authority and command which might
have fuiced a pontiff of the twelfth century, when a
papal decree was sufficient to have shaken, or to have
overturned, the throne of the greatest Monarch in
Europe; but which was altogether improper in that
age, especially when addrelTed to the minister of a
Prince who had so often made pontiffs more formi-
dable than Paul feel trle weight of his power. The
am baflkIdor, however, heard all his extravagant
propositions and menaces with much patience,
aiel cndeavouled to soothe him, by putting him in
mlind of the extreme dif'refs to which the Emperor
hald bcal

I red uced at Inflpruck, of the engagements

wlich he had come under to the Protedfants,
in order to extricate hiimfelf, of the necefity

7 of

of fulfilling these, and of accommodating his B O o K
conduct to the situation of his affairs. But i
weighty as these considerations were, they made a555
Do impression on the mind of the haughty and
bigoted pontiff, who instantly replied, That he
would absolve him by his apostolic authority
from those impious engagements, and even com-
mand him not to perform them; that in carrying
on the cause of God and of the church, no re-
gard ought to be had to the maxims of worldly
prudence and policy; and that the ill success of
the Emperor's schemes in Germany might juffly
be deemed a mark of the divine displeasure against
him, on account of his having paid little attention
to the former, while he regulated his conduct en-
tirely by the latter. Having said this, he turned
from the ambassador abruptly without waiting for
a reply.

His nephews took care to applaud and cherish and exarpe-
these sentiments, and easily wrought up his arro- et'd by

h i

gant mind, fraught with all the monkish ideas
concerning the extent of the papal supremacy,
to such a pitch of resentment against the house
of Austria, and to such an high opinion of his
own power, that he talked continually of his
being the successor of those who had deposed
Kings and Emperors; that he was exalted as head
over them all, and would trample such as op-
'ofecl him under his feet. In this disposition the Dcr. I.
Cardinal of ILorrain found the Pope, and easily tr"ey with
peIfuaded him to sign a treaty, which had for its Francc.

object

BOX10 K objet the ruin of a Prince, againfl whom he was

.-._.A so highly exasperated. The stipulations in the
'555' treaty were much the fame as had been proposed

by the Pope's envoy at Paris; and it was agreed
to keep the whole tranfaaion secret until their
united forces should be ready to take the field '.

The Empe- DURING the negociation of this treaty at Rome
ror resolves C

t

to reign his and Paris, an event happened which seemed to
3omiulcn., render the fears that had given rife to it vain,

and the operations which were to follow upon it,
unnecessary. This was the Emperor's refigna.
tion of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip;
together with his resolution to withdraw entirely
from any concern in business or the affairs of this
world, in order that he might spend the re-
mainder of his days in retirement and solitude.
Though it requires neither deep reflection nor ex-
traordinary discernment to discover that the state
of royalty is not exempt from cares and difap-
pointment; though most of those who are exalted
to a throne find solicitude, and satiety, and dif-
gust to be their perpetual attendants in that en- !
vied pre-eminence; yet, to descend voluntarily
from the supreme to a Subordinate station, and
to relinquifli the poffefion of power in order to
attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be
an effort too great for the human mind. Seve-
ral inflances, indeed, occur in history, of Mo-

Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 163. F. Paul, 365. Thuan. lib. xv.
5z5. lib.xvi. 540. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 609, &c.

narels

narchs who have quitted a throne, and have B 00 'c
ended their days in retirement. But they were -
either weak Princes who took this resolution '55ss
rashly, and repented of it as soon as it was taken;
or unfortunate Princes, from whose hands some
ft:onger rival had wrested their sceptre, and com-
pelled them to descend with reluctance into a
private tation. Diocletian is perhaps the only
Prince capable of holding the reins of govern-
ment, who ever resigned them from deliberate
choice, and who continued during many years to
enjoy the tranquillity of retirement without fetching
one penitent sigh, or casting back one look of
desire, towards the power or dignity which he had
abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation oTfhthmt''
lfould fill all Europe with astonishment, and figaation.
give rife, both among his contemporaries, and
among the historians of that period, to various
conjeItures concerning the motives which deter-
mined a Prince, whole ruling passion had been
uniformly the love of power, at the age of fifty-
fie, when objets of ambition continue to operate
with full force on the mind, and are pursued with
the greatest ardour, to take a resolution so singular
and unexpected. But while many authors have
imputed( it to motives so frivolous and fantastical,
as can hardly be supposed to influence any reason-
able mind; while others have imagined it to be
tle result of some profound scheme of policy;

hitto-

B 0 0 K hiflorians more intelligent, and better informed
L -.r^J neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search for myte.

*555' rious secrets of irate, where simple and obviou~

causes will fully account for the Emperor's con.
duct. Charles had been attacked early in life
with the gout, and notwithfranding all the pre.
cautions of the most flkilful physicians, the vio.
lence of the distemper increased as he advanced
in age, and the fits became every year more fre.
quent, as well as more revere. Not only
was the vigour of his conffitution broken, but
the faculties of his mind were impaired by the|
excruciating torments which he endured. Dur-l
ing the continuance of the fits, he was altogether
incapable of applying to business, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals
that he could attend to what was serious, he gave
up a great part of his time to trifling and even
childifl occupations, which served to relieve or
to anufe his mind, enfeebled and worn out with
excess of pain. Under these circumstances, the
conduft of such affairs as occurred of course, in
governing so many kingdoms, was a burden more
than fufticient; but to push forward and com-
plete the vast schemes, which the ambition of his
more active years had formed, or to keep in view
and carry on the fame great fyffem of policy,
extending to every nation in Europe, and con-,
neated with the operations of every different!
court, were functions which so far exceeded his
strength, that they oppressed and overwhelmed(

his;

his ind. As he had been long accustomed to B °o K
view the business of every department, whether I_ -
civil, or military, or ecclesiastical, with his own '555*
:ees, and to decide concerning it according to
lisown ideas, it gave him the utmost pain when
ie felt his infirmities increase so fast upon him,
thathe was obliged to commit the conduct of all
tfairs to his miniffers. He imputed every mif-
ortune which besel him, and every miscarriage
tat happened, even when the former was un-
avoidable and the latter accidental, to his inabi-
lity to take the infpeEtion of business himself.
He complained of his hard fortune, in being
opposed, in his declining years, to a rival, who
was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henry could take and execute all his resolutions
in person, he should now be reduced, both in
council and in action, to rely on the talents and
exertions of other men. Having thus grown old
before his time, he wifely judged it more decent to
conceal his infirmities in some solitude, than to ex-
pose them any longer to the public eye; and pru-
dently determined not to forfeit the fame, or
lose the acquisitions of his better years, by ftrug-
gling, with a vain obstinacy, to retain the reins
of government, when he was no longer able to
hold them with steadiness, or to guide them with
addlress *.

BuT

Dom Lcvcfque, in his memoirs of Cardinal Granvellc,

Eis a reason for the Emplror's resignation, which, as far as
lllctA, is not mentioned by any other historian. IIe sy's,

that

B o K BUT though Charles had revolved this fchemt

Xi.
A- in his mind for several years, and had commu.
cirJ .an- nicated it to his sifters the dowager Queens ol
de whi'ch France and Hungary, who not only approvedol
edit. his intention, but offered to accompany him to

whatever place of retreat he should chufe; feve
ral things had hitherto prevented his carrying i
into execution. He could not think of loadin
his son with the government of so many king

that the Emperor having ceded the government of the kin
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upo
his marriage with the Queen of England; Philip, notwith
tfanding the advice and intreaties of his father, remove
molt of the ministers and officers whom he had employedi
those countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to si
the places which they held. That he aspired openly, an
with little delicacy, to obtain a share in the administration o
affairs in the Low-Countries. That he endeavoured to thwar
the Emperor's measures, and to limit his authority, behavin
towards him sometimes with inattention, and sometimes wit
haughtiness. That Charles finding that he mutr either yiel
on every occasion to his son, or openly contend with hini,i
order to avoid either of these, which were both difagreeabl
and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution ofrefign
ing his crowns, and of retiring from the world, vol. i. p. 24
&c. Dom Levefque derived his information concerning the
curious faas, which he relates very briefly, from the origina
papers of Cardinal Granvelle. But as that vafl collecion o
papers, which has been preserved and arranged by MN
1'Abb6 Boizot of Befancon, though one of the moll valuabl
historical monuments of the fixtccnth century, and which can-
not fail of throwing much light on the tranfaclions of Charle
V. is not published, I cannot determine what degree of credit
should be given to this account of Charles's resignation. I
have therefore taken no notice of it in relating this event.

doms, i

doms, until he should attain such maturity of age, B O o K
and of abilities, as would enable him to sustain .-
that weighty burden. But as Philip had now ,555
reached his twenty-eighth year, and had been
early accustomed to business, for which he dif-
covered both inclination and capacity, it can
hardly be imputed to the partiality of paternal
affetion, that his scruples, with regard to this
point, were entirely removed; and that he thought
he might place his son, without further hesitation
or delay, on the throne which he himself was
about to abandon. His mother's situation had
been another obstruCtion in his way. For al-
though ihe had continued almost fifty years in
confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her husband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain
was still vested in her jointly with the Emperor;
her name was inserted together with his in all the
public inltruments issued in that kingdom; and
such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to
her, that they would probably have scrupled to
recognise Philip as their sovereign, unless she had
consented to afiume him as her partner on the
throne. Her utter incapacity for business rendered
it impossible to obtain her content. But her
death, which happened this year, removed this
difficulty; and as Charles, upon that event, be-
came sole monarch of Spain, it left the fucceflion
open to his son. The war with France had like-
wifc been a reason for retaining the administration
of affairs in his own hand, as he was extremely

solicitous

B O o K olicitous to have terminated it, that he might
L,-,, have given up his kingdoms to his son at peace

1555. with all the world. But as Henry had discovered

no disposition to close with any of his overtures,
and had even rejeEted proposals of peace, which
were equal and moderate, in a tone that seemed to
indicate a fixed purpose of continuing hoffilities, he
saw that it was vain to wait longer in expectation of
an event, which, however desirable, was altogether
uncertain.

The forma- As this, then, appeared to be the properjunc-
,shich he ture for executing the scheme which he had long
cecuted it meditated, Charles resolved to resign his king-

doms to his son, with a solemnity suitable to the
importance of the tranfation, and to perform
this last act of sovereignty with such formal pomp,
as might leave a lafding impression on the minds
not only of his fubjeds but of his successor.
With this view he called Philip out of England,
where the peevish temper of his Queen, which
increased with her despair of having issue, ren-
dered him extremely unhappy; and the jealousy
of the English left him no hopes of obtaining
the direction of their affairs. Having assemblcd
the States of the Low-Countries at Brussels, on
the twenty-fifth of October, Charles feated him-
self, for the last time, in the chair of slate, on
one fide of which was placed his son, and on the
other his sifter the QCeen of I-ungary, regent of
the Netherlands, with a splendid retinue of the
princes of the Empire and grandees of Spain

standing

Randing behind him. The president of the coun- B 0 x K
cil of Slanders, by his command, explained, in a ---
fe,v words, his intention in calling this extra- 1555'
ordinary meeting in the States. He then read
the instrument of resignation, by which Charles
surrendered to his son Philip all his territories,
jurisdiction, and authority in the Low-Countries,
absolving his subjects there from their oath of al-
legiance to him, which he required them to tranl-
ser to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with
the fame loyalty and zeal which they had manifested,
during so long a course of years, in support of his
go0ernment.

CHTARLES then rose from his feat, and leaning
on tie fioulder of the Prince of Orange, because
he was unable to stand without support, he ad-
drefed himself to the audience, and from a paper
which lie held in his hand, in order to assist his
memory, he recounted, with dignity, but with-
out ostentation, all the great tliings which he had
tndertaken and performed since the commence-
ment of his administration. He observed, that,
fom the fcvcnteenth year of his age, he had de-
dicated all his thoughts and attention to public
dijec&s, reserving no portion of his time for the
i;duilgcnce of his ease, and very little for the en-
,0ynment of private pleailure; that either in a
Pacific or hoflile manner, he hlad vilcitel Ger-
many nine times, Spain si, times, 1rance four
tIimcs, Italy seven times, the Low-Coulntries ten
times, lngland twice, Africa as often, and, had
VoL. IV. P made

B 0 o K made eleven voyages by sea; that while his health

XI.
_- _- permittted him to discharge his duty, and the
'jiS vigour of his conflitution was equal, in any de-

gree, to the arduous office of governing such
extensive dominions, he had never shunned la-
bour, nor repined under fatigue; that now when
his health was broken, and his vigour exhausted
by the rage of an incurable difterper, his grow-
ing infirmities admonished him to retire, nor was
he so fond of reigning, as to retain the sceptre in
an impotent hand, which was no longer able to
prote&t his fubjeas, or to secure to them the
happiness which he wished they should enjoy;
that instead of a sovereign worn out with dif-
eases, and scarcely half alive, he gave them one
in the prime of life, accustomed already to go-
vern, and who added to the vigour of youth all
the attention and sagacity of maturer years; that
if, during the course of a long adminiltration,
he had committed any material error in govern-
ment, or if, under the pressure of so many and
great affairs, and amidst the attention which he
had been obliged to give to them, he had either
negleted or injured any of his fubjecs, he now
implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he
flhould ever retain a grateful sense of their fidelity
and attachment, and would carry the remem-
brance of it along with him to the place of his re-
treat, as his fweteft- consolation, as well as the
best reward for all his services, and in his lat
prayers to Almighty God would pour forth his
moil carneft petitions for their welfare.

THIEN

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his B 0°o K
knees and kissed his father's hand, "C If," fays he, *-...
" I had left you by my death this rich inheritance, '55s'
to which I have made such large additions, some
regard would have been justly due to my memory
on that account; but now, when I voluntarily re-
sign to you what I might have still retained, I
may well expet the warmest exprefflons of thanks
on your part. With there, however, I dispense,
and flall confider your concern for the welfare
of your fubjeEs, and your love of them, as the
best and most acceptable testimony of your gra-
titude to me. It is in your power, by a wife and
virtuous administration, to justify the extra-
ordinary proof which I, this day, give of my pa-
ternal affeEtion, and to demonstrate that you are
worthy of the confidence which I repose in you.
Preserve an inviolable regard for religion;
maintain the Catholic faith in its purity; let
the laws of your country be sacred in your eyes;
encroach not on the rights and privileges of your
people; and if the time should ever come, when
you h;all wish to enjoy the tranquillity of private
life, may you have a son endowed with such
qualities, that you can resign your sceptre to him,
with as much, fatisfation as I give up mine to
you."

As soon as Charles had finished this long ad-
dress to his fubjeds and to their new bovereign,
he funk into the chair, exhausted and ready to
1,iflt with the fatigue of such an extraordinary

P X effort.

B °0 K effort. During his discourse, the whole audience

XI.
v__-r melted into tears, tome from admiration of his

1555- magnanimity, others softened by the expressions of

tenderness towards his son, and of love to his
people; and all were affected with the deepest for-
row at losing a sovereign, who, during his admi-
niftration, had distinguished the Netherlands, his
native country, with particular marks of his regard
and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after

returning thanks to his father, with a low and
fubmiflive voice, for the royal gift which his un-
exampled bounty had bestowed upon him, he
addressed the assembly of the States, and regret-
ting his inability to speak the Flemish language
with such facility as to express what he felt on this
interesting occasion, as well as what he owed to
his good fubjedEs in the Netherlands, he begged
that they would permit Granvelle bifhlop of Arras,
to deliver what he had given him in charge to
speak in his name. Granvelle, in a long dif-
course, expatiated on the zeal with which Philip
was animated for the good of his sub jets, on his
resolution to devote all his time and talents to the
promoting of their happiness, and on his inten-
tion to imitate his father's example in diftin-
guifhing the Netherlands with peculiar marks of
his regard. Macs, a lawyer of great eloquence,
replied, in the name of the States, with large pro-
fcffions of their fidelity and affetion to their new
sovereign.

Ti-i~N

THEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary, re- B 0oi K
signed the regency with which she had been en- I
rrusted by her brother during the space of twenty- 1556.
five years. Next day Philip, in presence of the January 6.
States, took the usual oaths to maintain the rights
and privileges of his fubjeass; and all the mem-
bers, in their own name, and in that of their con-
tfituents, swore allegiance to him'.

A FEW weeks after this tranfadion, Charles, in
an assembly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial
equally pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of
Spain, with all the territories depending on them,
both in the old and in the new world. Of all these
vaftpofefions, he reserved nothing for himself but
an annual pension of an hundred thousand crowns,
to defray the charges of his family, and to afford
him a finall fum for ats of beneficence and
charity ".

As

Godlevcus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldaft.

Polit. Imper. p. 377. Strada deBello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.
U The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of such
importance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of it,
one would cxpe~c, should have been ascertained by hillorians
ilhi the greatest accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this
point. All agree, that the deed by which Charles transfcr-
red to his son his dominions in the Netherlands. bears date
at Bruflls the z2th of (ctober. Sandoval fixes on the 28thl
of Oitoher as the day on which the ceremony of resignation
happened, and he was present at the tranfaittion, vol. ii.
P. s';9. (odleveus, who publifled a treatifc de Abdicatione
Caroli V. fixes the public ceremony, as well as the date of

1' 3 the

B 0 0 K As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain,

XI.
,-_ i hoping that the dryness and the warmth of the

P.e5o5vs 6 climate in that country might mitigathethe violence
fixhis ref- of his disease, which had been much increased
dence in
Spain. by the moirfure of the air and the rigour of the

the inRrurnent of resignation, en the 25th. Pete Barre, I
know not on what authority, fixes it on the 24th of Novem-
ber, Hilf. d'Alem. viii. 976. Herrera agrees with Godle-
veus in his account of this matter, tom. i. 155. as likewise
does Pallavicini, whose authority with refpe& to dates, and
every thing where a minute accuracy is requisite, is of great
weight, Hill. lib. xvi. p. 168. Historians differ no less with
regard to the day on which Charles resigned the crown of
Spain to his Ton. According to M. de Thou, it was a month
after his having resigned his dominions in the Netherlands,
i. e. about the zSth of November, Thuan. lib. xvi. p. 571.
According to Sandoval, it was on the i6th of January 1556,
Sand. ii. 603. Antonio de Vera agrees with him, Epitome
del Vida del Car. V. p. i Io. According to Pallavicini, it
was on the 17th, Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168. and with him Herrera
agrees, Vida del D. Felipe, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras
fixes it on the firif day of January, Hil. Gener. tom. ix.
p. 371. M. de Beaucaire supposes the resignation of thecrown
of Spain to have been executed a few days after the resignation
of the Netherlands, Corn. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is re-
markable, that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles, though
Charles had made over all his dominions to his son some weeks
previous to the conclusion of it, all the flipulations are in the
Emperor's name, and Philip is only flyled King of England
and Naples. It is certain Philip was not proclaimed King of
Caflile, &c. at Valladolid sooner than the 24th of March,
Sandov. ii. p. 606; and previous to that ceremony, he did
not chufe, it flould seem, to assume the title of King of
any of his Spanish kingelomr, or to perform any ac of royal
jurifdicqion. In a deed annexed to the treaty of truce, dated
April 19, he af;,mes the title of King of Caflile, &c. in the
uifual fyle of the Spamnifl monarchs in that age. Corps Dipl.
tom. iv. Append. p. 8;.

winters

winters in the Netherlands, he was extremely B ° x K
impatient to embark for that kingdom, and to ,-->
disengage himself entirely from business, which 's56
he found to be impoflible while he remained in
Brussels. But his physicians remonstrated so Obliged to

remain for

strongly againfi his venturing to sea at that cold and some tim
boiiterous season of the year, that he consented, te.nhc'-
though with reluctance, to put off his voyage for
some months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, he had the fa- Promotes

the nego-

tisfaation, before he left the Low-Countries, of ciation for
taking a considerable ftep towards a peace with pace.
France, which he ardently wished for, not only
on his son's account, but that he might have the
merit, when quitting the world, of re-establish-
ing that tranquillity in Europe, which he had
banished out of it almost from the time that he
assumed the administration of affairs. Previous
to his resignation, commiffloners had been ap-
pointed by him and by the French King, in order
to treat of an exchange of prisoners. In their
conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles, near Cam-
bray, an expedient was accidentally proposed for
terminating hostilities between the contending
monarchs, by a long truce, during the subsistence
of which, and without discusing their refpestive
claims, each flould retain what was now in his
poffeflion. Charles, sensible how much his king-
doms were exhausted by the expensive and almost
continual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his son a flort interval

P 4 of

B o°x0 K of peace, that he might eftablilh himself firmly
»-_-^ on his throne, declared warmly for closing with

155'ó the overture, though manifestly dilhonourable as

well as disadvantageous; and such was the refpeft
due to his wisdom and experience, that Philip,
notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchase
peace by such concessions, did not presume to
urge his opinion in opposition to that of his
father.

A trure HENRY could not have hesitated one moment
concjuded.

about giving his content to a truce on such con-
ditions, as would leave him in quiet possession of
the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's domi-
nions, together with the important conqueRs
which he had made on the German frontier. But
it was no easy matter to reconcile such a ftep with
the engagements which he had come under to the
Pope, in his late treaty with him. The Con-
flable Montmorency, however, represented in
such a striking light the imprudence of facri-
sicing the true interests of his kingdom to these
rafln obligations, and took such advantage of the
absence of the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had fe-
duced the King into his alliance with the Caraffas,
that I-enry, who was naturally fluctuating and un-
lteady, and apt to be influenced by the advice lafc
5th Feb. given him, authorised his ambassadors to sign a

treaty of truce with the Emperor for five years, on
the terms which had been proposed. But that he
might not teem to have altogether forgotten his
ally the Pope, who, he foresaw,- would be highly

7 cxafpc-

exarperated, he, in order to soothe him, took B O° K
care that he should be expressly included in the
truce X. 556

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and RatltheaOt
the Admiral Coligny to Brussels, the former to narchs.
be present when the King of France, and the
latter, when the Emperor and his son ratified the
treaty and bound themselves by oath to observe
itr. When an account of the conferences at The lope'*

ahtoM en-

Vaucelles, and of the conditions of truce which men," nd
had been proposed there, were firit carried to dife''
Rome, it gave the Pope no manner of difquier.
He trusted so much to the honour of the French
monarch, that he would not allow himself to
think that Henry could forget so loon, or violate
so flamefully, all the stipulations in his league
with him. He had such an high opinion of the
Empero-r's wisdom, that he made no doubt of
his refuting his content to a truce on such une-
qual terms; and on both these accounts he con-
fidently pronounced that this, like many pre-

I Mem. de Ribier, ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv.
App. 8i.
Y One of Admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote to
the court of France an account of what happened while they
relided at Brufltls, takes notice, as an inltance of Philip's
unpulitenfs;, that lie received the French ambaflador in an
apartmcnt hung with tapeltry, which represented the battle
O "ilia, the manner in which Francis I. was taken priloncr,
i8 voyage to Spain, with all the mortifying circumllances
of lus captivity and iniprifonment at Madrid. Mem. de Ri-
brl, ii. 634.

ceding

B °X1 K ceding negociations, would terminate in nothing,

- But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
556'. vinced him that no reasoning in political affairs

is more fallacious, than, because an event is im.
probable, to conclude that it will not happen.
The sudden and unexpeced conclusion of th
truce filled Paul with aflonifhment and terror,
The Cardinal of Lorrain durst not encounte
that itorm of indignation, to which he kne
that he Ihould be expoled from the haugh
Pontiff, who had so good reason to be incensed;
but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to
the Cardinal Tournon the difficult task of at-
tempting to soothe Paul and his nephews. The
were fully sensible of the perilous situation i
which they now flood. By their engagement
with France, which were no longer secret, the
had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded th
violence of his implacable temper. The duk
of Alva, a minister fitted, as well by his abili
ties as by the severity of his nature, for exe-
cuting all Philip's rigorous schemes, had ad
vanced from Milan to Naples, and began to
assemble troops on the frontiers of the Eccle-
fiaftical State. While they, if deserted by France,
must not only relinquish all the hopes of domi-
nion and sovereignty to which their ambitio
arpired, but remain expoled to the resentment
the Spanish monarch, without one ally to prore
them againfl: an enemy with whom they were
little able to contend.

UN Dll

UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourse B O0 K

XI.

to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which
the Papal court knows well how to avail itself in He1556-p
order to ward off any calamity threatened by an to rekindle

the war.

enemy superior in power. He asseted to approve
highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for
putting a stop to the effusion of Christian blood,
He exprefled his warmest wifhies that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He
exhorted the rival Princes to embrace this favour-
able opportunity of setting on foot a negociation
for that purpose, and offered, as their common
father, to be mediator between them. Under
this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his
nuncio to the court of Brussels, and his nephew
Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The public
inftruSions given to both were the fame; that
they should use their utmost endeavours to pre-
vail with the two monarchs to accept of the
Pope's mediation, that, by means of it, peace
might be re-established, and measures might be
taken for assembling a general council. But
under this specious appearance of zeal for attain-
ing objects so desirable in themselves, and so
becoming his sacred character to pursue, Paul
concealed very different intentions. Caraffl, be-
fides his public instructions, received a private
commiffon to solicit the French King to re-
nounce the treaty of truce, and to renew his en-
gagements with the Holy See; and he was em-
po'wered to spare neither entreaties, nor promises,
nor bribes, in order to gain that point. This,

both

B °YX K ceding negociations, would terminate in nothing

A- - But later and more certain intelligence soon con
55*6. vinced him that no reasoning in political affair

is more fallacious, than, because an event is im
probable, to conclude that it will not happen
The sudden and unexpected conclusion of the
truce filled Paul with aftoniihment and terror
The Cardinal of Lorrain durst not encounter
that storm of indignation, to which he knem
that he Ihould be expoied from the haughty
PontifF, who had so good reason to be incenled;
but departing abruptly fiom Rome, he left to
the Cardinal Tournon the difficult talk of at-
tempting to soothe Paul and his nephews. They
were fully sensible of the perilous situation in
which they now flood. By their engagements
with France, which were no longer secret, they
had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the
violence of his implacable temper. The duke
of Alva, a minister fitted, as well by his abili-
ties as by the severity of his nature, for exe-
cuting all Philip's rigorous schemes, had ad-
vanced from Milan to Naples, and began to
assemble troops on the frontiers of the Eccle-
fiaftical State. While they, if deserted by France,
muff not only relinquish all the hopes of domi-
nion and sovereignty to which their ambition
aspired, but remain expoled to the resentment of
the Spanish monarch, without one ally to protest
them againfl an enemy with whom they were so
little able to contend.

'UNDER

UNDER there circumstances, Paul had recourse B 00 K

XL.

to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which -
the Papal court knows well how to avail itself in Ie atte6p,,
order to ward off any calamity threatened by an to rekindle

the wear°

enemy superior in power. He affeced to approve
highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for
putting a stop to the effusion of Christian blood.
He expressed his warmest wishes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He
exhorted the rival Princes to embrace this favour-
able opportunity of setting on foot a negociation
for that purpose, and offered, as their common
father, to be mediator between them. Under
this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his
nuncio to the court of BruiTels, and his nephew
Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The public
inftrutions given to both were the fame; that
they should use their utmost endeavours to pre-
vail with the two monarchs to accept of the
Pope's mediation, that, by means of it, peace
might be re-established, and measures might be
taken for assembling a general council. But
under this specious appearance of zeal for attain-
ing objects so desirable in themselves, and so
becoming his sacred character to pursue, Paul
concealed very different intentions. CaraiT., be-
[ides his public inftrudtions, received a private
commirfion to solicit the French King to re-
nounce the treaty of truce, and to renew his en-
gagements with the Holy See; and he was em-
powercd to spare neither entreaties, nor promises,
nor bribes, in order to gain that point. This,

both

B 00 IC both the uncle and the nephew confidered as' th
XL -, real end of the embafly; while the other fervec
1556. to arnuii the vulgar, or to deceive the Empero
lith May. 21nd his son. The Cardinal, accordingly, sei

out instantly for Paris, and travelled with the
greatest expedition, while Rebiba was detained
1ome weeks at Rome; and when it became ne.
ceflary for him to begin his journey, he received
iCcret orders to protract it as much as possible,
tihat the issue of Caraffa's negociation might be
known before he Ihould reach Brussels, and ac-
cording to that, proper directions might be
given to him with regard to the tone which he
should assume, in treating with the Emperorand
his son .

Hi; negoci- CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with extra-
topur'oc. ordinary pomp; and having presented a confe-

crated sword to Hcenry, as the Protestor, on
whose aid the Pope relied in the present exigency,
he besought him not to disregard the entreaties
of a parent in distress, but to employ that weapon
which he gave him in his defence. This he re-
presented not only as a duty of filial piety, butI
as an act of justice. As the Pope, from confi-'
dence in the afliftance and support which his late
treaty with France entitled him to expet, had
taken such steps as had irritated the King of
Spain, he conjured -lenry not to susser Paul and
his family to be crufied under the weight of that

X Pallav. lib, xiii, p. r 69. Burnet I-Iif. of Reform. ii.
.Asp. 3j-.

resentment which they had drawn on themselves o0 K
merely by their attachment to France. Together ---
with this argument addressed to his generosity, s6.
he employed another which he hoped would
work on his ambition. He affirmed that now
was the time, when, with the most certain pro-
fpcft of success, he might attack Philip's do-
minions in Italy; that the flower of the veteran
Spanilh bands had perished in the wars of Hun-
gary, Germany, and the Low Countries; that
the Emperor had left his son an exhausted trea-
fury, and kingdoms drained of men; that he had
no longer to contend with the abilities, the ex-
perience, and good fortune of Charles, but with
a monarch scarcely feated on his throne, un-
prafifed in command, odious to many of the
Italian states, and dreaded by all. He promired
that the Pope, who had already levied soldiers,
would bring a considerable army into the field,
which, when joined by a sufficient number of
French troops, might, by one brisk and sudden
effort, drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and
add to the crown of France a kingdom, the con-
quest of which had been the great object of all his
predecessors during half a century, and the chief
motive of all their expeditions into Italy.

IVEir.x word Caraffa spoke made a deep imi- T'ir tf-
pression on Henry; conscious, on the one hand, Juy -z.
that the Pope had just cause to rcproach him
'itli having violated the laws not only of gene-

'rofilty

B oX° K rofity but of decency, when he renounced his
a__v-- league with him, and had agreed to the truce of

1556- Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, not

only to distinguish his reign by a conqueff, which
three former monarchs had attempted without
success, but likewise to acquire an establishment
of such dignity and value for one of his sons.
Reverence, however, for the oath, by which he
had so lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles;
the extreme old age of the Pope, whose death
might occasion an entire revolution in the politi-
cal fyfi-em of Italy; together with the represent-1
ations of Montmorency, who repeated all the
arguments he had used against 5he firit league
with. Paul, and pointed out the great and immne-
diate advantages which France derived from the
truce; kept Henry for some time in suspense,
and might possibly have outweighed all Caraffa's
arguments. But the Cardinal was not such a
novice in the arts of intrigue and negociation, as
not to have expedients ready for removing or fur-
mounting all there obstacles. To obviate the
king's scruple with regard to his oath, he pro-
duced powers from the Pope to absolve him from
the obligation of it. By way of security againfi
any danger which he might apprehend from the
Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle would
make such a nomination of Cardinals, as lhould
give Henry the absolute command of the next
election, and enable him to place in the papal chair
a person entirely devoted to his interest.

[K~~~~ ~~. IN ;

IN order to counterbalance the effe& of the B O o K

XI.

Constable's opinion and influence, he employed I-
not only the ative talents of the Duke of Guise, 1556.
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided by
the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who,
unfortunately for France, co-operated with Ca-
tharine in this point, though she took pleasure,
on almosts every other occasion, to thwart and
mortify her. They, by their. united solicitations,
easily swayed the King, who leaned, of his own
accord, to that fide towards which they wished
him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent re-
monstrances were disregarded; the nuncio ab-
solved Henry from his oath; and he signed a new
league with the Pope, which rekindled the
flames of war both in Italy and in the Low-
Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew July3r.
that there was a fair profpet of his succeeding in violenpro-
this negociation, he dispatched a messenger after ceed'ing

a gainft Phi.-

the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to return to lip.
Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As it
was now no longer necessary to preserve that tone
of moderation, which suited the chara&ter of a
mediator, and which he had asseted to assume,
or to put any farther restraint upon his resent-
ment againit Philip, he boldly threw off the
mall:, and took such violent steps as rendered a
rupture unavoidable. He seized and imprisoned
the Spanish envoy at his court. He excommuni.,

cated

B 0 0 K caked the Colonnas; and having deprived MarI

XI.
C--v- Antonio, the head of that family, of the duke.
1556- dom of Paliano, he granted that dignity, toge.

ther with the territory annexed to it, to his nephew
the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal in-
formation to be presented in the consistory of
Cardinals against Philip, fltting forth that he,
notwithfianding the fidelity and allegiance due by
him to the Holy See, of which he held the
kingdom of Naples, had not only afforded a re-
treat in his dominions to the Colonnas, whom the
Pope had excommunicated and declared rebels,
but had furnired them with arms, and was ready,
in conjunction with them, to invade the Eccle-
fiaftical State in an hostile manner; that such
conduct in a vassal was to be deemed treason
against his liege lord, the puniflhment of which
was the forfeiture of his fief. Upon this, the con-
fiftorial advocate requested the Pope to take cog-
nizance of the cause, and to appoint a day for
hearing of it, when he would make good every
article of the charge, and expec from his justice
that sentence which the heinouflefs of Philip's
crimes merited. Paul, whose pride was highly
flattered with the idea of trying and passing judg-
July 7. ment on so great a king, assented to his request,

and as if it had been no lets ealy to execute than
to pronounce such a sentence, declared that he
would consult with the Cardinals concerning the
formalities requisite in conduscing the trial".

a Pallav. lib. xiii. - i.

BUT

BUT while Paul allowed his pride and resent- B o o K
ment to drive him on with such headlong impe- Xl.
tuofity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation Ph56-.'
on his part. He had been taught by the Spanish per(ttious
ecclesiastics, who had the charge of his educa- crupl-s
tion, a profound veneration for the Holy See.
This sentiment, which had been early infused,
grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full poffeflion of his mind, which was na-
turally thoughtful, serious, and prone to super-
flition. When he foresaw a rupture with the
Pope approaching, he had such violent scruples
with refpeft to the lawfulness of taking arms
against the Vicegerent of Christ, and the common
father of all Christians, that he consulted some
Spanifll divines upon that point. They, with the
usual dexterity of casuists in accommodating their
responses to the circumfrances of those who apply
tothem for direction, allured him that, after em-
ploying prayers and remonstrances in order to
bring the Pope to reason, he had full right, both
by the laws of nature and of Christianity, not
only to defend himfclf when attacked, but to be-
gin hostilities, if that were judged the most
proper expedient for preventing the effects of
Paul's violence and injustice. Philip nevertheless
continued to deliberate and delay, confidering it
as a most cruel misfortune, that his adminiltra-
tion should open with an attack on a person,
whose sacred function and chara6cer he so highly
relpected b.

b Ferrcr. ill. de Efpagne, ix. 373. lerrera, i. 308.
VOL. V. Q. AT

B O o K AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compli-

XI.
k.- - ance with his master's scruples, had continued to
Tss6. negociate long after he should have begun to aft,

The Duke l
of Alva finding Paul inexorable, and that every overture
takes the
eld against of peace, and every appearance of hesitation on
the Pope. his part, increased the Pontiff's natural arrogance,
Sept. 5. took the field and entered the ecclesiastical terri-

tories. His army did not exceed twelve thousand
men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers,
and commanded chiefly by those Roman barons,
whom Paul's violence had driven into exile. The
valour of the troops, together with the animosity
of their leaders, who fought in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own estates, supplied the
want of numbers. As none of the French forces
were yet arrived, Alva soon became master of the
Campagna Romana; some cities being surrendered
through the cowardice of the garrisons, which con-
sifted of raw soldiers, ill disciplined, and worse
commanded; the gates of others being opened by
the inhabitants, who were eager to receive back
their ancient maiters. Alva, that he might not
be taxed with impiety in seizing the patrimony of
the church, took possession of the towns which ca.
pitulated, in the name of the college of cardinals,
to which, or to the lPope that should be chosen to
fuccced Paul, he declared that he would immedi-
ately reflore them.

A tr.c" be- TiIn. rapid progrers of the Spaniards, whofl
twecn the .

opet nd
, light troops made cxcurfions even to the gates of
L'"1'i. Rlomel, filled that city with conflernation. P1atl,

though

though inflexible and undaunted himself, was B oo iK
obliged to give way so far to the fears and folicita- _X
tions of the Cardinals, as to fend deputies to Alva s556.
in order to propose a cessation of arms. The Pope
yielded the more readily, as he was sensible of a
double advantage which might be derived from
obtaining that point. It would deliver the inha-
bitants of Rome from their present terror, and
would afford time for the arrival of the succours
which he expected from France. Nor was Alva
unwilling to close with the overture, both as he
knew how desirous his master was to terminate a
war, which he had undertaken with reluctance,
and as his army was so much weakened by gar-
rifoning the great number of towns which he had
reduced, that it was hardly in a condition to keep
the field without fresh recruits. A truce was
accordingly concluded first for ten, and afterwards Nov. 9g.
for forty days, during which, various schemes of
peace were proposed, and perpetual negociations
were carried on, but with no sincerity on the part
of the Pope. The return of his nephew the Car-
dinal to Rome, the receipt of a considerable fum
remitted by the King of France, the arrival of one
body of French troops, together with the expecta-
tion of others which had begun their march, ren-
dered him more arrogant than ever, and banishel
all thoughts from his mind, but those of war and
revenge c.

c Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 588. Mem. de
Ribier, ii. 664.

Q,2

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XII.

THE
H I S T R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHIARLES V.

BOOK XII.
5 HILE these operations or intrigues kept B OO K

the Pope and Philip busy and attentive,

the Emperor disentangled himself finally from all cha're56
the affairs of this world, and set out for the place newattempt

-

i . , . * to alter the

of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Im- fuccefionof
perial dignity, not from any unwillingness to re- the'empie
linquinf it, for, after having resigncd the real and
extensive authority that he enjoyed in his here-
ditary dominions, to part with the limited and
often ideal jurisdiction which belongs to an
elefive crown, was no great sacrifice. His sole o.
motive for delay was to gain a few months, for
making one trial more, in order to accomplish
his favourite scheme in behalf of his son. At the
very time Charles seemed to be mofc sensible of

Q,3 the

B 0 0 K the vanity of worldly grandeur, and when he ap.

XIl.
. _. peared to be quitting it not only with indiffer-

556- ence, but with contempt, the vast schemes of

ambition, which had so long occupied and en-
grossed his mind, frill kept possession of it. He
could not think of leaving his son in a rank in-
ferior to that which he himself had held among
the Princes of Europe. As he had, some years
before, made a fruitless attempt to secure the
'Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it to
the kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of the
house of Burgundy, he might put it in his power
to prosecute, with a better prospect of success,
those great plans, which his own infirmities had
obliged him to abandon, he was itill unwilling to
relinquish this flattering project as chimerical or
unattainable.

Which NOTWITHSTA.NDING the repulse which he had
pro ves un-
fuc.erffui. formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,

he renewed his solicitations with fresh importu-
nity; and during the summer, had tried every
art, and employed every argument, which he
thought could induce him to quit the Imperial
throne to Philip, and to accept of the investiture
of tome province, either in Italy, or in the Low
Countries, as an equivalent%. But Ferdinand,
who was to firm and inflexible with regard to this
point, that he had paid no regard to the folicita-
tions of the Emperor, even when they were en-

a Ambaffades dec Noailles, tom. v. 356.

forced

forced with all the weight of authority which ac- B o o WC
companies supreme power, received the overture, ._
that now came from him in the situation to which 15s56-
he had descended, with greater indifference, and
would hardly deign to liften to it. Charles,
ashamed of his own credulity in having imagined
that he might accomplish that now, which he
had attempted formerly without success, desisted
finally from his scheme. He then resigned the go-
vernment of the Empire, and having transferred
all his claims of obedience and allegiance from
the Germanic body, to his brother the King of August 7.
the Romans, he executed a deed to that effec&,
with all the formalities requisite in such an im-
portant tranfation. The instrument of refigna-
tion he commited to William Prince of Orange,
and empowered him to lay it before the college of
electors b

NOrHING now remained to detain Charles from Charles sec
that retreat for which he languished. The pre- spain.
parations for his voyage having been made for
some time, he set out for Zuitburg in Zealand,
where the fleet which was to convoy him had orders
to aflemble. In his way thither he passed through
Ghent, and after flopping there a few days, to
indulge that tender and pleasing melancholy, which
arises in the mind of every man in the decline of
life, on visiting the place of his nativity, and
viewing the scenes and objecs familiar to him in his

Goldaft. Conftit. Imper. pars i. 576.

Q.4 early

B O O K early youth, he pursued his journey, accompanied

xii.
t.---w. by his son Philip, his daughter the archduchess,

3556. his filters the dowager Queens of France and

Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-law, and a nu-
merous retinue of the Flemish nobility. Before
he went on board, he dismissed them, with marks
of his attention or regard, and taking leave of
Philip with all the tenderness of a father who em-
braced his son for the last time, he set fail on the
seventeenth of September, under convoy of a
large fleet of Spaniflh, Flemish, and English ships.
He declined a pressing invitation, from the Queen
of Englapd, to land in some part of her domi-
nions, in order to refresh himself, and that she
might have the comfort of feeing him once more.
" It cannot surely," said he, " be agreeable to a
Qjeen to receive a visit from a father-in-law, who
is now nothing more than a private gentleman."

His arrival Hrs voyage was prolperous, and he arrived at
and recep- I
;ion there. Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he left

Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell prostrate
on the ground; and confidering hirnfelf now as
dead to the world, he kissed the earth, and said,
" Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and
naked I now return to thee, thou common mo-
ther of mankind." From Laredo he pursued his
journey to Burgos, carried sometimes in a chair
and foreciines in a horse litter, suffering exqui-
site pain at every flep, and advancing with the
greatest diffculty. Some of the Spanish no-
blilty repaired to Burgos, in order to pay

court

court to him, but they were so few in number, B O 0o
and their attendance was so negligent, that Charles -. .
observed it, and felt, for the first time, that he was 5ss6-
no longer a Monarch. Accustomed from his
early youth to the dutiful and officious refpeat
with which those who poffcfs sovereign power are
attended, he had received it with the credulity
common to Princes, and was sensibly mortified,
hlen he now dilsovered, that he had been in-
dbreed to his rank and power for much of that
cbFequious regard which he had fondly thought
was paid to his personal qualities. But though
he might have soon learned to view with uncon-
cern the levity of his fubjeóts, or to have despised
their neglecl, he was more deeply afflicted with the
ingratitude of his son, who, forgetting already how
much he owed to his father's bounty, obliged him
to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he paid
him the first moiety of that fmnall pension, which
was all that he had reserved of so many king-
doms. As without this fum, Charles could not
dilmifs his domestics with such rewards as their
services merited, or his generosity had destined
for them, he could not help expressing both
furprize and difllttisfaLion c. At laif the money
was paid, and Charles having difinifled a great
number of his domestics, whole attendance he
thought would be superfluous or curnberfome in
his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid. There
he took a last and tender leave of his two

c Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.

filters,

B o o sifters, whom he would not permit to accompan

v,1L. him to his solitude, though they requested hin
I5S6. with tears, not only that they might have thi

confo]ation of contributing by their attendance
and care to mitigate or to sooth his sufferings
but that they might reap inftruEtion and benefil
by joining with him in those pious exercises,
to which he had consecrated the remainder of his
days.

The place FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to
t rea. Plazencia in Estremadura. He had passed through

this place a great many years before, and having
been struck at that time with the delightful fitua-
tion of the monastery of St. Juftus, belongingto
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant
from the town, he had then observed to some of
his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dio.
clefian might have retired with pleasure. The
impression had remained so strong on his mind,
that he pitched upon it as the place of his own
retreat. It was feated in a vale of no great extent,
watered by a small brook, and surrounded by
riling grounds, covered with lofty trees; from the
nature of the foil, as well as the temperature of
the climate, it was esteemed the most healthful
and delicious situation in Spain. Some months
before his resignation he had lent an architeft
thither, to add a new apartment to the monastery,
for his accommodation; but he gave ftrift orders
that the style of the building should be such as
suited his present station, rather than his former

S dignity.

dignity. It consisted only of fix rooms, four of B o o K
them in the form of Friars cells, with naked x .
walls; the other two, each twenty feet square, 1557.
were hung with brown cloth, and furnished in the
most simple manner. They were all on a level
with the ground; with a door on one fide into a
garden, of which Charles himself had given the
plan, and had filled it with various plants, which
he intended to cultivate with his own hands.
On the other fide they communicated with the
chapel of the monastery, in which he was to per-
formr his devotions. Into this humble retreat,
hardly sufficient for the comfortable accommo-
dation of a private gentleman, did Charles enter,
with twelve domestics only. He buried there, February
in solitude and silence, his grandeur, his am- 24'
bition, together with all thole vast projeets, which,
during almost half a century, had alarmed and
agitated Europe, filling every kingdom in it, by
turns, with the terror of his arms, and the dread of
being subdued by his power d
THE contrast between Charles's conduct and Contraltbe-

tween the

that of the Pope at this juncture, was so obvious, behaviour
that it struck even the most careless observers; and the'
nor was the comparison which they made to the Pope.
advantage of Paul. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accustomed to the splendour
which accompanies supreme power, and to those
busy and intereffing scenes in which an active

' Sandov. ii. 607. & Zuniga, 1oo. Thuan. lib. xvii.
609.

ambition

B o o K ambition had engaged him, quitted the world at a

xnr. period of life not far advanced, that he might close
'557. the evening of his days in tranquillity, and secure

some interval for fober thought and serious re-
colleiion. The latter, a priest, who had passed
the early part of his life in the shade of the
schools, and in the study of the speculative
sciences, who was seemingly so detached from the
world, that he had ihut himself up for many
years in the solitude of a cloyfter, and who was
not railed to the papal throne until he had reached
the extremity of old age, discovered at once all
the impetuosity of youthful amnbition, and formed
extensive schemes, in , order to accomplish
which, he scrupled not. to' scatter the feeds of dif-
cord, and to kindle':-he flanes of war, in every
corner of Eut-ope. But Paul, regardless of the
opinion or -censures' of mankind, held on his
own course with his wonted arrogance and vio-
lence. These, although they seemed already to
have exceeded all bounds, rose to still a greater
height, upon the arrival of the Duke of Guise in
Italy.

The Duke THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain fore-
ead tlhe saw and desired, had happened. The Duke of
French Guise was entrusted with the command of the
army into
,dry. army appointed to march to the Pope's assistance.

It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the bes
troops in the lervice of France. So high was the
I)uke's reputation, and such the general expecta-
tion of beholding some extraordinary exertion of

his

his courage and abilities in a war into which hle n o o K
had precipitated his country, chiefly with the design L
of obtaining a field where he might display his own 1557s
talents, that many of the French nobility who had
no command in the troops employed, accompanied
him as volunteers. This army passed the Alps in
an inclement season, and advanced towards Rome,
without any opposition from the Spaniards, whos
as they were not strong enough to. a in different
parts, had collected all their forces in one body on
the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of that
kingdom.

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, The Pope
the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment hofllities
against Philip, which, notwithstanding the na- Igailip.
tural violence of his temper, prudential confider-
ations had hitherto obliged him to keep under
fbme refiraint. He named commiffloners, whom
he empowered to pass judgment in the fuir,
which the consistorial advocate had commenced
against Philip, in order to prove that he had for-
feited the crown of Naples, by taking arms Feb. 1z.
againif the Holy See, of which he was a vaTfal.
He recalled all the nuncios resident in the courts
of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies.
This was levelled chiefly against Cardinal Pole, April 9.
the papal legate in the court of lngland, whole
great merit, in having contributed tb Ifccefsfully
to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Romce
together with the cxpectation of farthclr fci-viccs,
vlicll he, might perform, was not fifficient to

I
' Irccii

B o o K screen him from the resentment that he had in.

XI. ms curred by his zealous endeavours to establish peace
'557- between the house of Austria and France. H(

commanded an addition to be made to the ana.
themas annually denounced against the enemies of
the church on Maundy-Thurfday, whereby he in.
flited the censure of excommunication on the au.
thors of the late invasion of the ecclesiastical terri-
tories, whatever their rank or dignity might be;
and, in consequence of this, the usual prayers for
the Emperor were omitted next day in the Pope's
chapel c.

Hismilitary BUT while the Pope indulged himself in those
tionsina- wild and childish sallies of rage, either he ne-
dequate. gleEed, or found that it exceeded his power, to

take such measures as would have rendered his
resentment really formidable, and fatal to his
enemies. For when the Duke of Guise entered
Rome, where he was received with a triumphal
pomp, which would have been more suitable if
he had been returning after having terminated the
war with glory, than when he was going to be-
gin it with a doubtful chance of success, he found
none of the preparations for war in such forward-
ness as Cardinal Caraffa had promised, or he had
expeced. The papal troops were far inferior in
number to the quota stipulated; ho magazines sus-
ficient for their fubfitence were formed ; nor was
money for paying them provided. The Vene-

Pal. lib. Xiii. 180. Mcm. de Ribicr, ii. 678.

tianr,

tians, agreeably to that cautious maxim which B o K
the misfortunes of their state had first led them to ._
adopt, and which was now.become a fundamental 5ss7
principle in their policy, declared their resolution
to preserve an exa&t neutrality, without taking
any part in the quarrels of Princes, so far superior
to themselves in power. The other Italian hates
were either openly united in league with Philip, or
secretly wished success to his arms against a Pon-
tiff, whose Inconsiderate ambition had rendered
Italy once more the feat of war.

THE Duke of Guise perceived that the whole Duke of
weight of the war would devolve pn the French oprations.
troops under his command; and became sensible,
though too late, how imprudent it is to rely, in
the execution of great enterprizes, on the aid of
feeble allies. Pushed on, however, by the Pope's April 13.
impatience for action, as well as by his own desire
of performing some part of what he had so confi-
dently undertaken, he marched towards Naples,
and began his operations. But the success of,
these fell far short 'of his former reputation, of
what the world expected, and of what he himself
had promised. He opened the campaign with the
siege of Civitella, a town of some importance on
the Neapolitan frontier. But the obstinacy with
which the Spanish governor defended it, baffled
all the impetuous efforts of the French valour,,.
and obliged the Duke of Guise, after a siege of
three weeks, to retire from the town with difgracc.
I-Ie endeavoured to wipe off that fliain, by ad-

vancing

B o K vancing boldly towards the Duke of Alva's camp,

and offering him battle. But that prudent corn.
35s7. mander, sensible of all the advantages of standing

on the defensive before an invading enemy, de-
clined an engagement, and kept within his in-
trenchments; and adhering to his plan with the
steadiness of a Castilian, eluded, with great address,
all the Duke of Guise's stratagems to draw him
into action'. By this time sickness began to waste
the French army; violent dissensions had arifenj
between the Duke of Guise and the commanderof
the Pope's forces; the Spaniards renewed their in-1
curfions into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope, when
he found, instead of the conquests and triumphs
which he had fondly expected, that he could not
secure his own territories from depredation, mur-
mured, complained, and began to talk of peace.
The Duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree
with having aAed such an inglorious part, not
only solicited his court either to reinforce his
army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to fulfil
his engagements; and called on Cardinal Caraffa,
sometimes with reproaches, sometimes with
thleats, to make good those magnificent promises,
from a raflh confidence in which he had advised
his mafler to renounce the truce of Vaucelles,
and to join in league with the Pope g

Hofili;,ti BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in
uunthltc" . this wretched situation, an unexpected event hap-

f Ilerrera Vida de Fclipe, 181. g 'Thuan. fib.
xxviii. 614. Pallav. lib. xiii. 181. Burn. ii. app. 317·

pencd

pened in the Low Countries, which called,,the B 0o K
Duke of Guise from a station wherein he could..ac- *---.
quire no honour, to the most dignified and im- 's557
portant charge which could be committed to a
fubje&. As soon as the French had discovered
their purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles,
not only by fending an army into Italy, but by
attempting to furprize some of the frontier towns
in Slanders, Philip, though willing to have
avoided a rupture, determined to prosecute the
war with such spirit, as should make his enemies
sensible, that his father had not erred, when he
judged him to be so capable of government, that
he had given up the reins into his hands. As he
knew that Henry had been at great expence in
fitting out the army under the Duke of Guise, and
that his treasury was hardly able to answer the
exorbitant and endless demands of a distant war,
he foresaw that all his operations in the Low
Countries muff, of consequence, prove feeble,
and be confidered only as secondary to those in
Italy. For that reason, he prudently resolved to
make his principal effort in that place where he
expected the French to be weakest, and to bend
his chief force against that quarter where they
would feel a blow most sensibly. With this view,
he assembled in the Low Countries an army of
about fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving
him on this occasion with that active zeal which
subjects are wont to exert in obeying the first com-
mands of a new Sovereign. But Philip, cautious
and provident, even at this early period of life,
Vor.. IV. did

B 0 0 did not reft all his hopes of success on that formi-

_ ^ 'dable force alone.

1557.

Phil;p en- HE had been labouring for some time to en-
engage Eng- gage the English to espouse his quarrel; and
land in he though it was manifestly the interet of that king-

dom to maintain a ftrid neutrality, and the
people themselves were sensible of the advantages
which they derived from it; though he knew
how odious his name was _to the English, and
how averse they would be to co-operate with him
in any measure, he nevertheless did not despair of
accomplishing his point. He relied on the as-
fetion with which the Queen doated on him,
which was so violent, that even his coldness and
neglect had not extinguished it; he knew her
implicit reverence for his opinion, and her fond
desire of gratifying him in every particular.
That he might work on these with greater facility
and more certain fuccels, he set out for England.
The Queen, who, during her husband's absence,
had languished in perpetual dejection, resumed
fresh spirits on his arrival; and, without paying
the least attention either to the interest or to the
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into
all his schemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonfh-ate againfl the imprudence as well as
danger of involving the nation in an unneceffar)
war; in vain did they put her in mind of the so-
lemn treaties of peace subsisting between Englanc
and France, which the conduct of that natior

hac

had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary, B O K
toothed by Philip's caresses, or intimidated by
the threats which his ascendant over her em- '557.
boldened him at some times to throw out, was
deaf to every thing that could be urged in oppo-
fition to his sentiments, and insisted with the
greatest vehemence on an immediate declaration
of war against France. The council, though
all Philip's address and Mary's authority were
employed to gain or overawe them, after ftrug-
gling long, yielded at last, not from conviction,
but merely from deference to the will of their
sovereign. War was declared againif France, June 20.
the only one perhaps against that kingdom into
which the English ever entered with reluctance.
AsMary knew the aversion of the nation to this
measure, she durst not call a parliament in order
to raise money for carrying on the war. She sup-
plied this want, however, by a stretch of royal
prerogative, not unusual in that age; and levied
large fums on her fubjeEts by her own authority.
Tlhis enabled her to assemble a sufficient body of
troops, and to fend eight thousand men under the
conduct of the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's
army L.

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military Operatirns
glory, gave the command of his army to Ema- Orfhy iphP
nuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, and fixed his own LWcCOun-
residence at Cambray, that he might be at hand
to receive the earliest intelligence of his motions,

h Carte, iii. 337.

R 2 and

B I0 K and to aid him with his counsels. The Duke

Xli.
a - opened the campaign with a masterly stroke of
J557, address, which justified Philip's choice, and dif-

covered such a superiority of genius over the
French generals, as almost ensured success in his
subsequent operations. He appointed the gene.
ral rendezvous of his troops at a place confider.
ably distant from the country which he defined
to be the scene of asion; and having kept the
enemy in suspense for a good time with regard to
his intentions, he at last deceived them so effec-
tually by the variety of his marches and counter-
marches, as led them to conclude that he meant
to bend all his force against the province of
Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into
the kingdom on that fide. In consequence of
this opinion, they drew all their flrength towards
that quarter, and reinforcing the garrison there,
left the towns on other parts of the frontier defli-
tute of troops sufficient to defend them.

Invefa St. THE Duke of Savoy, as soon as he perceived
Quitin. that this feint had its full effect, turned suddenly

to the right, advanced by rapid marches into
Picardy, and fending his cavalry, in which he was
extremely firong, before him, invested St. Quin-
tin. This was a town deemed in that age of
considerable strength, and of great importance, as
there were few fortified cities between it and
Paris. The fortifications, however, had been much
negleaedl the garrison, weakened by draughts
Jlnt towards Champagne, did not amount to a

fifth

fifth part ofthe number requisite for its defence; B o ° K
and the governor, though a brave officer, was
neither of rank, nor authority, equal to the corn- 557.
mand in a place of so much consequence, besieged
by such a formidable army. A few days must have
put the Duke of Savoy in possession of the town,
if the Admiral de Coligny, who thought it con-
cerned his honour to attempt saving a place of
such importance to his country, and which lay
within his jurifdition as governor of Picardy, had
not taken the gallant resolution of throwing him-
self into it, with such a body of men as he could
colle& on a sudden. This resolution he executed
with great intrepidity, and, if the nature of the
enterprize be confidered, with no contemptible
fuccef s; for though one half of his small body of
troops was cut off, he, with the other, broke
through the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpected arrival of an officer of such high rank
and reputation, and who had exposed himself to
such danger in order to join them, inspired the
desponding garrison with courage. Every thing
that the Admiral's great skill and experience in
the art of war could suggest, for annoying the
enemy, or defending the town, was attempted;
and the citizens, as well as the garrison, second-
ing his zeal with equal ardour, seemed to be de-
termined that they would hold out to the last,
and sacrifice themselves in order to save their
country '.

1 Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

R 3 THE

B3 0 0 K THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English, under
I--_--' the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this time,
Th57Frenh pushed on the siege with the greatest vigour. An
endcaour army so numerous, and so well supplied with every
to relierve r e
the town. thing requisite, carried on its approaches with

great advantage againit a garrison which was flill
so feeble that it durst seldom venture to disturb
or retard the enemy's operations by sallies. The
Admiral, sensible of the approaching danger, and
unable to avert it, acquainted his uncle the Con.
flable Montmorency, who had the command of
the French army, with his situation, and pointed
out to him a method by which he might throw
relief into the town. The Constable, solicitous
to save a town, the loss of which would open a
passage for the enemy into the heart of France;
and eager to extricate his nephew out of that
perilous situation, in which zeal for the public
had engaged him; resolved, though aware of the
danger, to attempt what he desired. With this
view, he marched from La Fere towards St.
Quintin at the head of his army, which was not
by one half so numerous as that of the enemy,
and having given the command of a body of
chosen men to Coligny's brother Dandelot, who
was colonel general of the French infantry, he
ordered him to force his way into the town by
that avenue which the Admiral had represented as
most praEticable, while he himself, with the main
army, would give the alarm to the enemy's camp
on the opposite fide, and endeavour to draw all
their attention towards that quarter. Dandelot

executed

executed his orders with greater intrepidity than B Ox. o
condu&. He rushed on with such headlong im-
petuofity, that, though it broke the firfl body of Aug'570.
the enemy which flood in his way, it threw his
own soldiers into the utmost confusion; and as they
were attacked in that situation by fresh troops
which closed in upon them on every fide, the
greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dandelot,
with about five hundred of the most adventurous
and most fortunate, making good his entrance into
the town.

MEANWHILE the Constable, in executing his Thebattle
part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of ri. Q
the besiegers, as rendered it impossible to retreat
with safety in the face of an enemy so much fu-
perior in number. The Duke of Savoy instantly
perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared,
with the presence of mind and abilities of a great
general, to avail hirfifelf of it. He drew up his
army in order of battle, with the greatest expedi-
tion, and watching the moment when the French
began to file off towards La Fere, he detached
all his cavalry, under the command of the Count
of Egmont, to fall on their rear, while he him-
self, at the head of his infantry, advanced to sup-
port him. The French retired at first in perfect
order, and with a good countenance but when
they saw Egmont draw near with his formidable
body of cavalry, the flock of which they were
conscious that they could not withstand, the
prospect of imminent danger, added to digruft of

R 4 their

B o0 K their general, whose imprudence every soldier

- - now perceived, struck them with general confter-
J557' nation. They began insensibly to quicken their

pace, and those in the rear pressed so violently on
such as were before them, that in a short time their
march resembled a flight rather than a retreat.
Egmont, observing their confusion, charged them
with the greatest fury, and in a moment all their
men at.arms, the pride and strength of the French
troops in that age, gave way and fled with pre-

Total de- cipitation. The infantry, however, whom the
feat of the
French1. Constable, by his presence and authority, kept to

their colours, still continued to retreat in good
order, until the enemy brought some pieces of
cannon to bear upon their centre, which threw
them into such confusion, that the Flemish cavalry,
renewing their attack, broke in, and the rout
became universal. About four thousand of the
French fell in the field, and among these the Duke
of Anguien, a Prince of the blood, together with
fix hundred gentlemen. The Constable, as soon
as he perceived the fortune of the day to be ir-
retrievable, rushed into the thickest of the ene-
my, with a resolution not to survive the cala-
mity which his ill-conduc had brought upon his
country; but having received a dangerous wound,
and being wafted with the loss of blood, he was
surrounded by rome Flemish officers, to whom he
was known, who protected him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender.
Besides the Conflable, the Dukes of Montpenfier
and Longueville, the Marechal St Andre, many

officers

officers of diftinEtion, three hundred gentlemen, B 0o K
and near four thousand private soldiers, were taken L-
prisoners. All the colours belonging to the infan- s557.
try, all the ammunition, and all the cannon, two
pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's hands. The
vitorious army did not lose above fourscore men k.

THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the fThesrfi.it
ancient victories of Crecy and Agincourt, gained
by the English on the fame frontier, bore a near
resemblance to those disastrous events, in the fud-
dennefs of the rout; in the ill-condut of the
commander in chief; in the number of persons of
note slain or taken; and in the small loss sus-
tained by the enemy. It filled France with equal
consternation. Many inhabitants of Paris, with
the fame precipitancy and trepidation as if the
enemy had been already at their gates, quitted
the city, and retired into the interior provinces.
The King, by his pretence and exhortations, en-
deavoured to console and to animate such as re-
mained, and applying himself with the greatest
diligence to repair the ruinous fortifications of
the city, prepared to defend it against the attack
which he instantly expeted. But happily for
France, Philip's caution, together with the in-
trepid firmness of the Admiral de Coligny, not
only saved the capital from the danger to which
it was exposed, but gained the nation a short in-

k Thuan. 650. I Harei Annal. Brabant. ii. 692. Her-
rera, 291.

terval,

B i0 K terval, during which the people recovered from

XII.
a_ -- the terror and deje&ion occasioned by a blow nc
'557. less revere than unexpected, and Henry had leisure

to take measures for the public security, with
the spirit which became the sovereign of a power-
ful and martial people.

Philip re- PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited
pairs to his
army. the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received

with all the exultation of military triumph; and
such were his transports of joy on account of an
event which threw so much lustre on the begin-
ning of his reign, that they softened his revere
and haughty temper into an unusual flow ofcour-
tefyr When the Duke of Savoy approached, and
was kneeling to kifs his hands, he caught him in
his arms, and embracing him with warmth, "It
becomes me, fays he, rather to kifs your hands,
which have gained me such a glorious and almoR
bloodless victory."

ws delibe- As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations
rations con- ,
cerningthe on Philip's arrival were over, a council of war
rof cuin was held, in order to determine how they might
of the war. .

improve their viEtory to the belt advantage. The
Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the ablefi
officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they
should immediately relinquish the siege of St.
Quintin, the reduction of which was now an ob-
jet below their attention, and advance diretly
towards Paris; that as there were neither troops
tp oppofc, nor any town of firength to retard

their

their march, they might reach that capital while B O O K
under the full impression of the astonishment and '--L-
terror occasioned by the rout of the army, and 1557.
take possession of it without resistance. But Phi-
lip, less adventurous or more prudent than his ge-
nerals, preferred a moderate but certain advan-
tage, to an enterprize of greater splendour, but of
more doubtful success. He represented to the
council the infinite resources of a kingdom so
powerful as France; the great number as well as
martial spirit of its nobles; their attachment to
their sovereign; the manifold advantages with which
they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable deftruEtion which muff be
the consequence of their penetrating too rahly
into the enemy's country, before they had secured
such a communication with their own as might
render a retreat safe, if, upon any disastrous event,
that measure should become necessary. On all
there accounts, he advised the continuance of the
liege, and his generals acquiesced the more readi-
ly in his opinion, as they made no doubt of being
masters of the town in a few days, a loss of time
of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might easily repair it by their fubfe-
quent activity '.

THE weakness of the fortifications, and the St. Quintin
frmall number of the garrison, which could no edmrad b
longer hope either for reinforcement or relief, c,,igny1
seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's

Bclcar. Commentar. de Reb. Gallis. 901.
*. generals,

B OX K. generals. But, in making it, they did not attend
I--_- sufficiently to the character of Admiral de Co.

'557. ligny, who commanded in the town. A courage

undifinayed, and tranquil amidst the greatest
dangers, an invention fruitful in resources, age.
nius which roused and seemed to acquire new
force upon every disaster, a talent of governing
the minds of men, together with a capacity of
maintaining his ascendant over them even under
clrcumftances the most adverse and distressful,
were qualities which Coligny possessed in a de.
gree superior to any general of that age. These
qualities were peculiarly adapted to the station
in which he was now placed; and as he knew
the infinite importance to his country of every
hour which he could gain at this jun&ture,hel
exerted himself to the utmost in contriving howl
to protract the siege, and to detain the enemy
from attempting any enterprize more dangerous

tken by to France. Such were the perseverance and
niauic. skill with which he condu&ed the defence, and

such the fortitude as well as patience with which
he animated the garrison, that though the Spa-
niards, the Flemings, and the English, carried
on the attack with all the ardour which national
emulation inspires, he held out the town seventeen
AuguR 27. days. He was taken prisoner, at last, on the

breach, overpowered by the superior number of
the enemy.

Penry's HEENRY availed himself, with the utmost a&i-
f.irthe. . vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well-
fencc of his
kingdom. timed

timed obstinacy had afforded him. He appoint- B 0OO K
ed officers to collet the scattered remains of the -
Constable's army; he issued orders for levying '557.
fo!diers in every part of the kingdom ; he com-
manded the ban and arriere ban of the frontier
provinces instantly to take the field, and to join
the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he re-
called the greater part of the veteran troops
which served under the Marechal Briffac in Pied-
mont; he sent courier after courier to the Duke
of Guise, requiring him, together with all his
army, to return initantly for the defence of their
country; he dispatched one envoy to the Grand
Signior, to solicit the assistance of his fleet, and
the loan of a fum of money; he sent another
into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the
north of England, that, by drawing Mary's at-
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the King were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his fubjeats. The city
of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred
thousand livres. The other great towns imitated
the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of diPtinftion en-
gaged, at their own expence, to garrison and de-
fend the towns which lay most exposed to the
enemy. Nor was the general concern for the
public confined to corporate bodies alone, or to
those in the higher sphere of life, but diffusing
itself among persons of every rank, each indivi-
dual fecmed disposed to aft with as much vigour

7 as

B 0 0 K as if the honour of the King, and the.fafety of

o- _

v the state, had depended solely on his single
3557* efforts n.

The viaory PHILIP, who was no firanger either to the pru.
of St. Quin-
tinproduc- dent mealures taken by the French monarch for
bdficil the security of his dominions, or to the fpiritwith
cn'fequn- which his fubjeCs prepared to defend themselves,

perceived, when it was too late, that he had los
an opportunity which could never be recalled,
and that it was now vain to think of penetrating
into the heart of France. He abandoned, there.
fore, without much relucance, a scheme which
was too bold and hazardous to be perfetly agree.
able to his cautious temper; and employed his
army, during the remainder of the campaign, in
the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of there, he
soon became matter; and the reduaion of two
such petty towns, together with the acquisition
of St. Quintin, were all the advantages which he
derived from one of the most decisive vitories;
gained in that century. Philip himself, how-
ever, continued in high exultation on accountof
his success; and as all his passions were tinged
with superstition, he, in memory of the battle of
St. Quintin, which had been fought on the day
consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a
church, a monastery, and a palace, in honour of
that faint and martyr. Before the expiration of
the year, he laid the foundation of an edifite, in
which all these were united, at the Escurial in the

'" Mca. de Ribier, ii. 701, 703.

neighbour'

neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fartie prin- B o ° K
ciple which dictated the vow, directed the build- I.-
ing. For the plan of the work was so formed as 5s57.
to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the
legendary tale, had been the instrument of St.
Laurence's martyrdom. Notwithstanding the great
and expensive schemes in which his restless am-
bition involved him, Philip continued the build-
ing with such perseverance for twenty-two years,
and reserved such large fums for this monument
of his devotion and vanity, that the monarchs of
Spain are indebted to him for a royal residence,
which, though not the most elegant, is certainly
the most sumptuous and- magnificent of any in
Europe n.

THE first account of that fatal blow which the TheFrench
French had received at St. Quintin was carried to a out"of
Rome by the courier whom Henry had sent to italy.
recal the Duke of Guise. As Paul, even with
the assistance of his French auxiliaries, had hardly
been able to check the progress of the Spanilh
arms, he foresaw that, as soon as he was depriv-
ed of their protection, his territories mufft be
over-run in a moment. He remonstrated there-
tore with the greatest violence against the depar-
ture of the French army, reproaching the Duke
ofGuife for his ill-conduCt, which had brought
hinl into such an unhappy situation; and com-
plaining of the King for deferring him so unge-

Colmenar Annales d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

nrIltoufly

B 0 i K neroufly under such circumstances. The Duke of
IL_-y- Guise's orders, however, were peremptory. Paul,

J557. inflexible as he was, found it necessary to accom.

modate his conduet to the exigency of his affairs,
and to employ the mediation of the Venetians,
and of Cosmo di Medici, in order to obtain peace.
Philip, who had been forced unwillingly to a
rupture with the Pope, and who, even while fuc-
cess crowned his arms, doubted so much the jus-
tice of his own cause, that he had made frequent
overtures of pacification, listened eagerly to the
first proposals of this nature from Paul, and dif-
covered such moderation in his demands, as could
hardly have been expected from a Prince elated
with victory.

A treaty of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and
peace be-
Ptwg the the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle,
Ppe and met at Cavi, and both being equally disposed to

peace, they, after a short conference, terminated
the war by a treaty on the following terms: That
Paul should renounce his league with France, and
maintain for the future such a neutrality as be-
came the common father of Chriftendorn; That
Philip should instantly restore all the towns of the
ecclesiastical territory of which he had taken pof-
ielfion; That the claims of the Caraffas to the
dutchy of Paliano, and other dcmefnes of the
Colonnas, fhoukl be referred" to the decision of
the republic of Venice; That the Jluke of Alva
flould repair in person to Rome, and after aflling
pardon of Paul in his own name, and in that of

his

his master, for having invaded the patrimony of B O 0 K
the church, should receive the Pope's absolution
from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's 1s557
scrupulous timidity, finished an unprofperous war
without any detriment to the Papal See. The
conqueror appeared humble, and acknowledged
his error; while he who had been vanquished re-
tained his usual haughtiness, and was treated with
every mark of superiority °. The Duke of Alva,
in terms of the treaty, repaired to Rome, and,
in the posture of a supplicant, kissed the feet, and
implored the forgiveness of that very person
whom his arms had reduced to the last extremity.
Such was the superstitious veneration of the Spa-
niards for the Papal character, that Alva, though
perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accuf-
tomed from his infancy to a familiar intercourse
with Princes, acknowledged that when he ap-
proached the Pope, he was so much overawed,
that his voice failed, and his pretence of mind
forsook him P.
BUT though this war, which at its commence- Philip re

sitores Pla-

ment threatened mighty revolutions, was brought tentiato
to an end without occasioning any alteration in oFrte.o
those States which were its immediate object, it
had produced during its progrels effeCts of confi-
derable confcquence in other parts of Italy. As
Philip was extremely solicitous to terminate his

° Pallav. lib. xiii. 183. F. Paul, 380. Herrcra, vol. i.
310. P Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Summontc Iftoria di
Napoli, iv. z86.

VOL. IV. S quarrel

B 0 0 K quarrel with Paul as speedily as possible, he was

,--_ willing to make any sacrifice in order to gain those
'5577 Princes, who, by joining their troops to the Papal

and French army, might have prolonged the war.
WVith this view, he entered into a negociation with
Oftavio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and, in order
to reduce him from his alliance with France, he
restored to him the city of Placentia, with the
territory depending on it, which Charles V. had
seized in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-feven, had kept from that time in his pof-
fcffion, and had transmitted, together with his
other dominions, to Philip.

Cofmodi THIS tfep made such a discovery of Philip's
mafures character and views to Cosmo di Medici, the molf
for obtan-
ing Sena. agacious as well as provident of all the Italian

Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplilh-
ing his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his
success in this attempt depended entirely on the
delicacy of address with which it should be con-
ducted, hc employed all the refinements of policy
in the ncgociation which he set on foot for this
purpose. l-e began with soliciting Philip, whose
treasury he knew to be entirely drained by the ex.
pence of the war, to repay the great fums which
he had advanced to the Emperor during the siege
of Siena. When Philip endeavoured to elude a
demand which he was unable to satisfy, Colinm
anffclcd to be extremely disquieted, and makilg
no secret of his disgust, inftruated his ambassador

at

at Rome to open a negociation with the Pope, B O O K
which seemed to be the effect of it. The ambaf- _-_-
fador executed his commission with such dexte- '55'5
rity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienated from the Spanish interest, proposed to
him an alliance with France which should be ce-
mented by the marriage of his eldest son to one
of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the over-
ture with such apparent -fatisfaAion, and with
so many professions of gratitude for the high
honour of which he had the prospect, that not
only the Pope's ministers, hut the French envoy
at Rome, talked confidently, and with little re-
serve, of the accession of that important ally, as
a matter certain and decided. The account of
this was quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo,
who foresaw how much it would alarm him, had
dispatched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into
the Netherlands, that he might be at hand to
observe and take advantage of his confternationy
before the first impreflion which it made should
in any degree abate. Cosmo was extremely for-
tunate in the choice of the instrument whom he
employed. Toledo waited, with patience, until
he discovered with certainty, that Philip had re-
ceived such intelligence of his uncle's negocia-
tions at Rome, as must have filled his suspicious
mind with fear and jealousy; and then craving an
audience, he required payment of the money
which had been borrowed by the Emperor, in the
motl: earnest and peremptory terms. In urging
that point, he artfully threw out several dark

S 2 hints

B o 1 KC quarrel with Paul as speedily as possible, he was

A-.-.-- wiliing to make any sacrifice in order to gain those
'S57 Princes, who, by joining their troops to the Papal

and French army, might have prolonged the war.
W'ith this view, he entered into a negociation with
Ocavio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and, in order
to reduce him from his alliance with France, he
reflored to him the city of Placentia, with the
territory depending on it, which Charles V. had
seized in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-feven, had kept from that time in his pof-
session, and had transmitted, together with his
other dominions, to Philip.

Cofmodi THIS ftep made such a discovery of Philip's
mI:furcs character and views to Cosmo di Medici, the most
for obtaon- r
,",Sien. sagacious as well as provident of all the Italian

Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplish-
ing his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his
success in this attempt depended entirely on the
delicacy of address with which it should be con-
dueled, he employed all the refinements of policy
in the ncgociation which he set on foot for this
purpose. I e began with soliciting Philip, whose
treasury he knew to be entirely drained by the ex-
pence of the war, to repay the great fums which
he had advanced to the Emperor during the siege
of Siena. When Philip endeavoured to elude a
demand which he was unable to satisfy, Cofin0
affccted to be extremely difcluieted, and making
no secret of his difguLt, inftruted his ambaffidor

at

at Rome to open a negociation with the Pope, B °0 K
which seemed to be the effecQ of it. The ambaf- .--
fador executed his commission with such dexte- ,5s7o
riry, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienated from the Spanish interest, proposed to
him an alliance with France which should be ce-
mented by the marriage of his eldest son to one
of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the over-
ture with such apparent -fatisfaEtion, and with
so many professions of gratitude for the high
honour of which he had the profpe&, that not
only the Pope's ministers, hut the French envoy
at Rome, talked confidently, and with little re-
serve, of the accession of that important ally, as
a matter certain and decided. The account of
this was quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo,
who foresaw how much it would alarm him, had
dispatched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into
the Netherlands, that he might be at hand to
observe and take advantage of his consternation,
before the first impression which it made should
in any degree abate. Cosmo was extremely for-
tunate in the choice of the instrument whom he
employed. Toledo waited, with patience, until'
he discovered with certainty, that Philip had re-
ceived such intelligence of his uncle's negocia-
tions at Rome, as inui have filled his suspicious
mind with fear and jealousy; and then craving an
audience, he required payment of the money
which had been borrowed by the Emperor, in the
moll earnest and peremptory terms. In urging
that point, he artfully threw out several dark

S 2 hints

n x 0 K hints and ambiguous declarations, concerning the

XII.
i _» i- extremities to which Cosmo might be driven by

'557' a refusal of this just demand, as well as by other

grievances of which he had good reason to com-
plain.
Their fuc- PHILIP, astonished at an address in such a fdrain,

Cr. from a Prince so far his inferior as the Duke of

Tuscany, and comparing what he now heard with
the information which he had received from Italy,
immediately concluded that Cosmo had ventured
to assume this bold and unusual tone on the pro-
fpeEt of his union with France. In order to pre-
vent the Pope and Henry from acquiring an ally,
who, by his abilities, as well as the situation of
his dominions, would have added both reputation
and strength to their confederacy, he offered to
grant Cosmo the investiture of Siena, if he would
content to accept of it as an equivalent for the
fums due to him, and engage to furnish a body
of troops towards the defence of Philip's terri-
tories in Italy, against any power who should at-
tack them. As soon as Cosmo had brought Phi-
lip to make this concession, which was the object
of all his artifices and intrigues, he did not pro-
tract the negociation by any unnecessary delay, or
any excess of refinement, but closed eagerly with
the proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remon-
ftrances of his ablest counsellors, signed a treaty
with him to that effeet q.

I Thuan. lib: xviii. 6z+. Herrcra, i. z63. Z75. Pallav
lib. xiii. i 8o.

As

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his B 0 o K

XII.

rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquish v_
any territory which he possessed, by what tenure '557'
soever he held it, there unusual concerfions to the
Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he wan-
tonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defend-
ing which his father had employed many years,
and wafted much blood and treasure, cannot be
accounted for from any motive, but his fuperfti-
tious desire of extricating himself out of the war
which he had been forced to wage against the
Pope. By these treaties, however, the balance
of power among the Italian States was poised
with greater equality, and rendered less variable
than it had been since it received the first violent
shock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of
France. From this period Italy ceased to be
the great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain,
France, and Germany, contended for power or for
fame. Their dissensions and hostilities, though
as frequent and violent as ever, being excited by
new objets, stained other regions of Europe with
blood, and rendered them miserable, in their turn,
by the devastations of war.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame day Sept. ,9.
that his adversary the Duke of Alva made his hu- Th, Duue
miliating fubmiflion to the Pope. He was re- reception in

France.

ceived in France as the guardian angel of the
kingdom. His late ill success in Italy seemed to
be forgotten, while his former services, particu-
larly his defence of Metz, were recounted with

S 3 exagge-

B 0 0 K exaggerated praise; and he was welcomed in every

A-_---' city through which he passed, as the restorer of
'55"7 public security, who, after having set bounds

by his conduct and valour to the victorious arms
of Charles V. returned now, at the call of his
country, to check the formidable progress of
Philip's power. The reception which he met
with from Henry was no less cordial and honour-
able. New titles were invented, and new digni-
ties created, in order to distinguish him. He
was appointed lieutenant-general in chief both
within and without the kingdom, with a jurif-
diction almost unlimited, and hardly inferior to
that which was pofleffed by the King himself.:
Thus, through the singular felicity which attended
the Princes of Lorrain, the miscarriage of theiri
own schemes contributed to aggrandize them.;
The calamities of his country, and the ill-conduEt
of his rival the constable, exalted the Duke of
Guise to a height of dignity and power, which1
he could not have expected to attain by the mofti
fortunate and moit complete success of his own'
ambitious projects.

'rkes the THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform some-
command
ofthearmy. thing suitable to the high expectations of his'

countrymen, and that he might justify the extra-:
ordinary confidence which the King had reposed'
in him, ordered all the troops, which could be
got together, to assemble at Compeigne. Though,
the winter was well advanced, and had set in withl
extreme severity, he placed himself at their head,

and

and took the field. By Henry's aaivity and the B °0 K
zeal of his fubjeEts, so many soldiers had been '-
raised in the kingdom, and such considerable re- 1557.
inforcements had been drawn from Germany and
Swifferland, as formed an army refpeEable even
in the eyes of a victorious enemy. Philip,
alarmed at feeing it put in motion at such an un-
common season, began to tremble for his new
conquests, particularly St. Quintin, the fortifi-
cations of which were hitherto but imperfec&ly
repaired.
BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more im- He invests

Ca'ais.

portant enterprize; and after amusing the enemy 155g.
with threatening fucceflively different tc'1vns on January it.
the frontiers of Slanders, he turned suddenly to
the left, and invested Calais with his whole army.
Calais had been taken by the English under Ed-
ward III. and was the fruit of that monarch's
glorious viEtory at Crecy. Being the only place
that they retained of their ancient and extensive
territories in France, and which opened to them,
at all times, an easy and secure passage into the
heart of that kingdom, their keeping pofitffion
of it soothed the pride of the one nation as much
as it mortified the vanity of the other. Its fitua-
tion was naturally so strong, and its fortifications
deemed lb impregnable, that no monarch of
France, how adventurous soever, had been bold
enough to attack it. Even when the domestic
flrength of England was broken and exhausted
by the bloody wars between the houses of York

S 4 and

B o0 K and Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted

xn1.
A-_c from foreign objects, Calais had remained undif-

5 turbed and unthreatened. Mary and her coun-

cil, cornpofed chiefly of ecclesiastics, unac-
quainted with military affairs, and whore whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy
out of the kingdom, had not only neglected to
take any precautions for the safety of this im-
portant place, but seemed to think that the repu-
tation of its strength was alone sufficient for its
security. Full of this opinion, they ventured,
even after the declaration of war, to continue a
practice which the low slate of the Queen's;
finances had introduced in times of peace. As the
country adjacent to Calais was overflowed during
the winter, and the marshes around it became
impassable, except by one avenue, which the
forts of St. Agatha and Newnham-bridge corn-
manded, it had been the cuflom of the English
to difminis the greater part of the garrison towards
the end of autumn, and to replace it in the

Jtg defence. spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the Go-
left, . vernor of Calais, remonstrate againf: this ill-

timed parsimony, and represent the possibility of
his being attacked fiddenly, while he had not
troops fifficient to man the works. The privy-
council treated these remonstrances with scorn, as
if they had flowed from the timidity or the rapa-
cioufnefs of the governor; and some of them,
with that confidence which is the companion of
ignorance, boanted that they would defend Calais
with their white rods against any enemy who

liould

should approach it during winter . In vain did B O o K
Philip, who had passed through Calais as he re- Be
turned from England to the Netherlands, warn ,5Ss
the Queen of the danger to which it was exposed;
and acquainting her with what was necessary for
its security, in vain did he offer to reinforce the
garrison during winter with a detachment of his
own troops. Mary's counsellors, though obfe-
quious to her in all points wherein religion was
concerned, distrusted, as much as the reft of their
countrymen, every proposition that came from
her husband; and fufpefting this to be an artifice
of Philip's in order to gain the command of the
town, they negleaed his intelligence, declined
his offer, and left Calais with less than a fourth part
of the garrison requisite for its defence.
His knowledge of this encouraged the Duke Guifepumhe

the siege

of Guise to venture on an enterprize, that fur- with vigour.
prized his own countrymen no less than his
enemies. As he knew that its success depended
on conducting his operations with such rapidity
as would afford the English no time for throwing
relief into the town by sea, and prevent Philip
from giving him any interruption by land, he
pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little
known in carrying on sieges during that age.
He drove the Englifl from fort St. Agatha at the
firt assault. H-e obliged them to abandon the fort
of Newnham-bridge after defending it only three

1 Carte, iii. 345.

days.

B OXI K days. He took the castle which commanded thi

-,-_ harbour by ftormn; and on the eighth day afte
1558. he appeared before Calais, compelled the gover

Takes the nor to surrender, as his feeble garrison, which dic
town, not exceed five hundred men, was worn out with

the fatigue of iufaining so many attacks, and de-
fending such extensive works.

andlikewife THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the Eng-
Guifnes and
Hamel. lifh time to recover from the consternation occa-

rioned by this blow, immediately invested Guifnes,
the garrison of which, though more numerous,
defended itself with less vigour, and after fland-
ing one brisk afiault, gave up the town. The
castle of Hames was abandoned by the troops
posted there, without waiting the approach of the
enemy.

The plen- THUS, in a few days, during th'e depth of
dour and
efrea of winter, and at a time when the fatal battle of St.
ghesle'cn Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit of

the French, that their utmost aim was to protect
their own country, without dreaming of making
conquests on the enemy, the enterprizing valour
of one man drove the Englifl out of Calais,
after they had held it two hundred and ten years,
and deprived them of every foot of land in a'
kingdom, where their dominions had been once.
very extensive. This exploit, at the fame time.
that it gave an high idea of the power and re-,
sources of France to all Europe, set the Duke of
Guise, in the opinion of his countrymen, fir

above

above all the generals of the age. They cele- B 0o Kz
brated his conquests with immoderate transports _
of joy; while the Englilh gave vent to all the 's58.
passions which animate a high-fpirited people,
when any great national calamity is manifeffly
owing to the ill condu&t of their rulers. Mary
and her ministers, formerly odious, were now
contemptible in their eyes. All the terrors of
her severe and arbitrary administration could not
restrain them from uttering execrations-and threats
against those, who having wantonly involved the
nation in a quarrel wherein it was nowise interested,
had by their negligence or incapacity brought
irreparable disgrace on their country, and loft the
moit valuable possession belonging to the English

crown.

THE King of France imitated the conduc of its
former conqueror, Edward III. with regard to
Calais. He commanded all the English inhabit-
ants to quit the town, and giving their houses
to his own fubje ts, whom he allured to fettle
there by granting them various immunities, he
left a numerous garrison, under an experienced
governor, for their defence. After this, his vic-
torious army was conducted into quarters of refresh-
ment, and the usual inaction of winter returned.

DURING there various operations, Ferdinand Feb. 4,

afilmbled the college of EleEtors at Frankfort, in reignati'n
oiler to lay before them the inftrumnent whereby f'the ln.
Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and crown.

5 tranf-

o o K transferred it to him. This he had hitherto de.
xI'.
t_--.'_ layed on account of some difficulties which had

's558 occurred concerning the formalities requisite in

supplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to
which there was no parallel in the annals of the,
Empire. These being at length adjusted, the
Prince of Orange executed the commission with
which he had been entrusted by Charles; the
Ele&ors accepted of his resignation; declared
Ferdinand his lawful successor; and put him in
possession of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

The Pope BUT when the new Emperor sent Gufinan his
ackowufo chancellor to acquaint the Pope with this tranf-
ledge Ferdi- ation, to testify his reverence towards the Holy
]Emperor. See, and to signify that, according to form, he

would soon dispatch an ambassador extraordinary
to treat. with his Holiness concerning his coro-
nation; Paul, whom neither experience nor dif-
appointments could teach to bring down his lofty
ideas of the papal prerogative to such a moderate
standard as suited the genius of the times, refilfed
to admit the envoy into his pretence, and de-
clared all the proceedings at Frankfort irregular
and invalid. He contended that the Pope, as
the vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the
keys both of spiritual and of civil government;
that from him the Imperial jurifdision was de-
rived; that though his predeceffols had authorised
the Eletors to chufe an Emperor whom the Holy
See confirmed, this privilege was confined to

2 tthofc

those cafes when a vacancy was occasioned by B 0 O K
death; that the instrument of Charles's refigna-
tion had been presented in an improper court, as '55s
it belonged to the Pope alone to reject or to ac-
cept of it, and to nominate a person to fill the
Imperial throne; that, fetcing aside all these ob-
jedions, Ferdinand's election laboured under
two defecs which alone were sufficient to render
it void, for the Protestant EleAors had been ad-
mitted to vote, though by their apoftacy from
the Catholic faith, they had forfeited that and
every other privilege of the electoral office; and
Ferdinand, by ratifying the concessions of several
Diets in favour of heretics, had rendered him-
self unworthy of the Imperial dignity, which
was instituted for the protection, not for the de-
{truftion, of the church. But after thundering
outthefe extravagant maxims, he added, with an
appearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand
would renounce all title to the Imperial crown,
founded on the eleEtion at Frankfort, make pro-
fefions of repentance for his past conduct, and
supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm
Charles's resignation, as well as his own assumption
to the Empire, he might expe&t every mark of
favour from his paternal clemency and goodness.
Gufman, though he had foreseen considerable
ifficulties in his negociation with the Pope,
ittle expe6ted that he would have revived those
Intiquated and wild pretensions, which aftoniflied
nim so much, that he hardly knew in what tone
ic ought to reply. He prudently declined enter-

ing

B O 1 K ing into any controversy concerning the nature or

,-i. - extent of the papal jurifdition, and confining
z558. himself to the political considerations, whici

should determine the Pope to recognize an Em.
peror already in pofieffion, he endeavoured to
place them in such a light, as he imagined could
scarcely fail to firike Paul, if he were not alto-
gether blind to his own interelt. Philip seconded
Gufnan's arguments with great earnestness, by
an ambassador whom he sent to Rome on purpose,
and besought the Pope to desist from claims so
unseasonable, as might not only irritate and alarni
Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but
furnish the enemies of the Holy See with a newr
reason for representing its jurifdicion as incomn
patible with the rights of Princes, and, subversive
of all civil authority. But Paul, who deemed is
a crime to attend to any consideration suggested
by human prudence or policy, when he thought
himself called upon to afiert the prerogatives o0
the Papal See, remained inflexible; and, during
his pontificate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged
as Emperor by the court of Romes.

Tenry en- WHILE H-enry was intent upon his preparat
deavours to
xcite the tions for the approaching campaign, he received
Scots against
ieLnd." accounts of the issue of his negociations in Scott

land. Long experience having at last taught th4
Scots the imprudence of involving their country
in every quarrel between France and England}

* Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. Polit. Impec
392. Pallaw. lib. xii. 189. l(ibiar, ii. 746. 759.

neither

neither the solicitations of the French ambassador, B 00 K
nor the address and authority of the Queen-regent, ---
could prevail on them to take arms against a king- 5
dorn with which they were at peace. On this
occasion the ardour of a martial nobility and of a
turbulent people was restrained by regard for the
public interest and tranquillity, which in former
deliberations of this kind had been seldom attended
to by a nation always prone to rush into every
new war. But though the Scots adhered with
[eadinefs to their pacific system, they were ex-
tremely ready to gratify the French King in an-
other particular, which he had given in charge to
his ambassador.
THE young Queen of Scots had been affianced Marriage of

tl e Dauphin

to the Dauphin in the year one thousand five withthe
hundred and forty-eight, and having been edu- sotsof
cated since that time in the court of France, ihe
had grown up to be the mofl amiable, and one
of the most accomplished Princesses of that age.
Henry demanded the content of her fubjeEts to
the celebration of the marriage, and a parliament,
which was held for that purpose, appointed eight
comnmifioners to represent the whole body of the
nation at that solemnity, with power to lign such
deeds as might be requisite before it was con-
cluded. In fettling the articles of the marriage,
the Scots took every precaution that prudence
could ditate, in order to preserve the liberty and
independence of their country; while the French
"lcd every art to secure to the Dauphin the con-

dua

B 0 0 K du&t of affairs during the Queen's life, and tl

A _* fuccefflon of the crown on the event of her d4
April l4. mise. The marriage was celebrated with pom

suitable to the dignity of the parties, and th
magnificence of a court at that time the moi
splendid in Europe '. Thus Henry, in the cour
of a few months, had the glory of recovering aj
important possession which had anciently belonge1
to the crown of France, and of adding to it thl
acquisition of a new kingdom. B,^this event, too
the Duke of Guise acquired new consideration an,
importance; the marriage of his niece to the ap
parent heir of the crown, raising him so far abov
the condition of other fubjeAs, that the credi
which he had gained by his great acions, feeme
thereby to be rendered no less permanent than it w
extentive.

The cam- WHEN the campaign opened, soon after th
p.n open- Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise wa

placed at the head of the army, with the fam
unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re
ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjeEts, tha
the troops under his command were both nu
merous and well appointed; while Philip, ex
haufted by the extraordinary efforts of the pre
ceding year, had been obliged to dismiss f
many of his forces during the winter, that h
could not bring an army into the field capable o
making head against the enemy. The Duke o

t Keith's Hiflory of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps
Diplom. v. 21. Gife

I Io

Guise did not lose the favourable opportunity B o 0 K
which his superiority afforded him. He invested '---
Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg, one 1558'
of the strongest towns on the frontier of the
Netherlands, and of great importance to France
by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-
standing the obstinate valour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege of

June i2,

three weeks .
BUT the success of this enterprize, which it The French

army de.

was expeted would lead to other conquests, was featedat
more than counterbalanced by an event that Graveline
happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fition, invested Dunkirk with an army of fourteen
thousand men, and took it by storm on the fifth
day of the siege. Hence he advanced towards
Nieuport, which must have soon falen into his
hands, if the approach of the Count of Egmont
with a superior army had not made it prudent to
retreat. The French troops were so much en-
cumbered with the booty which they had got at
Dunkirk, 'or by ravaging the open country, that
they moved slowly; and Egmont, who had left
his heavy baggage and artillery behind him,
marched with such rapidity, that he came up with
them near Gravelines, and attacked them with

u Thuan. lib. xx. 690.
VOL. IV. T the

B 0 0 K the utmost impetuosity. De Termes, who had

the choice of the ground, having potted his
Ss58. troops to advantage in the angle formed by the

mouth of the river Aa and the sea, received him
with great firmness. Victory remained for some
time in suspense, the desperate valour of the
French, who foresaw the unavoidable deftru&ion
that must follow upon a rout in an enemy's
country, counterbalancing the superior number
of the Flemings, when one of those accidents to
which human prudence does not extend, decided
the contest in favour of the latter. A squadron
of English ships of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered the
river Aa, and turned its great guns against the
right wing of the French, with such effect, as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom assistance, so unexpeCted and
lo seasonable, gave fresh fpirir, redoubled their
efforts, that they might not lose the advantage
which fortune had presented them, or give the
enemy time to recover from their consternation,
and the rout of the French soon became uni-
vcrlal. Near two thousand were killed on the
ipot; a greater number fell by the hands of the
peasants, who, in revenge for the cruelty with
which their country had been plundered, pursued:
the fugitives, and massacred them without mercy;
the rett were taken prisoners, together with

Dc

De Termes their general, and many officers of B O° E; K
diRintion".

1558.

THrs signal viAory, for which the Count of fuifop.
Egmont was afterwards so ill requited-hy Philip, poed tiha
obliged the Duke of Guile to relinquish all other army.
schemes, and to haften towards the frontier of
Picardv, that he might oppose the progress of the
enemy in that province. This difafler, however,
refleed new lustre on his reputation, and once
more turned the eyes of his countrymen towards
him, as the only general on whose arms vidory
always attended, and in whose condu&, as well as
good fortune, they could confide in every danger.
Henry reinforced the Dukeof Guise's army with
formany troops drawn from the adjacent garrisons,
that it soon amounted to forty thousand men.
That of the enemy, after the junction of Egmont
with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in num-
ber. They encamped at the distance of a few
leagues fi-om one another; and each monarch
having joined his refpeftive army, it was expe&ed,
after the vicissitudes of good and bad success
during this and the former campaign, that a deci-
five battle would at last determine, which of the
rivals (hould take the ascendant for the future,
and give law to Europe. But though both had
it in their power, neither of them discovered any
inclination to bring the determination of such an
important point to depend upon the uncertain

x Thoan. lib. xx. 694.

T 2 ifue

B 0 0 K ifue of a tingle battle. The fatal engagement

v----, at St. QOuintin and Gravelines were too recent t(
J55S. be so soon forgotten, and the profpet of encoun

tering the fame troops, commanded by the fami
generals who had twice triumphed over his arms
inspired Henry with a degree of caution whicl
was not common to him. Philip, of a genius
averse to bold operations in war, naturally leaned
to cautious measures, and was not disposed to
hazard any thing againit a general so fortunati
and successful as the Duke of Guise. Both mo
narchs, as if by agreement, flood on the defen
five, and fortifying their camps carefully, avoided
every skirmish or rencounter that might bring o
a general engagement.

Both mo- %WHILE the armies continued in this inaction
narchsbegin
to desire peace began to be mentioned in each camp, an
peace. both Henry and Philip discovered an inclinatio

to liften to any overture that tended to re-eftabli
it. The kingdoms of France and Spain had bee
engaged during half a century in almost con
tinual wars, carried on at great expence, and pro
durtive of no considerable advantage to eithe
F.xhaufted by extraordinary and unceasing e
forts, which far exceeded those to which th
nations of Europe had been accustomed befor
the rivalfhip between Charles V. and Francis
both nations longed so much for an interval
repose, in order to recruit their strength, tha
their fovcreigns drew from them with difficult
the supplies neceffarry for carrying on hoitilities

'Th,

I.

The private inclinations of both the Kings con- E o o K
curred with those of their people. Philip was ---
prompted to wish for peace by his fond desire of 558.
returning to Spain. Accustomed from his in-
fancy to the climate and manners of that country,
he was attached to it with such extreme predi-
lecion, that he never felt himself at ease in any
other part of his dominions. But as he could
not quit the Low Countries, either with decency
or safety, and venture on a voyage to Spain during
the continuance of war, the profpet of a pacifi-
cation which would put it in his power to execute
his favourite scheme, was highly acceptable.
Henry was no less desirous of being delivered
from the burden and occupations of war, that he
might have leisure to turn all his attention, and
bend the whole force of his government, towards
fupprefling the opinions of the Reformers, which
were spreading with such rapidity in Paris and
other great towns of France, that they began to
grow formidable to the established church.

BESIDES these public and avowed confidera- An intrigue
tions arising from the Rate of the two hostile if Fhane
kingdoms, or fi-cn the wifies of their refpedtive facilitatesit.
monarchs, there was a secret intrigue carried on
in the court of France, which contributed as
much as either of the other, to haften and to fa-
cilitate the negociation of a peace. The Con-
Itable Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld
tihe rapid ificcefs and growing favour of the Duke
of Guise with the envy natural to a rival. Every

TI 3 advantage

B 0 K advantage gained by. the Princes of Lorrain he

x_ ,, confidered as a fresh wound to his own reputation,
55sjs and he knew with what malevolent address it would

be improved to diminish his credit with the King,
and to augment that of the Duke of Guise. These
arts, he was afraid, might, by degrees, work on
the ealy and ductile mind of Henry, so as to
efface all remains of his ancient affection towards
himself. But he could not discover any remedy
for this, unless he were allowed to return home,
that he might try whether by his pretence he
could defeat the artifices of his enemies, and re-
vive those warm and tender sentiments which had
long attached Henry to him, with a confidence
so entire, as relenbled rather the cordialty of
private friendship, than the cold and selfish con-
nexion between a monarch and one of his cour-
tiers. NWhile Monrtmorency was forming fchenes
and wifthes for his retuin to France wich much
anxiety of mind, but with little hope of lfccefs,
an unexpeaced incident prepared the way for it.
The Cardinal of Lorrain, who had sharcd with
his brother in the King's favour, and partici-
pated of the power which that conferred, did not
bear prosperity with the fame discretion as the
Duke of Guile. Intoxicated vith their good
fortune, he forgot how much they had been in-
debted for their present elevation to their con-
nexions with the Dutchels of Valentinois, and
vaiinly atci ibec all to the extraordinary merit of
their family. This led him not only to neglct
his bcncfatlrcfs, but to thwart her fchemcs, anel

2 to

to talk with a sarcastic liberty of her charaóer B o10 K
and person. That singular woman, who, if we tv
may believe contemporary writers, retained the 1s5j8
beauty and charms of youth at the age of three-
score, and on whom it is certain that Henry frill
doated with all the fondness of love, felt this injury
with fenfibilicy, and set herself with eagerness to
inflict the vengeance which it merited. As there
was no method of supplanting the Princes of Lor-
rain so effectually as by a coalition ofinterefts with
the Conltable, she proposed the marriage of her
grand-daughter with one of his sons, as the bond
of their future union; and Montmorency readily
gave his content to the match. Having thus
cemented their alliance, the Dutchess employed
all her influence with the King, in order to con-
firm his inclinations towards peace, and induce
him to take the steps necessary for attaining it.
She insinuated that any overture of that kind
would come with great propriety from the Con-
stable, and if entrufled to the conduct of his pru-
dence, could hardly fail of fuccels.

I-ENRY, long accustomed to commit all affairs Henrycom-
of importance to the management of the Con- mt'lthcn"

tDFgociation to
flable, and needing only this encouragement to M')ntto-

-

, i .' rency.

return to his ancient habits, wrote to him imme-
liatcly with his usual familiarity and affection,
empowering him at the fame time to take the first
ol)lortunity of founding Philip and his ministers
v-ith regard to peace. Montmorency made his
lpplication to Philip by the most proper channel.

T 4 l-ie

B 0 OK He opened himself to the Duke of Savoy, who,

v----* notwithstanding the high commnandto which he
55s8. had been raised, and the military glory which he

had acquired in the Spanish service, was weary of
remaining in exile, and languished to return into
his paternal dominions. As there was no profpel
of his recovering possession of them by force of
arms, he confidered a definitive treaty of peace
between France and Spain, as the only event by
which he could hope to obtain reititution. Being
no stranger to Philip's private wishes with regard
to peace, he easily prevailed on him not only to
discover a disposition on his part towards accom.
modation, but to permit Montmorency to return,
on his parole, to France, that he might confirm
his own Sovereign in his pacific Sentiments. Henry
received the Constable with the most flattering
marks of regard; absence, inffead of having
abated or extinguished the Monarch's friendship,
seemed to have given it new ardour. Montmo-
rency, firom the moment of his appearance in
court, assumed, if possible, a higher place than
ever in his affection, and a more perfet ascendant
over his mind. The Cardinal of Lorrain and
Duke of Guise prudently gave way to a tide of
favour too strong for them to oppose, and con-
fining themselves to their proper departments, per-
mitted, without any firuggle, the Conflable and
Dutchess of Valentinois to direc public allairs at
their pleasure. They soon prevailed on the King
to nominate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace.
Philip did the fame. The abbey of Cercamp was

fixed

fixed on as the place of congress; and all mill- B O O K
tary operations were immediately terminated by I
a suspension of arms. 5s8.

WHILE these preliminary steps were taking to- Death of
wards a treaty which restored tranquillity to Eu- Ch"arl .
rope, Charles V. whose ambition had so long dif-
turbed it, ended his days in the monastery of St.
Jugtus. When Charles entered this retreat, he
formed such a plan of life for himself, as would
have suited the condition of a private gentleman
of a moderate fortune. His table was neat, but
plain; his domestics few; his intercourse with
them familiar; all the cumbersome and ceremo-
nious forms of attendance on his person were en-
tirely abolished, as deftruEtive of that social ease
and tranquillity which he courted, in order to
soothe the remainder of his days. As the mild-
ness of the climate, together with his deliverance
from the burdens and cares of government, pro-
cured him, at first, a considerable remifflon from
the acute pains with which he had been long tor-
mented; he enjoyed, perhaps, more complete fa-
tisfaEtion in this humble solitude, than all his
grandeur had ever yielded him. The ambitious
thoughts and projects which had so long engross-
ed and disquieted him, were quite effaced from
his mind; far from taking any part in the poli-
tical tranfaaions of the Princes of Europe, he
restrained his curiosity even from any inquiry
concerning them; and he seemed to view the
bury scene which he had abandoned with all the

contempt

B o0 K contempt and indifference arising from his tho
»v_ o Lrough experience of its vanity, as well as from th

'15S. pleating reflection of having disentangled himsel

from its cares.

is anmu'e OTHER amusements, and other objects now oc-
ments in his
·etiea. cupled him. Sometimes he cultivated the plants

in his garden with his own hands; sometimes he
rode out to the neighbouring wood on a little horse,
the only one that he kept, attended by a single
servant on foot. When his infirmities confined
him to his apartment, which often happened, and
deprived him of these more active recreations, he
either admitted a few gentlemen who resided near
the monastery to visit him, and entertained them
familiarly at his table; or he employed himself
in studying mechanical principles, and in forming
curious works of mechanifin, of which he had
always been remarkably fond, and to which his
genius was peculiarly turned. With this view he
had engaged Turriano, one of the molt ingenious
artifis of that age, to accompany him in his re-
treat. I-ec laboured together with him in fram-
ing models of the most useful machines, as well
as in making experiments with regard to their re-
1ieCRive powers, and it was not feldorn that the
ideas of the monarch a:tlecl or perfelced the in-
ventions of the artist. He relieved his mind, at
intervals, with fighter and more fantaflic works
of merchanifii, in faflioning puppets, which, by
the firucture of internal springs, mimicked the
geflures and adions of men, to the afloniflilmnt

of

of the ignorant monks, who beholding move- B ° o K
ments which they could not comprehend, some- -
times distrusted their own senses, and sometimes 'ss.
fuf!)caed Charles and Turriano of being in com-
pact with invisible powers. lie was particularly
curious with regard to the conftrudion of clocks
and watches; and having found, after repeated
trials, that he could not bring any two of them
to go exacsly alike, he reflected, it is said, with
a mixture of surprise as well as regret, on his
ovn folly, in having bestowed so much time and
labour on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of sentiment
concerning the profound and mysterious doEtrines
of religion.
BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed of H;i more

serious oc-

the reft of his time, he constantly reserved a con- cupaions.
fiderable portion of it for religious exercises. He
regularly attended divine service in the chapel of
the monastery, every morning and evening; he
took great pleasure in reading books of devotion,
particularly the works of St. Augultine and St.
Bernard; and converted much with his confessor,
and the prior of the monastery, on pious sub-
jeds. Thus did Charles pass the first year of his
retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a man per-
felly disengaged from the affairs of the present life,
and fl-anding on the confines of a future world;
either in innocent amusements, which toothed his
pains, and relieved a mind worn out with excefive
application to bufinofs; or in devout occupations,

which

B o 0 K which he deemed necessary in preparing for another

f tate.

1558.

The causes BUT about fix months before his death, the
*fhs death.

gout, after a longer intermission than usual, re-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His shattered conffitution had not vigour enough
remaining to withstand such a shock. It enfeebled
his mind as much as his body, and from this pe-
riod we hardly discern any traces of that found
and miafculine underfianding, which distinguished
Charles among his contemporaries. An illi-
beral and timid superstition depressed his spirit.
He had no relish for amusements of any kind.
He endeavoured to conform, in his manner of
living, to all the rigour of monaflit austerity.
He desired no other society than that of monks,
and was almost continually employed with them
in chanting the hymns of the Missal. As an ex-
piation for his fins, he gave himself the discipline
in secret with such severity, that the whip of cords
which he employed as the instrument of his pu-
nithment, was found after his decease tinged with
his blood. Nor was he satisfied with these atis of
mortification, which, however severe, were not
unexampled. The timorous and dillruftful Ioli-
citude which always accompanies lfupcriition,
fill continued to dilquiet him, and depreciating
all the devout exercises in which he had hitherto
been engaged, prompted him to aim at some-
thing extraordinary, at some new and singular
act of piety that would dilplay his zeal, and

merit

merit the favour of Heaven. The as on which B 0 0 K

XJ.

he fixed was as wild and uncommon as any that -
superstition ever suggested to a weak and difor- 5
dered fancy. He resolved to celebrate his own
obsequies before his death. He ordered his tomb
to be ereeed in the chapel of the monastery. His
domestics marched thither in funeral procession,
with black tapers in their hands. He himself
followed in his shroud. He was laid in his coffin,
with much solemnity. The service for the dead
was chanted, and Charles joined in the prayers
which were offered up for the reft of his foul,
mingling his tears with those which his attend-
ants shed, as if they had been celebrating a real
funeral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling
holy water on the coffin in the usual form, and
all the assistants retiring, the doors of the chapel
were shut. Then Charles rose out of the coffin,
and withdrew to his apartment, full of those aw-
ful sentiments which such a singular solemnity
was calculated to inspire. But either the fatiguing
length of the ceremony, or the imprefion which
the image of death left on his mind, affeeted him
so much, that next day he was seized with a fever.
His feeble frame could not long refifl its violence,
and he expired on the twenty-firfl of September,
after a life of fifty-eight years, fix months, and
twenty-five days Y.

Y Strada de Bello Bclg. lib. i. p. 1 . Thuan. 723. San-
dov. ii. 609, &c. Miniana Contin. Mariana, vol. iv. z26.
Vcra y Zuniga Vida de Cailos, p. I 1.

As

B 0 0 K As Charles was the first Prince of the age in

Xil.
A_- rank and dignity, the part which he aced, whether
,Hi]s.- we confider the greatness, the variety, or the fuc-
ter. cess of his undertakings, was the most confpi-

cuous. It is from an attentive observation of his
condu&t, not from the exaggerated praises of the
Spanish historians, or the undiftinguifhing censure
of the French, that a just idea of Charles's genius
and abilities is to be collected. He possessed qua-
lities so peculiar, that they strongly mark his cha-
racter, and not only distinguish him from the
Princes who were his contemporaries, but account
for that superiority over them which he so long
maintained. In forming his schemes, he was, by
nature, as well as by habit, cautious and confider-
ate. Born with talents which unfolded themselves
slowly, and were late in attaining maturity, he
was accustomed to ponder every iubje& that de-
manded his consideration, with a careful and deli-
berate attention. He bent the whole force of his
mind towards it, and dwelling upon it with a
serious application, undiverted by pleasure, and
hardly relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it,
in silence, in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his resolution with a de-
cifive firmness, which fcldom follows such flow,
and seemingly hesitating consultations. Of con-
sequence, Charles's micafures, inflead of refem-
bling the desultory and irregular sallies of Henry
VIII. or Francis I. had the appearance of a con-
firtent yflein, in which all the parts were arran-

gel,

ged, all the effe6ts were foreseen, and even every Bs o K

XII.

accident was provided for. His promptitude in ._-
execution was no less remarkable than his patience s558
in deliberation. He did not discover greater
fagacicy in his choice of the measures which it
:as proper to pursue, than fertility of genius in
finding out the means for rendering his pursuit
of them successful. Though he had naturally so
little of the martial turn, that during the moil
ardent and bustling period of life, 'he remained
in the cabinet inactive, yet when he chose at
length to appear at the head of his armies, his
mind was so formed for vigorous exertions in
every direction, that he acquired such knowledge
in the art of war, and such talents for command,
as rendered him equal in reputation and success
to the molt able generals of the age. But Charles
possessed, in the most eminent degree, the science
which is of greatest importance to a monarch,
that of knowing men, and of adapting their ta-
lents to the various departments which he allotted
to them. From the death of Chievres to the end
of his reign, he employed no general in the field,
no minitter in the cabinet, no ambalTador to a
foreign court, no governor of a province, whose
abilities were inadequate to the trust which he
reposed in them. Though destitute of that be-
witching afflability of manners, which gained
Francis the hearts of all who approached his per-
Tfn, he was no firanger to the virtues which if-
cure fidelity and attachment. He placed un-
bounded confidence in his generals; he rewarded

their

B 0 0 K their services with munificence; he neither envied
L 1 --@ their fame, nor discovered any jealousy of theii
J$8· power. Almofi all the generals who conduced

his armies, may be placed on a level with those
illustrious personages who have attained the high-
eft eminence of military glory; and his advan.
tages over his rivals, are to be ascribed so mani-
feftly to the superior abilities of the commanders
whom he set in opposition to them, that this
might seem to detra&t, in some degree, from his
own merit, if the talent of discovering and fteadi-
ness in employing such instruments were not
the most undoubted proofs of a capacity for
government.

THERE were, nevertheless, defects in his po-

litical character which must considerably abate
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents.
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed the
chimerical proje&t of establishing an universal mo-
narchy in Europe, it is certain that his desire of
being distinguished as a conqueror involved him
in continual wars, which not only exhausted and
oppressed his fuibjedts, but left him little leisure
for giving attention to the interior police and im-
provement of his kingdoms, the great objects of
every Prince who makes the happiness of his
people the end of his government. Charles, at
a very early period of life, having added the Im-
perial crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and to

the

the hereditary dominions of the houses ofAuftria -B o oi
and Burgundy, this opened to him such a vast c
field of enterprize, and engaged him in schemes lss.
so complicated as well as arduous, that feeling
his power to be unequal to the execution of them,
he had often recourse to low artifices, unbecoming
his superior talents, and sometimes ventured on
such deviations from integrity, as were difho-
nourable in a great Prince. His insidious and
fraudulent policy appeared more conspicuous, and
was rendered more odious by a comparison with
the open and undesigning character of his con-
temporaries Francis I. and Henry VIII. This
difference, though occasioned chiefly by the di-
verfity of their tempers, must be ascribed, in
some degree, to such an opposition in the prin-
ciples of their political condu& as affords some
excuse for this defe6t in Charles's behaviour,
though it cannot serve as a justification of it.
Francis and Henry seldom aaed but from the im-
pulse of their passions, and rushed headlong to-
wards the object in view. Charles's measures,
being the result of cool reflection, were disposed
into a regular system, and carried on upon a con-
certed plan. Persons who aa in the former man-
ner, naturally pursue the end in view, without
assuming any diiguife, or displaying much ad-
dress. Such as hold the latter course, are apt, in
forming, as well as in executing their designs, to
employ such refinements as always lead to artifice
in conduct, and often degenerate into deceit.

VOL. IV. U THE

B 0 O K THE circumstances transmitted to us, with re.

XII.
i<--~-i fpea to Charles's private deportment and charac-

55 ter, are fewer and less interesting, than might have

been expected from the great number of authors
who have undertaken to write an account of his
life. These are not the object of this history,
which aims more at representing the great tranf-
acions of the reign of Charles V. and pointing out
the manner in lwhich they affelted the political state
of Europe, than at delineating his private virtues
or defects.

on ference THE plenipotentiaries of France, Spain, and
in order to
pccc. England, continued their conferences at Cer-

camp; and though each of them, with the usual
art of negociators, made at firfl: very high de-
mands in the name of their refpetive courts, yet
as they were all equally desirous of peace, they
would have consented reciprocally to such abate-
ments and reflridtions of their claims, as must
have removed every obstacle to an accommoda-
tion. The death of Charles V. was a new motive
with Philip to haflen the conclusion of a treaty,
as it increased his impatience for returning into
Spain, where there was now no perlon greater or
more illustrious than himself. Bur, in spite of
the concurring wishes of all the parties interelted,
an event happened which occasioned an unavoid-
able delay in their negociations. About a month
after the opening of the conferences at Cercamp,

. '7. Mary of England ended her flort and inglorious
tary of reign, and Elizabeth, her fiter, was immediately

proclaimed

proclaimed Qieen with universal joy. As the B °o° K
powers of the English plenipotentiaries expired on -
the death of their mistress, they could not proceed 5sa.
until they received a commifflon and inftrutions
from their new Sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation Hent, and

Philip court

to the throne with equal solicitude. As during Elizabeth
Mary's jealous administration, under the most cefsrr.
difficult circumstances, and in a situation extreme-
ly delicate, that Princess had conducted herself
with prudence and address far exceeding her years,
they had conceived an high idea of her abilities,
and already formed expectations of a reign very
different from that of her sifter. Equally sensible
of the importance of gaining her favour, both
monarchs set themselves with emulation to court
it, and employed every art in order to insinuate
themselves into her confidence. Each of them
had something meritorious, with regard to Eliza-
beth, to plead in his own behalf. Henry had of-
sered her a retreat in his dominions, if the dread
of her filter's violence fliould force her to fly for
fifety out of England. Philip, by his powerful
intercefflon, had prevented Mary from proceed-
ing to the mofR fatal extremities against her ris-er.
Each of them endeavoured now to avail himself
of the circumstances in his favour. Henry wrote
to Elizabeth soon after her accefflon, with the
warmest expressions of regard and fiiendfhip.
He represented the war which had unhappily
been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a

U 2 national

B o1 K national quarrel, but as the effeEt of Mary's blind

Xl'.
---- partiality to her husband, and fond compliance
155. with all his withes. He entreated her to difen-

gage herself from an alliance which had proved
so unfortunate to England, and to content to a
separate peace with him, without mingling her
interests with those of Spain, from which they
ought now to be altogether disjoined. Philip,
on the other hand, unwilling to lose his connexion
with England, the importance of which, during
a rupture with France, he had so recently expe-
rienced, not only vied with Henry in declarations
of esteem for Elizabeth, and in professions of his
resolution to cultivate the strictest amity with her,
but, in order to confirm and perpetuate their
union, he offered himself to her in marriage, and
undertook to procure a dispensation from the Pope
for that purpose.

E1zabeth'a ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two
delibera-
tion on- Monarchs attentively, and with that provident
cerning her
Cond.ua. discernment of her true interest, which was con-

fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave some
encouragement to FHenry's overture of a separate
negociation, because it opened a channel of cor-
refpondence with France, which the might find
to be of great advantage, if Philip should not
discover sufficient zeal and solicitude for securing
to her proper terms in the joint treaty. But The
ventured on this flep with the most cautious re-
fcrve, that fhee might not alarm Philip's suspicious
temper; and lose an ally in attcmpting to gain

a11

an enemyz. Henry himself, by an unpardonable B 01 K
as of indiscretion, prevented her from carrying '---
her intercourse with him, to such a length as '558
might have offended or alienated Philip. At the
very time when he was courting Elizabeth's friend-
ship with the greatest assiduity, he yielded with
an inconsiderate facility to the solicitations of the
Princess of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-
law the Queen of Scots to assume the title and
arms of Queen of England. This ill-timed pre-
tension, the source of many calamities to the un-
fortunate Queen of Scots, extinguished at once
all the confidence that might have grown between
Henry and Elizabeth, and left in it's place distrust,
resentment, and antipathy. Elizabeth soon found
that she muff unite her interests closely with Phi-
lip's, and expe& peace only from negociations
carried on in conjun&ion with hima.

As ihe had granted a commission, immediately Sheempow-

after her accession, to the fame plenipotentiaries hTfrrs to
whom her sifter had employed, she now inftruted treat of

peace.

them to at in every point in concert with the ple-
nipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no ftep until
they had previously consulted with them b. But
though she deemed it prudent to assume this ap-
pearance of confidence in the Spanish Monarch,
fle knew precisely how far to carry it; and dif-
covered no inclination to accept of that extraor-

z Sorbes, i. p. 4. * Strype's Annals of the Reform.
ation, i. i I. Carte's Hiit. of England, vol. iii. p. 375.

1 Forbes's full View, i. p. 37. 4o.

U 3 dinary

B O 0K dinary proposal of marriage which Philip had
--.- m-.ade to her. The Enghifh had expressed so

555- openly their detestation of her sifter's choice of

him, that it would have been highly imprudent
to have exalperated them by renewing that odious
alliance. She was too well acquainted with Phi-
lip's liarl imperious temper, to think of him for
a husband. Nor could she admit a dispensation
from the Pope to be sufficient to authorize her
marrying him, without condemning her father's
divorce from Catharine of Aragon, and acknow-
ledging of consequence that her mother's mar-
riage was null, and her own birth illegitimate.
But though fle determined not to yield to Phi-
lip's addresses, the firuation of her affairs rendered
it dangerous to rejece them; she returned her
answer, therefore, in terms which were evasive,
but so tempered with refpe&, that though they
gave him no reason to be secure of success, they
did not altogether extinguish his hopes.

Nsgec;a- By this artifice, as well as by the prudence with
tions at
Cateau which she concealed her sentiments and intentions
Cainbrcs. concerning religion, for some time after her ac-

cession, flhe so far gained upon Philip, that he
warmly erpoufed her interefl in the conferences
which were renewed at Cercamp, and after-

T So. wards removed to Cateau Cambrefis. A defi-
Fcbr uary 6.

litive treaty, whicl; was to acljull the claims and
prctcnfions of so many princes, required the cx-
amination of ftcli a variety of intricate points,
and led to lich in!inite and minute details, as

drew

drew out the negociations to a great length. But B O o K
the Conflable Montmorency exerted himself with '--
such indefatigable zeal and industry, repairing al- '559'
ternately to the courts of Paris and Brussels, in
order to obviate or remove every difficulty, that
all points in dispute were adjusted at length in
such a manner, as to give entire fatisfation in
every particular to Henry and Philip; and the
last hand was ready to be put to the treaty between
them.

THE claims of England remained as the only Dfficultie

t"ivh regard

obflacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the totheclaim
reflitution of Calais in the most peremptory tone, of E;"lad.
as an essential condition of her consenting to peace;
Henry refused to give up that important conquest;
and both feerned to have taken their retolution
with unalterable firmness. Philip warmly sup-
ported Elizabeth's pretensions to Calais, not mere-
ly from a principle of equity towards the English
nation, that he might appear to have contributed
to their recovering what they had loft by espousing
his cause; nor solely with a view of toothing Eli-
zabeth by this maniteftation of zeal for her inte-
rell ; but in order to render France less formidable,
by fccu-ing to her ancient enemy this eaty access
into the heart of the kingdom. The earnefiiels,
however, with which he seconded the argurments
of the 'Englifll plenipotentiaries, toon began to
relax. During the course of the neg, i.'tion,
l:lizabeth, who now felt herself filminy icatctl oni
her throne, began to take such open and vi, V,.ous

U 4
' I1calurcS

B o0 0 K measures not only for overturning all that her filler

Xl'.
i__1-« had done in favour of popery, but for effablilhing

'559* the proteflant church on a firm foundation, as

convinced Philip that his hopes of an union with
her had been from the beginning vain, and were
now desperate. From that period, his interpofi-
tions in her favour became more cold and formal,
flowing merely from a regard to decorum, or
from the consideration of remote political inte-
refts. Elizabeth, having reason to expet such
an alteration in his conduct, quickly perceived it.
But as nothing would have been of greater detri-
ment to her people, or more inconsistent with her
schemes of domestic adminiffration, than the
continuance of war, she saw the necessity of sub-
mitting to such conditions as the situation of her
affairs imposed, and that she muff reckon upon
being deserted by an ally who was now united to
her by a very feeble tie, if she did not speedily
reduce her demands to what was moderate and
attainable. She accordingly gave new infiruc-
tions to her ambassadors; and Philip's plenipo-
tentiaries aacing as mediators between the French
and them c, an expedient was fallen upon, which,
in some degree, justified Elizabeth's departing
from the rigour of her sirss demand with regard
to Calais. All lesser articles were fettled without
much difcufiion or delay. Philip, that he might
not appear to have abandoned the English, in-
sifted that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth

r Sorbes, i. 59.

should

should be concluded in form, before that between B 0o0 ;
the French monarch and himself. The one was
signed on the second day of April, the other on '559
the day following.

THE treaty of peace between France and Eng- Articles of
land contained no articles of real importance, but peace b,
that which refpeaed Calais. It was stipulated, France and
That the King of France should retain poffeflion
of that town, with all its dependencies, during
eight years; That, at the expiration of that term,
he should restore it to England; That in cafe of
non-performance, he should forfeit five hundred
thousand crowns, for the payment of which fum,
seven or eight wealthy merchants, who were not
his fubjeas, should grant security; That five
persons of diftintion should be given as hostages
until that security were provided; That, although
the forfeit of five hundred thousand crowns should
be paid, the right of England to Calais should
Rill remain entire, in the fame manner as if the
term of eight years were expired; That the King
and (ueen of Scotland flhould be included in the
treaty; That if they, or the French King, should
violate the peace by any hoflile action, Henry
hiould be obliged instantly to restore Calais;
That, on the other hand, if any breach of the
treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then Henry and
the King and Queen of Scots were absolved firom
all the engagements which they had come under
by this treaty.

NOTWIT H--

B O 0 K NOTWITHSTANDING the fiudied attention with

which so many precautions were taken, it is evi.

Th5 viws dent that 1-enry did not intend the reffitution ol
of both par. Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth expeted
re!pet to it. It was hardly poflible that she could main.

tain, during the course of eight years, such per-
sect concord both with France and Scotland, as
not to afford Henry some pretext for alleging
that fle had violated the treaty. But even if that
term should elapse without any ground for com-
plaint, Henry might then chufe to pay the fum
flipulated, and Elizabeth had no method of as-
serting her right but by force of arms. lIow-
ever, by throwing the articles in the treaty with
regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth satisfied
her fubjeEts of every denomination; she gave men
of discernment a firiking proof of her address, in
palliating what she could not prevent; and
amused the multitude, to whom the cession of such
an important place would have appeared altoge-
ther infamous, with the profpecd of recovering in
a short time that favourite pofTflion.

Anepc'i;- Tr-HE expedient which Montmorency employed,
Prootes in order to facilitate the conclusion of peace be-
eace b- tween France and Spain, was the negociating
Frrnce .nd two treaties of marriage, one between Elizabeth,

H--enry's eldeftc daughter, and Philip, who sup-
planted his fun, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to
whom that Princess had been promilfed in the for-
mer conferences at Cercamp ; the other between

Margareth

Margaret, Henry's only sifter, and the Duke of B o KC
Savoy. For however feeble the ties of blood may --
often be among Princes, or how little soever they ,519*
may regard them when pufled on to aft by mo-
tives of ambition, they assume on other occasions
the appearance of being so far influenced by these
dormieic affections, as to employ them to justify
meaflires and concessions which they find to be
necessary, but know to be impolitic or difho-
nourable. Such was the uie Henry made of the
two marriages to which he gave his content.
Having secured an honourable establishment for
his lifler and his daughter, he, in consideration
of thetf, granted terms both to Philip and the
Duke of Savoy, of which he would not, on any
other account, have ventured to approve,
THE principal articles in the treaty between The tems

of pacifica..

France and Spain were, That sincere and per- tian.
petual amity should be eftablifled between the
two crowns and their refpedcive allies; That the
two monarchs should labour in concert to procure
the convocation of a general council, in order to
check the progress of heresy, and restore unity
and concord to the Chr-itian church That all
conquests made by either party, on this fide of
the Alps, since tlhe commencement of the war in
one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, flould
ci mnutually reflored; That the dutchy of Sa-
voy, the principality of Piedmont, the country
ofBrefne, and all the other territories formerly sub-
Jic to the dulke of Savoy, Ihould be rcflorcd to

L-; rmanuc1

BO OXK Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the cele.

- - bration of his marriage with Margaret of France
3$59.

the towns of Turin, Quiers, Pignerol, Chivaz,
and Villanova excepted, of which Henry should
keep possession until his claims to there places, in
right of his grandmother, should be tried and
decided in course of law; That as long as Henry
retained there places in his hands, Philip should
be at liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of
Vercelli and Af-i ; That the French King should
immediately evacuate all the places which he held
in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and renounce all
future prerenfions to them; that he should re-
store the marquisate of Montserrat to the Duke
of Mantua; That he should receive the Genoese
into favour, and give up to them the towns which
he had conquered in the island of Corsica; That
none of the Princes or States, to whom these cef.
sions were made, should call their fubjets to ac-
count for any part of their conduct while under
the dominion of their enemies, but flhould bury
all past tranfanions in oblivion. The Pope, the
Emperor, the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Po-
land, Portugal, the King and Queen of Scots,
and almost every Prince and State in Chriftendomrf
were comprehended in this pacification as the al-
lies either of Henry or of Philip ".

Whiclhre- THus, by this famous treaty, peace was re-
tranciliity eleabliflied in Europe. All the causes of discord
in Europe.

d Rccueil des Traitez, tom. ii. z87.

7 which

which had so long embroiled the powerful mo- B O O K
narchs of France and Spain, which had transmit- x.--
ted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles to 1559.
Philip, and fiom Francis to Henry, seemed to be
wholly removed, or finally terminated. The
French alone complained of the unequal condi-
tions of a treaty, into which an ambitious mini-
fler, in order to recover his liberty, and an artful
mistress, that the might gratify her resentment,
had seduced their too easy monarch. They ex-
claimed loudly against the folly of giving up to
the enemies of France an hundred and eighty-
nine fortified places, in the Low-countries or in
Ialy, in return for the three insignificant towns
of St. Quintin, Ham, and Catelet. They con-
fidered it as an indelible stain upon the glory of
the nation, to renounce in one day territories so
extensive, and so capable of being defended,
that the enemy could not have hoped to wrest
them out of its hands, after many years of
vicory.

BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments The peace
of his people, or being moved by the remon- _Fannd
trances of his council, ratified the treaty, and 7."r'""
executed with great fidelity whatever he had ftipu-
lated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired
with a numerous retinue to Paris, in order to
celebrate his marriage with Henry's filter. The
Duke of Alva was sent to the fame capital, at the
head of a splendid embassy, to cfpoufe Eli-
zabeth in name of his maifter. They were

received

B 1 0 K received with extraordinary magnificence by th

vo-_. French court. Amidst the rejoicings and fefti

Dct59g. vities on that occasion, Henry's days were ct
Death of
-lnry. short by a singular and tragical accident. Hi

son, Francis IL. a prince under age, of a weal
constitution, and of a mind still more feeble, fuc
ceeded him. Soon after, Paul ended his violen
and imperious Pontificate, at enmity with all th
world, and ditgufted even with his own nephews
They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted byth
succeeding Pope, whom they had raised by thei
influence to the papal throne, were condemnec
to the punishment which their crimes and ambi
tion had merited, and their death was as infamou
as their lives had been cirninal. Thus most o
the personages, who had long futiained/the prin
cipal characters on the great theatre of Europe
disappeared about the fame time. A more knowr
period of history opens at this aera; other aC0tor
enter upon the ltage, with different views, as wel
as different palions ; new contests arose, and net
schemes of ambition occupied and disquietec
mankind.

A Cneral UPON reviewing the tranfaitinns of any acive
he'whol, period, in the history of civilised nations, the
period. changes which are accompliflhed appear-wonder

fully dilproportioncd to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquests are never very exten
five or rapid, but among nations whole progref
in improvement is extremely unequal. Wher
Alexander the Great, at the liead of a gallan

people.

people, of simple imanners, and formed to war B o 0 K
by admirable military infitutions, invaded a slate
funk in luxury, and enervated by exceflive refine- a559
ment; when Genchizcan and Tamerlane, with
their armies of hardy barbarians, poured in upon
nations, enfeebled by the climate in which they
lived, or by the arts and colmmerce which they
cultivated, these conquerors, like a torrent, swept
every thing before them, subduing kingdoms and
provinces in as fhiort a space of time as was re-
qifite to march through them. But ,vhen na-
tions are in a state similar to each other, and keep
equal pace in their advances towards refinement,
they are not exposed to the calamity of sudden
conquelts. Their acquisitions of knowledge, their
progress in the art of war, their political figacity
and addrels, are nearly equal. The fate of states
in this situation, depends not on a single battle.
Their internal resources are many and various.
Nor are they themselves alone interested in their
owvn safety, or active in their own defence. Other
Riates interpose, and balance any tenmporary advan-
tage which either party may have acquired. After
tlhe fiercefc and most lengthened contefr, all the
rival nations are exhausted, none are conquered.
At length they find it necellary to conclude a peace,
which restores to each almofl the fame power and
the fame territories of which they were formerly in
possession.

Sucr- was the state of Europe during the reign Then,.,;on
of Charles V. No Prince was to much fuiperior , i,,,.
to the relt in power, as to rentdcr his cfilrts ir-rc- t. ,2i;^gf

the, "iu: ' tl

B o K fiftible, and his conquests easy. No nation ha

Xli. .----. made progress in improvement so far beyond it
1559- neighbours, as to have acquired a very manifel

pre-eminence. Each state derived some advan
tage, or was subjeE to some inconvenience fron
its situation or its climate; each was diflinguihec
by something peculiar in the genius of its people
or the constitution of its government. But the
advantages possessed by one slate, were counter.
balanced by circumstances favourable to others;
and this prevented any from attaining such fupe.
riority as might have been fatal to all. The na.
tions of Europe in that age, as in the present,
were like one great family; there were tome sea-
tures common to all, which fixed a resemblance;
there were certain peculiarities conspicuous in
each, which marked a diftintion. But there was
not among them that wide diversity of charater
and of genius which; in almost every period of
history, hath exalted the Europeans above the in-
habitants of the other quarters of the globe, and
seems to have destined the one to rule, and the
other to obey.

A remark- BUT though the near resemblance and equality

ahl, ch , Jge

in ,' ftlt in improvement among the different nations of
tur"'hpe Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V. from
icin, of being diftinguiflled by such sudden and extensive
Chalks V. n ;

conquefLs as occur in some other periods of his-
tory, yet, during the course of his adminiltra-
tion, all the conlidcrable flates in Europe fuffcred
a remarkable change in their political situation,

and

and felt the influence of events, which have not B 0 0 K
hitherto spent their force, but still continue to ---
operate in a greater or in a less degree. It was
during his reign, and in consequence of the per-
petual efforts to which his enterprizing ambition
roused him, that the different kingdoms of Eu-
rope acquired internal vigour; that they discerned
the resources of which they were poffefled; that they
came both to feel their own ifrength, and to know
how to render it formidable to others. It was
during his reign, too, that the different kingdoms
of Europe, which in former times teemed fi-equent-
ly to a&t as if they had been single and disjoined,
became so thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately
connected with each other, as to form one great
political system, in which each took a station,
wherein it has remained since that time with less
variation than could have been expected after the
events of two aAite centuries.

THn progress, however, and acquisitions of the The pro-

house of Austria, were not only greater than those h"ue of
of any other power, but more discernible and AufRna.
conspicuous. I have already enumerated the exten-
five territories which descended to Charles from his
Aufirian, Burgundian, and Spanifil anceflors*.
To these he himself added the Imperial dignity;
and, as if all this had been too little, the bounds
of the habitable globe teemed to be extended,
and a new world was fubjetced to his conmmand.
Upon his resignation, the Burgundian provinces,

Vol. 1.. p. z.
TVol. IV. X and

B 0 0 K and the Spanish kingdoms with their dependen.

-. cies, both in the old and new worlds, devolved to

Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions
to his son, in a condition very different from that
in which he himfelfhad received them. They were
augmented by the accession of new provinces;
they were habituated to obey an administration
which was no less vigorous than steady; they
were accustomed to expensive and persevering
efforts, which, though necessary in the contests
between civilized nations, had been little known
in Europe before the sixteenth century. The pro-
vincecs of Friesland, Utrecht, and Overyffel,
which he acquired by purchase from their former
proprietors, and the dutchy of Gueldres, of
which he made himfelfmafter, partly by force of
arms, partly by the arts of negociation, were
additions of great value to his Burgundian do-
minions. Ferdinand and Isabella had. transmit-
ted to him all the provinces of Spain, from the
bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portu-
gal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace with
that kingdom, amidst the various efforts of his
enterprizing ambition, he made no acquisition of
territory in that quarter.

p.rticuil.rly CHARLES had gained, however, a vast acceflion
i11 Spain. of power in this part of his dominions. By his

success in the war with the commons of Castile,
he exalted the regal prerogative upon the ruins
of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the

Cortes

Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it B Ox K
to be continued; he reduced its authority and -_j
juri!-iiLion almost to nothing, and modelled it in
such a manner, that it became rather ajunto of the
Iervants of the crown, than an assembly of the re-
presentatives of the people. One member of the
conffitution being thus lopped off, it was impof-
fible but that the other mufl feel the firoke, and
sus'er by it. The suppression of the popular power
rendered the ariftocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the
age, or allured by the honours which they enjoyed
in a court, exhausted their fortunes in military
service, or in attending on the person of their
Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did not
observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain diftination
of being covered in pretence of their sovereign,
firipped them, by degrees, of that real power
which they possessed while they formed one body,
and acted in concert with the people. Charles's
success in abolishing the privileges of the com-
mons, and in breaking the power of the nobles
of L aftile, encouraged Philip to invade the liber-
ties of Aragon, which were still more extensive.
The Caffilians, accustomed to fubjetion them-
selves, affifled in imposing the yoke on their more
happy and independent neighbours. The will
of the sovereign became the supreme law in all
the kingdoms of Spain ; and princes who were not
checked in forming their plans by the jealousy of
tlie people, nor controled in executing them by

X 2 the

B so0 K the power of the nobles, could both aim at great

XI.
I , objects, and call forth the whole strength of the

monarchy in order to attain them.

AIr, in As Charles, by extending the royal preroga-
of u:rope. tive, rendered the monarchs of Spain masters at

home, he added new dignity and power to their
crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet poffeflion of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud,
and held with difficulty. He united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous
Italian provinces, to the Spanish crown; and left
his successors, even without taking their other
territories into the account, the most considerable
Princes in Italy, which had been long the theatre
of contention to the great powers of Europe,
and in which they had struggled with emulation
to obtain the superiority. When the French, in
conformity to the treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis,
withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally re-
linquifhed all their schemes of conquest on that
fide of the Alps, the Spanish dominions then rose
in importance, and enabled their Kings, as long
as the monarchy retained any degree of vigour,
to preserve the chief sway in all the tranfaftions
of that country. But whatever acceflion, either
of interior authority or of foreign dominion,
Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain in Eu-
rope, was inconriderabl c when compared with
his acquisitions in the new world. He added
there, not provinces, but empires to his crown.

lHe

He conquered territories of such immense ex- B 0 0 K
tent; he discovered such inexhauffible veins of t-
wealth, and opened such boundless profpeAs of
every kind, as muff have roused his successor, and
have called him forth to aCtion, though his am-
bition had been much less ardent than that of
Philip, and must have rendered him not only en-
terprizing but formidable.

WHILE the elder branch of the Auffrian family Progress of

the Germaa
rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the younger, branch of

the houf¢

of which Ferdinand was the head, grew to be of Auitia.
considerable in Germany. The ancient hereditary
dominions of the house of Austria in Germany,
united to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia,
which Ferdinand had acquired by marriage,
formed a refpeaable power; and when the Im-
perial dignity was added to these, Ferdinand pof-
sessed territories more excenfive than had be-
longed to any Prince, Charles V. excepted, who
had been at the head of the Empire during several
ages. Fortunately for Europe, the disgust which
Philip conceived on account of Ferdinand's re-
fusing to relinquish the Imperial crown in his
favour, not only prevented for rome time the
separate members of the house of Austria from a&-
ing in concert, but occasioned between them a vi-
fible alienation and rivalflip. By degrees, howv-
ever, regard to the interest of their family extin-
guifhed this impolitical animosity. The confidence
which was natural returned; the aggrandizing of
the house of Austria became the common object of

X 3 all

D o0 K all their schemes; they gave and received affit-
_* - ance alternately towards the execution of them;

and each derived conlideration and importance
from the other's success. A family so great and
so aipiring, became the general object of jealousy
and terror. All the power, as well as policy, of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order
to check and humnble it. Nothing can give a more
striking idea of the ascendant which it had ac-
quired, and of the terror which it had inspired, than
that after its vigour was spent with extraordinary
exertions of its ftrer gth, after Spain was become
only the shadow of a great name, and its mo-
narchs were funk into debility and dotage, the
house of Austria flill continued to be formidable.
The nations of Europe had so often felt its fupe-
rior power, and had been so contfantly employed
in guarding against it, that the dread of it became
a kind of political habit, the influence of which
remained when the causes, which had formed it,
ceased to exifl.

Acqnriticna WHIIrE the house of Aufiria went on with such
of'thr'e"g' fucceis in enlarging its dominions, France made
.or;ne, the no considerable acquisition of new territory.
ye gn of
Ch^irc v. All its schemes of conquest in Italy had proved

abortive; it had hitherto obtained no establish-
ment of consequence in the new world; and after
the continued and vigorous efforts of four fuc-
ceffive reigns, the confines of the kingdom were
much the fame as loui s XI. had left them. But
though France made not flich large strides to-

wards

wards dominion -as the house of Austria, it con- B O 0 K
tinued to advance by steps which were more fe-
cure, because they were gradual and less observed.
Theconquefi of Calais put it out of the power
of the English to invade France but at their ut-
most peril, and delivered the French from the
dread of their ancient enemies, who, previous to
that event, could at any time penetrate into the
kingdom by that avenue, and thereby retard or
defeat the execution of their best concerted en-
terprizes against any foreign power. The im-
portant acquisition of Metz, covered that part of
their frontier which formerly was molt feeble,
and lay moit exposed to infuit. France, from
the time of its obtaining these additional fecuri-
ties against external invasion, must be deemed
the mofi powerful kingdom in Europe, and is
more fortunately situated than any on the Conti-
nent either for conquest or defence. From the
confines of Artois to the bottom of the Pyrenees,
and from the British channel to the frontiers of
Savoy and the coast of the Mediterranean, its
territories lay compa&t and unmingled with those
of any other power. Several of the considerable
provinces, which had contracted a spirit of inde-
pendence by their having been long subje&t to
the great vassals of the crown, who were often at
variance or at war with their master, were now
accustomed to recognize and to obey one fove-
reign. As they became members of the fame
monarchy, they assumed the sentiments of that
body into which they were incorporated, and co-

X 4 operated

B o00 K operated with zeal towards promoting its interest

--- and honour. The power and influence wrested

from the nobles were seized by the crown. The
people were not admitted to share in there spoils;
they gained no new privilege; they acquired no
additional weight in the legislature. It was not
for the fake of the people, but in order to extend
their own prerogative, that the monarchs of
France had laboured to humble their great vassals.
Satisfied with having brought them under entire
fubjedion to the crown, they discovered no soli-
citude to free the people from their ancient de-
pendence on the nobles of whom they held, and by
whom they were often oppressed.

Enables A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus
them to as-
fume an united at home and secure from abroad, was en-
tion hrr^o titled to form great designs, because he felt him-
the uropow self in a condition to execute them. The foreign

wars which had continued with little interruption
from the accession of Charles VIII. had not only
cherished and augmented the martial genius of
the nation, but by inuring the troops during the
course of long service to the fatigues of war, and
accustoming them to obedience, had added the
force of discipline to their natural ardour. A
gallant and aaive body of nobles, who confidered
themselves as idle and useless, unless when they
were in the field; who were hardly acquainted
with any paflime or exercise but what was mi-
litary; and who knew no road to power, or
fame, or wealth, but war, would not have its-
sered thcir fovcrcign to remain long in inaction.

The

The people, little acquainted with the arts of B 0 o K
peace, and always ready to take arms at the corn-
mand of their superiors, were accustomed, by the
expence of -long wars carried on in distant
countries, to bear impositions, which, however
inconsiderable they may seem if estimated by the
exorbitant rate of modern exations, appear im-
mense when compared with the fums levied in
France, or in any other country of Europe, pre-
vious to the reign of Louis XI. As all the mem-
bers of which the state was composed were thus
impatient for aEtion, and capable of great efforts,
the schemes and operations of France must have
been no less formidable to Europe than those of
Spain. The superior advantages of its situation,
the contiguity and compaEtnefs of its territories,
together with the peculiar slate of its political
constitution at that juncture, must have rendered
its enterprizes still more alarming and more de-
cifive. The King possessed such a degree of
power as gave him the entire command of his
tubjes s; the people were ifrangers to those oc-
cupations and habits of life which render men
averse to war, or unfit for it; and the nobles,
though reduced to the subordination necessary in
a regular government, ifill retained the high un-
daunted spirit which was the effecl of their an-
cient independence. The vigour of the feudal
tinmes remained, their aia, chy was at an end;
and the Kings of France could avail themrllelves
of the martial ardour which that lintilar il'i!i-
tution had kindled or kept alive, without being

5 cxplicd

nB °xo K exposed to the dangers or inconveniencies
x_-r _ which are inseparable from it when in entire

force.

crcumflanh. A KINGDOM il fiuch a slate is, perhaps, capablei
p,.vented of greater military efforts then at any other]
diae ,etTec. period in its progress. But how formidable or
"f Lheir how fatal soever to the other nations of Europe the

power of such a monarchy might have been, the
civil wars which broke out in France saved them
at that junEture from feeling its effecs. These
wars, of which religion was the pretext and am-
bition the cause, wherein great abilities were dif-
played by the leaders of the different faEtions,
and little conduct or firmness were manifeftedby
the crown under a succession of weak Princes,
kept France occupied and embroiled for halfa
century. During these commotions the internal
strength of the kingdom was much wafted, and
such a spirit of anarchy was spread among the
nobles, to whom rebellion was familiar, and the
restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable in-
terval became requisite not only for recruiting the
internal vigour of the nation, but for re-eftablili-
ing the authority of the Prince; so that it was
long before France could turn her whole attention
towards foreign tranfations, or at with her pro-
per force in foreign wars. It was long before she
oli to that ascendant in Europe which she has
lmain:lilned since the administration of Cardinal
Rici;ici, and which the situation as well as extent
oft tie k;ingdom, the nature of her government,

together

together with the character of her people, entitle B o3 ° K
Iher to maintain.

WVHFILE the kingdoms on the continent grew proreft of
i;ro vowner and consequence, England likewise E'rgl'pea
mnc:!L conidcrable progress towards regular go- t" its e-

~able!, rior 1&ate.

vci.iment and interior ftength. Henry VIII.
p:cbabli without intention, and certainly with-
tut any consistent plan, of which his nature was
i icapab!c, pursued the scheme of deprering the
nob!liry, which the policy of his father Henry VII.
had begun. The pride and caprice of his tem-
per led iimr to employ chiefly new men in the
administration of affairs, because he found them
most oblequious, or least scrupulous; and he not
only conferred on them .such plenitude of power,
but exalted them to such pre-eminence in dignity,
as mortified and degraded the ancient nobility.
By the alienation or sale of the church lands,
which were dissipated with a profusion not inferior
to the rapacioufneis with which they had been
seized, as well as by the privilege granted to the
ancient landholders of felling their estates, or
diilofing of them by will, an immense property,
formerly locked up, was brought into circulation.
This put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it tome considerable degree of
vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and excessive flow of wealth from the Wefl
Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain; a mo-
derate acceflion in England to the fuil in circu-

lation

B x0 K lation gave life to commerce, awakened the in-

genuity of the nation, and excited it to useful
enterprize. In France, what the nobles loft the
crown gained. In England, the commons were
gainers as well as the King. Power and influence
accompanied of course the property which they
acquired. They rose to consideration among their
fellow-fubjects; they began to feel their own im-
portance; and extending their influence in the
legislative body gradually, and often when neither
they themselves nor others foresaw all the effects
of their claims and pretensions, they at last at-
tained that high authority to which the British
constitution is indebted for the existence, and
must owe the preservation, of its liberty. At the
fame time that the English conffitution advanced
towards perfection, several circumitances brought
on a change in the ancient system with refpe&t to
foreign powers, and introduced another more
beneficial to the nation. As soon as Henry
disclaimed the supremacy of the Papal See, and
broke off all connexion with the Papal court,
considerable fums were saved to the nation, of
which it had been annually drained by remit-
tances to Rome for difpenlations and indulgences,
by the expence of pilgrimages into foreign coun-
tries *, or by payment of annates, firit fruits,

and

* The loss which the nation fuflained by mofl of these

articles is obvious, and must have been great. Even that
by pilgrimages was not inconsiderable. In the year 1428,
licence was obtained by no fewer than 916 pcrfons to visit

the

and a thousand other taxes which that artful and B o° o K
rapacious court levied on the credulity of mankind. 1-
The exercise of a jurifdition different from that of
the civil power, and claiming not only to be inde-
pendent of it, but superior to it, a wild folecifin in
government, apt not only to perplex and disquiet
weak minds, but tending directly to disturb society,
was finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more refpeaable, when no rank
or character exempted any person from being
amenable to the fame courts as other fubjecEs, from
being tried by the fame judges, and from being
acquitted or condemned by the fame laws.

BY the loss of Calais the English were excluded With re-
from the continent. All schemes for invading cfPe'to thh

affairs of the

France became of course as chimerical as they continent.
had formerly been pernicious. The views of the
English were confined, firfl by necessity, and
afterwards from'choice, within their own ifand.
That rage for conquest which had pofefTfed the
nation during many centuries, and wafted its
strength in perpetual and fruitless wars, ceased at
length. Those active spirits which had known and
followed no profession but war, fought for occupa-
tion in the arts of peace, and their country was
benefited as much by the one as it had fuiflered by
the other. The nation, which had been exhauflecd

the lhrine of St. James of Compoftclla in Spain. Rymer,
vol. x. p. . In 1434, the nunber otpilgrims to the
fame place was 2460. Ibid. p. . In '14p, they were
21oo, vol. xi. p.

by

B 0 0 K by frequent expeditions to the continent, recruited

* . l its numbers, and acquired new strength; and when

routed by any extraordinary exigency to take part
in foreign operations, the vigour of its efforts was
proportionally great, because they were only occa-
fional and of a Ihort continuance.

With re- THE fame principle which had led England to
fpe& to
Scotand. adopt this new system with regard to the powers

on the continent, occasioned a change in its plan
of conduc with refpec to Scotland, the only
foreign state, with which, on account of irs fitua-
tion in the fame island, the Englilh had such a
close connexion as demanded their perpetual at-
tention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient
scheme of conquering that kingdom, which the
nature of the country, defended by a brave and
hardy people, rendered dangerous if not im-
pra&ticable; it appeared more eligible to endea-
vour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as
might exempt England from any danger or dif-
quiet from that quarter. The national poverty of
the Scots, together with the violence and animosity
of their factions, rendered the execution of this plan
easy to a people far superior to them in wealth. The
leading men of greatest power and popularity were
gained; the ministers and favourites of the crown
were corrupted; and such abfolutedireEtion of the
Scottish councils was acquired, as rendered the ope-
rations of the one kingdom dependent, in a great
incalure, on the sovereign of the other. Such perfect
external fccurity, added to the interior advantages

which

which England now possessed, mufl soon have B o° K
raited it to new consideration and importance; -
the long reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous
for wisdom, for steadiness, and for vigour, accele-
rated its progress, and carried it with greater rapi-
dity towards that elevated flation which it hath
lince held among the powers of Europe.
DURING the period in which the political state Chaneesin

the political

of the great kingdoms underwent such changes,, natcofthe
revolutions of considerable importance happened powersai
in that of the secondary or inferior powers. _Those Euro"e.
in the papal court are most obvious, and of mofl
extensive consequence.
IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned Thenmof

considerable
the rife of that spiritual jurisdiction, which the revolution

of the fist

Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have- teent cen-
traced the progress of that authority which they utytf'h
poflefs as temporal Princes *. Previous to the Rome.
reign of Charles V. there was nothing that
tended to circumscribe or to moderate their au-
thority, but science and philosophy, which began
to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of
there, however, was fRill inconsiderable; they
always operate slowly; and it is long before their
influence reaches the people, or can produce any
sensible effe& upon them. They may perhaps
gradually, and in a long course of years, under-
nline and shake an established system of false re-

Vol. I. p. 149,' &c.
I ligion,

B O K by frequent expeditions to the continent, recruited

X its numbers, and acquired new strength; and when

routed by any extraordinary exigency to take part
in foreign operations, the vigour of its efforts was
proportionally great, because they were only occa-
fional and of a Ihort continuance.

With re- THE fame principle which had led England to
fpe&t to
Scotland. adopt this new system with regard to the powers

on the continent, occasioned a change in its plan
of conduct with respect to Scotland, the only
foreign state, with which, on account of its fitua-
tion in the fame ifiand, the Englilh had such a
close connexion as demanded their perpetual at-
tention. Inflead of proiecuting the ancient
scheme of conquering that kingdom, which the
nature of the country, defended by a brave and
hardy people, rendered dangerous if not im-
practicable; it appeared more eligible to endea-
vour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as
might exempt England from any danger or dif-
quiet from that quarter. The national poverty of
the Scots, together with the violence and animoficy
of their factions, rendered the execution of this plan
easy to a people far superior to them in wealth. The
leading men of greatest power and popularity were
gained; the ministers and favourites of the crown
were corrupted; and such absolute dire&tion of the
Scottish councils was acquired, as rendered the ope-
rations of the one kingdom dependent, in a great
ineafuire, on tle sovereign of the other. Such perfect
external security, added to the interior advantages

which

which England now poffefled, must soon have B O I K
railed it to new consideration and importance; '-- i
the long reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous
for wisdom, for steadiness, and for vigour, accele-
rated its progress, and carried it with greater rapi-
dity towards that elevated rfation which it hath
since held among the powers of Europe.
DURING the period in which the political state cbhanesin

the political

of the great kingdoms underwent such changes, ftatcofthe
revolutions of considerable importance happened powersin
in that of the secondary or inferior pow'ers. Those Europe.
in the papal court are most obvious, and of most
extensive consequence.

IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned The most
the rife of that spiritual jurifdiftion, which the revolution

of the fix-

Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have teeth cen-
traced the progress of that authority which they tuy f th'
poflies as temporal Princes *. Previous to the Rome.
reign of Charles V. there was nothing that
tended to circumscribe or to moderate their au-
thority, but science and philosophy, which began
to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of
these, however, was frill inconfiderabe; they
always operate slowly; and it is long before their
influence reaches the people, or can produce any
sensible effe& upon them. They may perhaps
gradually, and in a long course of years, under-
mine and shake an eftablilhed system of false re-

* Vol. I. p. 149, &c.
I ligion,

B o00 K legion, but there is no instance of their havino
»i. overturned one. The battery is too feeble to de-

molifh those fabricks which superstition raises on
deep foundations, and can strengthen with the
most consummate art.

The general LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy
revolt againl the with other weapons, and with an impetuosity
doc""ine" f more formidable. The time and manner of his
the church
of Rome, attack concurred with a multitude of circum-
and the
power of fiances, which have been explained, in giving

Popes. him immediate success. The charm which had

bound mankind for so many ages was broken at
once. The human mind, which had continued
long as tame and paflive, as if it had been formed
to believe whatever was taught, and to bear
whatever was imposed, routed of a sudden and
became inquilitive, mutinous, and disdainful of
the yoke to which it had hitherto submitted.
That wonderful ferment and agitation of mind,
which, at. this distance of time, appears unac-
countable, or is condemned as extravagant, was
so general, that it muff have been excited by
causes which were natural and of powerful effi-
cacy. The kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden,
England, and Scotland, and almost one half of
Germany, threw off their allegiance to the Pope,
abolished his jurifdition within their territories,
and gave the fanfion of law to modes of difci-
pline and systems of docrine which were not only
independent of his power, but hostile to it. Nor
was this spirit of innovation confined to those

countries

countries which openly revolted from the Pope; B O°O K
it spread through all Europe, and broke out in --.-
every part of it with various degrees of violence.
It penetrated early into France, and made a quick
progress there. In that kingdom, the number of
converts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal so enterprizing, and the abilities
of their leaders so diffinguifled, that they soon
ventured to contend for superiority with the efta-
blifhed church, and were sometimes on the point
of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany
which continued to acknowledge the Papal fupre-
macy, as well as in the Low Countries, the Pro-
teftant doctrines were secretly taught, and had
gained so many protclytes, that they were ripe
for revolt, and were restrained merely by the
dread of their rulers from imitating the example
of their neighbours, and alTerting their independ-
ence. Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of
the fame disposition to flake off the yoke appear-
ed. The pretensions of the Pope to infallible
knowledge and supreme power were treated by
many persons of eminent learning and abilities
with such scorn, or attacked with such vehe-
mence, that the most vigilant attention of the
civil magistrate, the highest firains of pontifi-
cal authority, and all the rigour of inquisitorial
jurisdic'tion were requisite to check and extin-
guifh it.

THIE defe&ion of so many opulent and power- Thisabridg-
ful kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal td th cx-

ten. of tile
VOL. IV. Y blow 'Poe'"s do.

minions.

B 0 0 K blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged the

a-_ dominions of the Popes in extent, it diminilhed

their revenues, and left them fewer rewards to
bellow on the ecclesiastics of various denomi-
nations, attached to them by vows of obedience
as well as by ties of interest, and whom they em-
ployed as instruments to eftablith or support their
uflirpations in every part of Europe. The coun-
tries too which now disclaimed their authority,
were those which formerly had been moit devoted
to it. The empire of superstition differs from
every other species of dominion; its power is
often greatest, and most implicitly obeyed in the
provinces most remote from the feat of govern-
ment; while such as are situated nearer to that,
are more apt to discern the artifices by which it is
upheld, or the inpoitures on which it is founded.
The personal frailties or vices of the Popes, the
errors as well as corruption of their administration,
the ambition, venality, and deceit which reigned
in their courts, fell immediately under the obfer-
vation of the Italians, and could not fail ofdimi-
nifhing that relpect hich begets lbmifflion. But
in Ger many, K ngland, and the mnore remote parts
of Europe, thelta wi e either altogether unknown, or
being only known by report, m adice a lighter im-
prcion. Veneration for the l'apal dignity incrcal-
cdc accordingly in thcfie countries in proplortion t
their dliflance iom tontc; i and tl.hat veneralion,
addedc tothcir gcr;ls ignorance, rendcrcil tlecln 'equal-
ly credulous and pallve. In tiacing the progreil ot
the P1pal doininiatioln, the bolJciL and moll ti c-

celf'ill

cefsful instances ofencroachment are to be found in B OI K
Germnany and other countries distant from Italy. In --v---
theft its impositions were heaviest, and its exa&i-
ons the most rapacious; so that in effimating the
diminution of power which the court of Rome sus-
sered in consequence of the Reformation, not only
the number but the character of the people who re-
volted, not only the great extent of territory, but
the extraordinary obsequiousness of the fubjets
which it loft, must be taken into the account.
NOR was it only by this defecion of so many andobliged

them to

kingdoms and states which the Reformation oc- changethe
cafioned, that it contributed to diminish the thert go-
power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them vernment.
to adopt a different system of conduct towards
the nations which still continued to recognise
their jurisdiction, and to govern them by new
maxims and with a milder fpirir. The Reform-
ation taught them, by a fatal example, what
they seem not before to have apprehended, that
the credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and exhausted. They became
afraid of venturing upon any such exertion of
their authority as might alarm or exasperate their
subjects, and excite them to a new revolt. They
saw a rival church eftabliflecl in many countries
of Europe, the members of which were on the
watch to observe any errors in their adiminiftia-
tion, and eager to expose them. They were
fcnfible that the opinions, adverse to their power
aInd usurpations, were not adopted by their ene-

Y 2 niies

B o0 K mies alone, but had Spread even among the

- -- people who frill adhered to them. Upon all these

accounts, it was no longer possible to lead or to
govern their flock in the fame manner as in those
dark and quiet ages when faith was implicit,
when -fbmiffion was unreserved, and all tamely
followed and obeyed the voice of their pastor.
From the ara of the Reformation, the Popes have
ruled rather by address and management than by
authority. Though the style of their decrees be
fill the fame, the effect of them is very different.
Those Bulls and Interdicts which, before the Re-
formation, made the greatest Princes tremble,
have since that period been disregarded or de-
liried by the most inconsiderable. Those bold
dccifions and acts of jurifdition which, during
many ages, not only passed uncenfured, but werei
revered as the awards of a sacred tribunal, would,
since Luther's appearance, be treated by one
part of Europe as the effeEt of folly or arrogance,
and be detested by the other as impious and
unjust. The Popes, in their administration, have
been obliged not only to accommodate them-
lelves to the notions of their adherents, but to
pay some regard to the prejudices of their ene-
miw T. 'hey feldoni venture to claim new
po\\.rs, or even to infif- obflinately on their an-
cienlt prero'.gatives, lefl- they should irritare the
fobrner; they carcf-illy avoid every measure that
may eiller excite the indignation or draw on them
the dcliilion of the latter. The policy of the
court of Romle nl;s becomel as cattious, circurm-

lpeEt,

fpe&, and timid, as.it was once adventurous and B x K
violent; and though their pretensions to infalli- v--
bility, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurifdition
which they have at any time claimed or exercised,
they find it expedient to fuffcr many of their pre-
rogatives to lie dormant, and not to expose
themfclves to the rifque of losing that remainder
of power which they still enjoy, by ill-timed at-
tempts towards reviving obsolete pretensions.
Before the sixteenth century, the Popes were
the movers and directors in every considerable en-
terprize; they were at the head of every great
alliance; and being confidered as arbiters in
the affairs of Christendom, the court of Rome
was the centre of political negociation and in-
trigue. Since that time, the greatest operations
in Europe have been carried on independent of
them; they have funk almoll to a level with the
other petty Princes of Italy; they continue to
claim, though they dare not exercise, the fame
fpiritualjurifdiftion, but hardly retain any fha-
dow of the temporal power which they anciently
possesscd.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may The R,-
have been to the power of the Popes, it has con- t,'""tinld

contributed

tributed to improve the church of Rome both in to improve
science and in morals. The desire of equalling ob}h in
the reformers in tholf talents which haid pro- nlorinal."
cured them refpe t; the neccfiity of acquiring

Y 3 the

B °x0 K the knowledge requisite for defending their own

--- tenets, or refuting the arguments of their oppo-

nents, together with the emulation natural be-
tween two rival churches, engaged the Roman
Catholic clergy to apply themselves to the study
of useful science, which they cultivated with such
assiduity and success, that they have gradually be-
come as eminent in literature, as they were in
some periods infamous for ignorance. The fame
principle occasioned a change no less considerable
in the morals of the Romish clergy. Various
causes which have formerly been enumerated,
had concurred in introducing great irregularity,
and even difTolution of manners among the popish
clergy. Luther and his adherents began their
attack on the church with such vehement in-
vectives againlt these, that, in orde. to remove
the scandal, and silence their declamations,
greater decency of conduc became necessary.
The Reformers themselves were so eminent not
only for the purity but even austerity of their
manners, and had acquired such reputation among
the people on that account, that the Roman
Catholic clergy must have soon loft all credit,
if they had not endeavoured to conform in fume
mealure to their flandard. They knew that all
their actions fell under the revere infpetion of
the Protcftants, whom enmity and emulation
prompted to observe every vice, or even impro-
priety in their conldut ; to censure them without
indulgence, and to expolc them without mercy.

This

This rendered them, of course, not only cautious 011 K
to avoid such enormities as might give offence, --
but studious to acquire the virtues which might
merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the
tyrannical jurifdition of the Inquisition cruihed
the Protestant faith as soon as it appeared, the
spirit of Popery continues invariable; science has
made small progress, and the character of eccle-
fiaftics has undergone little change. But in
those countries where the members of the two
churches have mingled freely with each other,
or have carried on any considerable intercourse,
either commercial or literary, an extraordinary
alteration in the ideas, as well as in the morals
of the Popish ecclesiastics, is manifest. In
France, the manners of the dignitaries and fe-
cular clergy have become decent and exemplary
in an high degree. Many of them have been
distinguished for all the accomplishments and vir-
tues which can adorn their profession; and differ
greatly from their predecessors before the Reform-
ation, both in their maxims and in their condut.

NoR has the influence of the Reformation been The effeal

of it extend

felt only by the inferior members of the Roman to the cha-
Catholic Church; it has extended to the See of Pperthe
Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Vio- tllc"lnelve
lations of decorum, and even trespasses against
morality, which paled without censure in those
ages, when neither the power of the Popes, nor
the veneration of the people for their character,

Y 4 had

B 0i 0 K had any bounds; when there was no hollile eye
I , y to observe the errors in their conduet, and no ad-

verfaries zealous to inveigh against them; would
be liable now to the severest animadversion, and
excite generai indignation or horror. Instead of
rivalling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety,
and furpafling them in licentibufnefs, the Popes
have studied to assume manners more revere and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical charater.
The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that refem-
bled Alexander VI. or several of his predecessors,
who were a disgrace to religion and to human na-
ture. Throughout this long ficceffion of Popes,
a wonderful decorum of conduct, compared with
that of preceding ages, is observable. Many of
them, especially among the Pontiffs of the preSent
century, have been conspicuous for all the virtues
becoming their high station; and by their huma-
nity, their love of literature, and their modera-
tion, have made some atonement to mankind for
the crimes of their prcdeceflbrs. Thus the bene-
ficial influences of the Reformation have been
more extensive than they appear on a superficial
view; and this great division in the Christian
church hath contributed, in some measure, to
increase purity of manners, to diffuse science,
and to inlpire humanity. History recites such a
number of fliocking events, oceafioned by reli-
gious cdifsienons, that it mull afford peculiar fa-
tisfalaion to trace any one salutary or beneficial

erEcat

effea to that source from which so many fatal B o K
calamities have flowed. k .

THE republic of Venice, which, at the begin- Stateofthe
ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so vepice.
formidable, that almost all the potentates of Eu-
rope united in a confederacy for its deftrudion,
declined gradually from its ancient power and
Iplendor. The Venetians not only loft a great
part of their territory in the war excited bythe
league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as
vigour of the state were exhausted by their extra-
ordinary and long continued efforts in their own
defence; and that commerce by which they had
acquired their wealth and power began to decay,
without any hopes of its reviving. All the fatal
consequences to their republic, which the saga-
city of the Venetian senate foresaw on the first dif-
covery of a passage to the Eaft-Indies by the Cape
of Good Hope, actually took place. Their en-
deavours to prevent the Portuguese from establish-
ing themselves in the Eaft-Indies, not only by ex-
citing the Soldans of Egypt, and the Ottoman mo-
narchs, to turn their arms against such dangerous
intruders, but by affording secret aid to the Infi-
dels in order to insure their success z, proved in-
effeAual. The activity and valour of the Por-
tuguefe surmounted every obstacle, and obtained
such a firm footing in that fertile country, as fen

1 Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. 529.

cured

B 0 0 K cured to them large possessions, together with an
I-- influence still more extensive. Lisbon, instead of

Venice, became the flaple for the precious com-
modities of the East. The Venetians, after hav-
ing poffefled for many years the monopoly of that
beneficial commerce, had the mortification to be
excluded from almost any share in it. The dif-
coveries of the Spaniards in the western world,
proved no lets fatal to inferior branches of their
commerce. The original defects which were for-
merly pointed out in the constitution of the Ve-
netian republic still continued, and the difadvan-
tages with which it undertook any great enterprize,
increased rather than diminilhed. The sources
from which it derived its extraordinary riches and
power being dried up, the interior vigour of the
slate declined, and, of course, its external opera-
tions became less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased
to be one of the principal powers in Europe, and
dwindled into a secondary and subaltern state.
But as the senate had the address to conceal the
diminution of its power, under the veil of modera-
tion and caution; as it made no rash effort that
could discover its weakness; as the symptoms
of political decay in states are not soon observed,
and are seldom so apparent to their neighbours as
to occasion any sudden alteration in their conduct
towards them, Venice continued long to be con-
fidered and refpeced. She was treated not ac-
cording to her present condition, but according

to

to the rank which she had formerly held. Charles B 0 0 K

xu1.

V. as well as the Kings of France, his rivals, -.-
courted her afliflance with emulation and folici-
tude in all their enterprizes. Even down to the
close of the century, Venice remained not only
an object of attention, but a considerable feat of
political negociation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the first Cosmo di ofTufcany.
Medici, and Lawrence, his grandson, had ac-
quired in the republic of Florence by their
beneficence and abilities, inspired their descend-
ants with the ambition of usurping the fove-
reignty in their country, and paved their way to-
wards it. Charles V. placed Alexander di Medici
at the head of the republic, and to the natural A. D.s55o.
interest and power of the family added the weight
as well as credit of the Imperial protection. Of
these, his successor Cosmo, firnamed the Great,
availed himself; and establishing his supreme
authority on the ruins of the ancient republican
constitution, he transmitted that, together with
the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany, to his de-
fcendants. Their dominions were composed of
the territories which had belonged to the three
commonwealths of Florence, Pisa, and Siena,
and formed one of the molt respectable of the
Italian states.

THE Dukes of Savoy, during the former part Ofrhe
of the sixteenth century, pofeffied territories which D"u,"os

werevoy.
were

B 0o K were not considerable either for extent or value;

_.-._i and the French, having seized the greater part of

them, obliged the reigning Duke to retire for
jafety to the firong fortress of Nice, where he shut
himself up for several years, while his son, the
Prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to better his
fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies
of Spain. The peace of Cateau Canbrefis re-
stored to him his paternal dominions. As these
are environed on every hand by powerful neigh-
bours, all whose motions the Dukes of Savoy must
observe with the greatefl attention, in order not
only to guard againfi the danger of being fur-
prized and overpowered, but that they may chute
their fide with discernment in those quarrels
wherein it is impossible for them to avoid taking
part, this peculiarity in their situation seems to
have had no inconsiderable influence on their
character. By routing them to perpetual atten-
tion, by keeping their ingenuity always on the
firetch, and engaging them in almost continual
acion, it lath formed a race of Princes more
sagacious in discovering their true interest, more
decisive in their resolutions, and more dexterous
in availing themselves of every occurrence which
presented itself, than any perhaps that can be
singled out in the hiflory of Eurupe. By gra-
dual acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy have added
to their territories, as well as to their own im-
portance; and alfiring at length to regal dignity,
which they obtained about half a century ago, by

tlhe

the title of Kings of Sardinia, they hold now 1B 0 K
no inconsiderable rank among the monarchs of t- -*
Europe.

THE territories which form the republic of of the

the United Netherlands, were loft during the provinces.
firit part of the sixteenth century, among the
numerous provinces subjeE to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconsiderable, that
hardly one opportunity of mernioning them hath
occurred in all the buly period of this hiitory.
But soon after the peace of Cateau Cambrefis,
the violent and bigoted maxims of Philip's go-
vernment, being carried into execution with unre-
lenting rigour by the Duke of Alva, exasperated
the siee people of the Low-Countries to such a
degree, that they threw off the Spanish yoke,
and aferted their ancient liberties and laws.
These they defended with a persevering valour,
which gave employment to the arms of Spain dur-
ing half a century, exhausted the vigour, ruined
the reputation of that monarchy, and at last con-
firained their ancient maiters to recognise and to
treat with them as a free independent tlate. This
ilate, founded on liberty, and reared by industry
and ceconomy, grew into great reputation, even
while Struggling for its existence. But when
peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views,
and to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of
the mot refpeóEable as well as enterprizing powers
3n Europe.

THE

B 0 0 KI THE tranfaaions of the kingdoms in the North
b.. -~ of Europe, have been seldom attended to in the

course of this hitfory.
Of Russia. RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism and

obscurity, from which it was called about the
beginning of the present century, by the cre-
ative genius of Peter the Great, who made his
country known and formidable to the reft of
Europe.

Of Den- IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of
mark and
Sweden. Charles V. great revolutions happened in their

constitutions, civil as well as eeclefiaftical. In
the former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded
from the throne, and expelled the country, a
new Prince was called by the voice of the
people to assume the reins of government. In
the latter, a fierce people, routed to arms by in-
juries and oppression, shook off the Danish yoke,
and conferred the regal dignity on its deliverer
Gustavus Ericson, who had all the virtues of
a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhausted
by foreign wars, or weakened by the dissensions
between the King and the nobles, became in-
capable of such efforts as were requisite in order
to recover the ascendant which it had long pof-
sessed in the North of Europe. Sweden, as soon
as it was freed from the dominion of firangers,
began to recruit its strength, and acquired in
a fliort time such internal vigour, that it became

i1 the

the first kingdom in the North. Early in the B O O IQ
subsequent century, it rose to such a high rank ,L
among the powers of Europe, that it had the
chief merit in forming, as well as conduatiug,
that powerful league, which proteEted not only
the Protestant religion, but the liberties of Ger-
many againfl the bigotry and ambition of the
house of Austria.

# INDEX TO THE SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH VOLUMES.

I N D E X

TO THE
SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH

VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman Numerals diret to the Volume, and

the Figures to the Page.

A

lIB SOL UIIO N, the form of that used by Father
' Tetzel in Germany, II. 107.
Adorni, the faaion of, assists the Imperial general Co-

lonna in the reduction of Genoa, II. I97.
Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. un-

der William de Croy, lord of Chievres, II. 27. His
charaaer, ib. Sent by Charles with power to
aftHme the regency of Cafftile on the death of his
grandfather, 34. His claim admitted by Cardinal
2Ximenes, and executed in conjunaion, ib. Autho-
rized by Charles to hold the Cortes of Valencia,
which refuses to aflemble before him, 82. Made
viceroy of Castile on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 86. His elecqion rcmonftrated against
by the Caflilians, ib. Is chofcn PIope, 193. Rc-
trofpea of his conductd in Spain during the absence
of Charles, 206. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
Scgovians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonfcca to
besiege the city, who is rcpulfed by tlhe inhabitants of
1ed iina d l Campl)o, 207, 208. Apologizes for lon-
ficc;'s cc(nltia[ to the people, 209. Rccals Fonfcca,

Vol.. LV. Z and

and difmifles his troops, 209. His authority dil.'
claimed by the Holy Junta, 2I . Deprived of power
by them, 214. His ill reception on his arrival at
Rome on being chosen to the Papacy, 246. Refiores
the territories acquired by his predecefior, ib. La-
bours to unite the contending powers of Europe,
247. Publishes a bull for a three years truce among
them, 248. Accedes to the league against the French
King, ib. His death, 257. The sentiments and
behaviour of the people on that occasion, 258. A
rctrofpect of his conduc towards the Reformers, 270.
His brief to the diet at Nuremburg, ib. Receives
a lift of grievances from the diet, 273. His conduEc
to the Reformers, how esteemed at Rome, 275.
Afrira, the Spanish troops sent by Cardinal Ximenes

againfi Barbarossa, defeated there, 11. 47.
Aigues Mortes, interview between the Emperor Charles

and Francis, there, III. 153.
Aix la Chapelle, the Emperor Charles crowned there,

II. I02. Ferdinand his brother crowned King of
the Romans there, III. 53.
Alarcon, Don Ferdinand, Francis I. of France, taken

prisoner at the battle of Pavia, committed to his
custody, 11. 298. Conduacs Francis to Spain, 309.
Delivers up Francis in pursuance of the treaty of
IMadrid, 329. Is tent ambaflador to Francis tq re-
quire the fulfilment of his treaty, 348. Pope Cle-
ment VII. taken prisoner by the Imperialists, is
committed to his custody, 372.
Albany, John Stuart, Duke of, commands the French

army lent by Francis 1. to invade Naples, II. 291.
Albert of Brandenburgh, grand mailcr of the Teuto-

nic Order, becomes a convert to the doctrines of
Luther, II. 342. Obtains of Sigifmnund King of
Poland the iivtftiturc of PruTlia, ercrled into a
dutchy, ib. Is put under the ban of the Empire,
lb. His family fixed in the inheritance of Pruflia,
ib. Commands a body of troops in behaifof Mau-
rice of Saxony, but endeavours to afl'rt an inidepend-
ency, IV. 8o. D)cfeats and rakes the Duke
d'Auinale plilbincr, and joins the Emperor at Metz,

107.

107. Is condemned by the Imperial Chamber for
his demands on the Bishops of Bamberg and Wortf-
burg, 117. A league formed against him, Ix9.
Is defeated by Maurice, 120. Is again defeated by
Henry of Brunswick, I22. Is driven out of Ger-
many, and dies in exile, 123. His territories restored
to his collateral heirs, ib.
Albert, elector of Mentz, the publication of indulgences

in Germany committed to him, II. 106.
Alexander VI. Pope, remarks on the pontificate of,

II. 136.

Alexander di Medici. See MEDICI.
Algiers, how it was seized by Barbarossa, III. 92. Is

seized by the brother of the fane name, on the death
of the former, 93. Is taken under the protection
of the Porre, 94. Is governed by Hafcen Aga in the
absence of Barbarofia, 222. Is besieged by the Em-
peror Charles V. 226. Charles forced to re-imbark
by bad weather, 230.
Alrafchid, brother of Muley Hafcen King of Tunis,

solicits the protecion of Barbarossa against him, III.
95. His treacherous treatment by Barbarossa, 96.
Alva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in

his dispute with the Archduke Philip concerning the
regency of Caffile, I[. ir. Forces the Dauphin to
abandon the siege of Perpignan, III. 242. Presides
at the court-martial which condemns the Elecor of
Saxony to death, 409. Detains the Landgrave
prisoner by the Emperor's order, 421. Commands
under the Emperor the army destined against France,
IV. 105. Is appointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 165. Enters the ecclefiaflical territories and
seizes the Camnpagna Romana, 226. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, 227. Negotiates a peace be-
tween Philip and the Pope, with Cardinal Caraffta,
256. (Gocs to Rome to aflc pardon of the Pope for
his hostilities, 257. Is Tent to Paris in the name of
Philip to efpoufc the Princess Elizabeth, 301.
Amerftorjf; a nobleman of 1Holland, aflociated by

Charles V. with Cardinal Xinenes, in the rtency
of Caflile, II. 4.4

Z 2 nab

A'nabaptftis, the origin of that sea deduced, III. 7r.

Their principal tenets, 73. Their settlement at
Munfler, 74. CharaEter of their principal leaders,
ib. They seize the city of Munster, 75. They
eftablifl a new form of government there, ib.
Chufe Bocold IKing, 79. Their licentious practices,
ib. A confederacy of the German Princes formed
against them, 81. Are blockaded in Munster by
the bifflop, 82. The city taken, and great slaughter
made of them, 83. Their king put to death, 8+.
Charaaer of the sect since that period, 85. See
AIatthias and Bocold.
,Angleria, his authority Fited in proof of the extortions

of the Flermih miniflers of Charles V. 11. 58.
Anhalt, Prince of, avows the opinions of Martin Lu-

ther, II. 269.

Annats to the court of Rome, what, II. 151.
Aragon, how Ferdinand became poflefled of that king-

dom, II. 2. The Cortes of, acknowledges the
Archduke Philip's title to the crown, 3. Ancient
enmity between this kingdom and Castile, 8. Na-
varre added to this crown by the arts of Ferdinand,
23. Arrival of Charles V. 59. The Cortes not
allowed to afienhle in his name, ib. The refrac-
tory behaviour of the Aragonians, 60. They re-
fuse reflitution of the kingdom of Navarre, ib. Don
John Lanuza appointed regent, on the departure of
Charles for Germany, 86. Who compotes the dif-
turbances there, 242. The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 244.
See Spain.
Agrdres, an interview there between Francis I. and

Henry V 11. of England, II. ico.
J/lurias, Charles ftn of: Ihilip and Joanna, acknow-

ledged Prince of, by the Cortes of Castile, 11. 17.
A.u/llui;g, a diet called there by Charles V. III. 47.

Iis public entry into that city, ib. The confeflion
of faith named from this city, drawn up by Mclanc-
thon, ib. Resolute behaviour of the Proteltant
Princes at, 49. Its form of government violently
altered, and rendered flubiillivc to the Emperor,

454.

454. The diet re-assembled there, IV. g. The
diet takes part with the Emperor against the city of
Magdeburg, 18. Is seized by Maurice of Saxony,
66. Another diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 173.
Cardinal Morone attends the diet as the Pope's
nuncio, 175. Morone departs on the Pope's death,
I77. Recess of the diet on the subjea of religion,
I8I. Remarks on this recess, I87. The dietagain
assembled there, III. 430. Is intimidated by being
surrounded by the Emperor's Spanish troops, 43i.
The Emperor re-establishes the Romili worthip in
the churches of, ib. The diet, by the Emperor's
order, petitions the Pope for the return of the coun-
cil to Trent, 439. A system of theology laid before
the diet by the Emperor, 445. The archbishop of
Mentz declares, without authority, the diet's ac-
ceptance of it, ib.
.vila, a convention of the malecontents in Spain held

there, II. 211. A confederacy termed the Holy
Junta, formed there, ib. Which disclaims the au-
thority of Adrian, 212. The Holy Junta removed
to Tordefillas, 213. See Junta.
,lAujria, by what means the houle of, became so for-

midable in Germany, II. 375- The extraordinary
acquisitions of the house of, in the person of the Em-
peror Charles V. IV. 305. 309.

B
Barbarossa, Horuck, his rife to the kingdom of Algiers

and Tlunis, II. 46. Defeats the Spanish troops sent
against him by Cardinal Ximenes, 47. His parent-
age, III. 9l. Commences pirate with his brother
Hayradin, ib. How he acquired pollielion of Al-
giers, 92. Infests the coast of Spain, 93. Is re-
duced and killed by Comares the Spanifi governor
of Oran, ib.
Barbaro/2i, Hayradin, brother to the former of the

fame name, takes polleflion of Algiers on his bro-
ther's death, 111. 94. Puts his dominions under the
proteclion of the Grand Signior, ib. Obtains the

Z 3 command

command of the Turkish fleet, ib. His treacherous
treatment of Alrafchid, brother to the king of Tu-
nis, 96. Seizes Tunis, 97. Extends his depre-
dations by sea, ib. Prepares to resist the Emperor's
armament againff him, 99. Goletta and his fleet
taken, ior. Is defeated by Charles, 103. Tunis
taken, 104. Makes a descent on Italy, 253. Burns
Rheggio, ib. Besieges Nice in conjunction with
the French, but is forced to retire, 254. Is dif-
miffed by Francis, 267.
Barbary, a summary view of the revolutions of, III.

Qo. Its division into independent kingdoms, ib.
Rife of the piratical flates, 91. See Barbaro/a.
Barcelona, the public entry of the Emperor Charles V.

into that city as its count, III. 36. The treaties of
Charles with the Italian States, published there, 41.
Bayard, chevalier, his character, II. 179. His gal-

lant defence of Meziers besieged by the Imperialifis,
180. Obliges them to raise the siege, ib. His noble
behaviour at his death, 265. His refpedful fune-
ral, 266.
Bellay, M. his erroneous account of the education of

Charles V. corrected, II. 27. Note. His account
of the disastrous retreat of the Emperor Charles V.
from his invasion of Provence, III. 138.
Bible, a translation of, undertaken by Martin Luther,

and its effeAs in opening the eyes of the people, II.
268.
Bicocca, battle of, between Colonna and Marefchal

Lautrec, I. I95.
Bacold or Beukles, John, ajourneyman- taylor, becomes

a leader of the Anabaptifis at Munfler, III. 74.
Succeeds Matthias in the direction of their affairs,
78. His enthusiastic extravagancies, ib. Is chofein
King, 79. Marries fourteen wives, 80. Beheads
one of them, 83. Is put to a cruel death at the
taking of Munfiir, 84. See Anabaptjifs.
Bohemia, the archduke Ferdinand cholen king of, II.

374. Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties of the
Jlohemians, 111. 427. The Reformation introduced
by John Huls and Jerome of Prague, 4z8. Raise an

ai iy .

army to no purpose, ib. Is closely confined in the
citadel of Mechlin, IV. 22.
Bonnivet, admiral of France, appointed to command

the invasion of Milan, II. 256. His characer, ib.
Enables Colonna to defend the city of Milan by his
imprudent delay, 257. Forced to abandon the
Milanese, 264. Is wounded, and his army defeated
by the Imperialists, ib. Stimulates Francis to an
invasion of the Milarrefe, 285. Advises Francis to
besiege Pavia, 287. Advises him to give battle to
Bourbon, who advanced to the relief of Pavia, 293.
Is killed at the battle of Pavia, 296.
Bologna, an interview between the Emperor Charles V.

and Pope Clement VII. there, 111. 37. Another
meeting between them there, 60.
Bouillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares war

against the Emperor Charles, at the instigation of
Francis, II. 177. Is ordered by Francis to disband
his troops, 178. His territories reduced by the
Emperor, 179.
Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of England, III.

274.. Taken, 284.
Bourbon, Charles Duke of, his character, II. 250.

The causes of his discontent with Francis I. ib.
His duchess dies, 251. Rejecs the advances of
Louise the King's mother, 252. His estate fequeft-
ered by her intrigues, ib. Negociates secretly with
the Emperor, 253. Is inc'cded in a treaty between
the Emperor and Henry VIII. of England, ib. Is
taxed by the King with betraying him, which he
denies, 254. Escapes to Italy, 255. Dir-ets the
measures of the Imperial army under Lannoy, 263.
Defeats the French on the banks of the Selia, 265.
Initigates Charles to an invasion of France, 280.
Advances to the relief of Pavia, 292. Defeats
Francis, and takes him prisoner, 296. -Haaltens to
Madrid to secure his own interests in the interview
between Charles and Francis, t12. His kind re-
ception by Charles, 320. Obtains a grant of the
duchy of Milan, and is made general of the Impe-
rial army, 321. Obliges SfOrza to furrendcr Mil;ii,

Z + 35'.

352. Is forced to oppress the Milanere to satisfy
his troops mutinying for pay, 357. Sets Morone
at liberty, and makes him his confident, 357, 358.
Appoints Leyva governor of Milan, and advances
to invade the Pope's territories, 359, 360. His dif-
appointed troops mutiny, 36I. He determines to
plunder Rome, 365. Arrives at Rome, and aflaults
it, 366. Is killed, ib.
Brandenburg, Elector of, avows the opinions of Lu-

ther, II. 269.

Albert of. See Albert.
Bruges, a league concluded there between the Em-

peror and Henry VIII. of England, against France,
II. 182.
Brunswick, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 269
---- FHenry Duke of, driven from his dominions
by the Protestant Princes of the league of Smalkalde,
11. 260. Raises men for Francis, but employs
them to recover his own dominions, 298. Is taken
prisoner, 299.
Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand king of the Romans,

11. 218. Is treacherously seized by Sultan Soly-
man, 219.

C
Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Germany, ap-

pointed to examine the dottrines of Martin Luther,
[1. 117. Requires Luther peremptorily to retrac
his errors, 18. Requires the Elector of Saxony to
Surrender or banish Luther, 120. His condut
jufiified, 122.
Calais, an ineffecAual congress there, between the Em-

peror and Francis, under the mediation of Henry
VI11. II. J8o. The careless manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary Queen of Eng-
land, IV. 264. Ineffectual remoriftranices of Philip,
and Lord Wcntworth the governor, concerning its
defencelcts state, ib. Is invelred and taken by the
Duke of Guile, 265. The English inhabitants

turned

turned out, 266. Stipulations concerning, in the
treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 297.
Catnbray, articles of the peace concluded there, between

the Emperor Charles, and Francis of France, III.
31. Remarks on this treaty, ib.
Campe, peace of, between Henry VIII. and Francis,

III. 334.
Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from Pope Clement

VII. to the second diet at Nuremberg, II. 276, 277.
Publishes articles for reforming the inferior clergy,
278. Advises Charles to rigorous measures against
the Protestants, III. 50.
Capitulation of the Germanic body, signed by Charles

V. and prescribed to all his fucceflbrs, II. 77.
Caraffa, Cardinal, his precipitate eleaion, IV. 193.

Is appointed legate to Bologna, ib. Reasons of his
disgust with the Emperor, 94.. Persuades the
Pope to solicit an alliance with France against the
Emperor, 195, I96. 20o. His insidious commis-
sion to the court of France, 219. His public entry
into Paris, 220. Exhorts Henry to break his truce
with the Emperor, 22I. Absolves Henry from his
oath, 223. Negociates a peace between the Pope
and Philip, with the Duke d'Alva, 256. The fate
of him and his brother on the death of Pope Paul,
302.
CarrlojIadius, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,

at Wittemberg, II. 130. His intemperate zeal,
267. Awed by the reproofs of Luther, 268.
Carignan, belieged by the Count d'Enguin, and defended

by the Marquis de Guafto, III. 267. Guafto de-
feated in a pitched battle, 270. The town taken, 272.

Cajfaldo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno.
Canjile, how llabella became pofefl'ed of that king-

dom, II. 2. 'I'he Archduke Philip's title acknow-
ledged by the Cortes of that kingdom, 3. lfabella
dies, and leaves her husband lFerdinand of Aragon,
regent, 7. Ferdinand resigns the crown of, 8.
Ferdinand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, ib.
Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon, ib.

The

The particular dislike of the Caflilians to Ferdinand,
8. '1 he regency of, jointly veRied in Ferdinand,
Philip and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, 4..
Declares against Ferdinand, 15. The regency of,
resigned by Philip to Ferdinand, i6. Philip and
Joanna acknowledged King and Queen by the
Cortes, 17. Death of Philip, ib. " he perplexity
of the Castilians on Joanna's incapacity for govern-
ment, g9. Ferdinand gains the regency and the good
.ill of the Castilians by his prudent administration,
22. Oran and other places in Barbary annexed to
this kingdom by Ximenes, 23. Ximenes appointed
regent by Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of
Charles V. 31. Charles aflines the regal title, 35.
Ximenes procures its acknowledgment, 37. 1 he
nobility deprefled by Ximenes, 38, 39. The grandees
mutiny against Ximenes, 40. The mutiny sup-
prested, ib. Ximenes resumes the grants made by
Ferdinand to the nobles, 41. The bold reply of
Ximenes to the discontented nobles, 43. Other
associates in the regency appointed with Ximenes at
the infligation of the Flemifl courtiers, 44. Xi-
menes dies, 55. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in favour
of his mother Joanna, 56. The Castilians receive
unfavourable impreflions of him, ib. Disgusted by
his partiality to his Flemish ministers, 57. Sauvage
made chancellor, 58. William de Croy appointed
archbishop of Toledo, ib. The principal cities
confederate, and complain of their grievances, 61.
The clergy of, refute to levy the tenth of benefices
granted by the Pope to Charles V. 8I. InterdicIted,
but the interdict taken off; by Charles's application,
ib. An infurrccion there, 84. lncreaile the dilat-
feftlion, 85. Cardinal Adrian appointed regcnt, on
the departure of Charles for Germlany, 86. 'l'h
views and pretensions of the commons, in their in-
furreclions, 209. The confederacy called the Holy
Junta formed, 2I I. The procccedings of which are
carried on in the name of Qiecn Joanlna, 213.
](eceives circulatory letters from Chlia cs for the in-

fu rgents

furgents to lay down their arms, with promises of
pardon, 215. The nobles undertake to suppress
the insurgents, 221. Raise an army againfl them
under the Conde de Haro, 224. Haro gets pof-
feflion of Joanna, 225. Expedients by which they
raise money for their troops, 227. Unwilling to
proceed to extremities with the Junta, 228. The
army of the Junta routed and Padilla executed, 232,
233. Dissolution of the Junta, 235. The mode-
ration of Charles toward the insurgents on his ar-
rival in Spain, 244. He acquires the love of the
Caltilians, 245. See Spain.
Catherine of Aragon, is divorced from Henry VIII. of

England, Ill. 69. Dies, x60.
Catherine a Boria, a nun, flies from her cloister, and

marries Martin Luther, 11. 340.

Catherine di Medici. See MEDICI.
Cavi, peace concluded there between Pope Paul IV.

and Philip II. of Spain, IV. 256.
Cercamp, negociations for peace entered into there be-

tween Philip II. of Spain. and Henry II. of France,
IV. 281. 290. The negociations removed to Cha-
teau Cambrefis, 294. See Chateau Cambrefs.
Charaters of men, rules for forming a proper estimate

of them, Il1. 313. Applied to the cafe of Luther,
ib.
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, his observations

on the manners of the clergy, in his letter to the
archbishop of Metz, II. I39. Note.
Charles V. Emperor, his descent and birth, II. r. How

he came to inherit such extensive dominions, 2.
Acknowledged Prince of Asturias by the Cortes of
Castile, 17. His father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy
and hatred of his grandfather lFerdinand towards him,
23. Left heir to his dominions, 26. Death of
Ferdinand, ib. His education committed to Wil-
liam de Croy, Lord of Chievres, ib. Adrian of
Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor, 27. 'Ihe
firit opening of his charadcr, 29. Afliues the
government of Slanders, and attends to business, ib.
iends Cardinal Adrian to be regent of Caflilc, who

cxecutes

executes it jointly with Ximenes, 34. Aflumes the
regal title, 35. His title admitted with difficulty
by the Castilian nobility, 37. Persuaded to add
aflbciate regents to Ximenes, 44. His F'lemish
court corrupted by the avarice of Chievres, 47.
Persuaded by Ximenes to visit Spain, but how that
journey is retarded, 48, 49. The present slate of his
affairs, 49. Concludes a peace at Noyen with Fran-
cis I. of France, and the conditions of the treaty,
ib. Arrives in Spain, 52. His ungrateful treat-
ment of Ximenes, 54. His public entry into Val-
ladolid, 55. Is acknowledged King by the Cortes,
who vote him a free g;fc, 56. 'l'he Castilians re-
ceive unfavourable imprelfions of him, ib. Disgusts
them by his partiality to his Flemish minifiers, 57.
Sets out for Aragon, 59. Sends his brother Ferdi-
nand to visit their grandfather Maximilian, ib.
Cannot aflemtle the Cortes of Aragon in his own
name, ib. The opposition made by that assembly
to his desires, ib. Refutes the application of Fran-
cis I. for restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 60.
Neglects the remonflrances of the Castilians, 61.
Death of the Emperor Maximilian, 62. View of
the present slate of Europe, 68. How Maximilian
was obfiruced in securing the Empire to him, 63.
Francis I. alpircs to the Imperial crown, 64. Cir-
cumfiances favourable to the pretensions of Charles,
ib. L8. The Swiss Cantons efpoule his cauie, 69.
Apprehensions and conduct of Pope Leo X. on the
occasion, 7, 71. Ailimbling of the diet at Franc-
fort, 72. Frederic duke of Saxony refules the offer
of the empire, and votes for him, 73, 74. And re-
fuses the prcl;rts of'icred by his ainiatladors, 75.
Concurring circumltlnces which favoured his elec-
tion, 76. His ctlecion, 77. Signs and confirms
the cipitulation of the (ermanic h):ly, 77, 78.
'1 he eledtion noiiicd to him, 78. Afliji.cs the title
of Majefly, 79. Accepts the Imperial dignity of-
sered by the Counlt Palattine, am l); iisilor trom the
Elcdtors, 80. The clergy of Cafllile relu(e the
tenth of benefices granted him by the Pope, ib.

6 Procures

Procures the interdia the kingdom is laid under for
refusal, to be taken off, 81. Empowers Cardinal
Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia, 82. The
nobles refuse to assemble without his prelence, 82,
83. Authorises the insurgents there to continue in
arms, 83. Summons the Cortes of Castile to meet
in Galicia, ib. Narrowly escapes with his Flemifil
ministers from an infurrecion on that account, 84.
Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 86. Prepares
to leave Spain, and appoints regents, ib. Embarks,
87. Motives of this journey, 89. Rife of the ri-
valfhip between him and Francis 1. 90. Courts the
favour of Henry VIII. of England and his minister
Cardinal Wolfey, 96. Visits Henry at Dover, 99.
Promises Wolfey his interest for the papacy, 1oo.
Has a second interview with Henry at Gravelines,
o10. Offers to submit his differences with Francis
to Henry's arbitration, ib. His magnificent coro-
nation at Aix-la-Chapelle, 102. Calls a diet at
W.Vorms, to check the reformers, 103. Causes
which hindered his espousing the party of Martin
Luther, 161. Grants Luther a fafe-conduft to the
diet of Worms, 162. An edit published against
him, 164. His embarraflinent at this time, 168.
Concludes an alliance with the Pope, 172. The
conditions of the treaty, 172, 173. Death of his
ninifter Chievres, and its advantages to him, 173,
174. Invasion of Navarre by Francis, 175. The
French driven out, and their genelal L'Efparre
taken prisoner, 177. War declared against him by
Robert de la Marck, lord of Bouillon, who ravages
Luxemburg, 177, 178. Reduces Bouillon, and
invades France, 179. His demands at the congress
;t Calais, 181. Has an interview with Cardinal
XVolfey at Bruges, and concludes a league with
HIenry VIII. againlt France, 182. Pope Leo de-
dares for him agaiint France, 186,187. 1 he French
driven out of Milan, 190. 195. Viiits England in
his paflage to Spain, I9b'. Cultivates the good-will
of Cardinal W'olHty, and creates the Earl of Surrey
his high admiral, 199. Grants the island of Malta

to

to the Knights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes by
Solyman the Magnificent, 202. Arrives in Spain,
203. A retrofpec of his proceedings in relation to
the infurreetions in Spain, 215. Issues circulatory
letters for the insurgents to Jay down their arms,
with promises of pardon, ib. His prudent mode-
ration towards the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
244. Acquires the love of the Caffilians, 245.
Enters into a league with Charles Duke of Bourbon,
257. Why he did not endeavour to get Wolfey
eleaed Pope, 259. Invades Guienne and Burgundy,
but without success, 262. His troops in Milan
mutiny for want of pay, but are pacified by Morone,
264. Undertakes an invasion of Provence, 280.
Orders Pescara to besiege Marseilles, 281. Peifcara
obliged to retire, 282. Disconcerted by the French
over-running the Milanese again, 286. The reve-
nues of Naples mortgaged to raise money, 287.
His troops defeat Francis, and take him prisoner at
the battle of Pavia, 296. His asseted moderation
at receiving the news, 298, 299. Avails himself of
a treaty concluded between Lannoy and Pope Cle-
ment, but refuses to ratify it, 305. His army in Pa-
via mutiny, and are obliged to be disbanded, 305,
306. His deliberations on the proper improvement
of his disadvantages, 306, 307. His propositions
to Francis, 308. After many delays grants Sforza
the invefliture of Milan, 311. Morone's intrigues
betrayed to him by Pescara, 316. Orders Pescara
to continue his negotiations with MoronS, ib. His
rigorous treatment of Francis, 318. Visits Francis,
319. His kind reception of the Duke of Bourbon,
320. Grants Bourbon the dutchy of Milan, and
appoints him general in chief of the Imperial army
there, 32i. Fruitles.s negotiations for the delivery
of Francis, 322. Treaty of Madrid with Francis,
324. D)elivers up Fancis, 329. Marries Isabella
of Portugal, 33A. An alliance formed a'ainit hint
at Cognac, 345. Sends ambafd(lors to Francis to
require the fultilment of the treaty of Madrid, 348.
Prepacrcs for war aguinfl Francis, 350. The Pope
red'lcecd to aln accomin odation with hiin, 355. The

i cxhauftcd

exhaufled state of his finances, 356. His troops un-
der Bourbon distressed and mutinous for want of pay,
357. Bourbon assaults Rome and is slain, but the
city taken, 368. The Prince of Orange general
on Bourbon's death, takes the cafle of St. Angelo,
and the Pope prisoner, 371. The Emperor's con-
dud on that occasion, iT. His diflentions with
the Pope, how far favourable to the reformation,
375. His iiftrudions to the diet at Spires, ib.
His manifesto against the Pope, and letter to the
Cardinals, 376. France and England league against
him, III. 3. Is refused supplies by the Cortes of
Castile, 9. Delivers the Pope for a ransom, ib.
His overtures to Henry and Francis, ii. Their
declaration of war against him, 13. Is challenged
by Francis to sing!e combat, 14. Andrew Doria
revolts from Francis to him, 21. His forces de-
feat the French in Italy, 23. 26. His motives for
desiring an accommodation, 27. Concludes a fepa-
rate treaty with the Pope, 29. Terms of the peace
of Cambray concluded with Francis by the media-
tion of Margaret of Austria and Louise of France,
30. Remarks on the advantages gained by him in
this treaty, and on his condudt of the war, 31.
Visits Italy, 36. His policy on his public entry into
Barcelona, 37. Has an interview with the Pope at
Hologna, ib. Motives for his moderation in Italy,
38. His treaties with the flates of, 39. Is crowned
King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 41.
Summons a diet at Spires to confider the state of
religion, 43. His deliberations with the Pope, re-
speCting the expediency of calling a general council,
45. Appoints a diet at Augsburg, 47. M/kces a
public entry into that city, ib. His endeavours to
check the reformation, ib. Resolute behaviour of
the Protestant princes toward him, 49. His severe
decree against the Proteflints, ib. PropoSes his
brother Ferdinand to be elected King of the Roman5s,
51. Is opposed by the Protcflants, 53. Obtains
his election, ib. Is desirous of an accommodation
with the Protcfl:ints, 57. Concludes a treaty with

them

them at Nuremburg, ib. Raises an army to oppose
the Turks under Solyman, and obliges him to retire,
59. Has another interview with the Pope, and
presses him to call a general council, 60. Procures
a league of the Italian States to secure the peace of
Italy, 63. Arrives at Barcelona, ib. His endea-
vours to prevent the negotiations and meeting be-
tween the Pope and Francis, 67. Undertakes to
expel Barbarossa from Tunis, and restore Muley
Hafcen, 98. Lands in Africa, and besieges Go-
letta, Ioo. Takes Goletta, and seizes Barbarofla's
fleet, 102, 103. Defeats Barbaroifa, and takes
Tunis, 103, 104. Restores Muley Hafcen, and
the treaty between them, io5. The glory acquired
by this enterprise, and the delivery of the Christian
captives, 0o6. Seizes the dutchy of Milan on the
death of Francis Sforza,, I22. His policy with
regard to it, ib. Prepares for war with Francis,
123. His inveEtive against Francis at Rome before
the Pope in council, 124. Remarks on this tranf-
action, 127. Invades France, 130. Enters Pro-
vence and finds it desolated, 135. Besieges Mar-
feilles and Arles, 136- His miserable retreat from
Provence, 138. His invasion of Picardy defeated,
x39. Is accused of poisoning the Dauphin, 14I.
Improbability of its truth, 142. Conjcaure concern-
ing the Dauphin's death, ib. Slanders invaded by
Francis, I44. A suspension of arms in Slanders,
how negotiated, 145. A truce in Piedmont, 146.
Motives to there truces, ib. Negotiation for peace
vwith Francis, a19. Concludes a truce for ten years
at Nice, iSi. Remarks on the war, 152. His in-
terview with Francis, ib. Courts the friendfilip of
Henry VIII. of England, I6o. Indulges the Pro-
tcftant P linccs, 161. (,uiets their apprehensions of
the Catholic le:ague, 166. His troops mutiny,
169. Afiiembles the Cortes of Castile, ib. Dc-
fio')s the i: ci(nlt conflitution of the Cortes, 17I.
IJ fiancu (of the h.lighty fiirit of the Spanifih grandees,
i72. .-:cfircs pelmifliun of Francis to pals through
I' .ticc tu the Nicthc larlais, 1 1. I-lis reception in

11' ran Cc,

France, 182. His rigorous treatment of Ghent,
I86. RefuTes to fulfil his engagements to Francis,
x88. Appoints a friendly conference between a
deputation of Catholic and Protestant divines before
the diet at Ratisbon, 211. Result of this confer-
ence, 213. Grants a private exemption from op-
pressions to the Protestants, 214. Undertakes to
reduce Algiers, 222. Is near being cast away by a
violent storm, 225. Lands near Algiers, ib. His
soldiers exposed to a violent tempest and rain, 227.
His fleet /hattered, 228. His fortitude under these
disasters, 230. Leaves his enterprize and em-
barks again, 231. Is difireffed with another storm
at Tea, ib. Takes advantage of the French invasion
of Spain to obtain subsidies from the Cortes, 242.
His treaty with Portugal, 243. Concludes a league
with Henry VIII. 244. Particulars of the treaty,
247. Over-runs Cleves, and his barbarous treat-
ment of the town of Duren, 250. His behaviour
to the Duke of Cleves, 251. Besieges Landrecy,
ib. Is joined by an English detachment, ib. Is
forced to retire, 252. Courts the favour of the
Protestants, 259. His negociations with the Pro-
teftants, at the diet of Spires, 261. Procures the
concurrence of the diet in a war against Francis,
265. Negociates a separate peace with the King of
Denmark, 266. Invades Champagne, and invests St.
Difiere, 273. Want of concert between his~opera'
tions and those of Henry, who now invades France,
274. Obtains St. Diliere by artifice, 275. His
dilirefles and happy movements, 277. Concludes
a separate peace with Francis, 279. His motives
to this peace, 280. His advantages by this treaty,
283. Obliges himself by a private article to exter-
minate the Protestant herclf, ib. Is cruelly as-
flicted with the .gout, 286. Diet at Worms, 288.
Arrives at Worms and alters his conduct toward the
Proteltants, 291. His conduct on the death of the
Duke of Orleans, 295. His dissimulation to the
Lanidgravc of Helle, 315. Concludes a truce with
Solyman, 320. Holds a diet at Ratisbon, 321.

VOL. IV. A a 1is

His declaration to the Protestant deputies, 326. His
treaty with the Pope, concluded by the Cardinal of
Trent, ib. His circular letter to the Protestant
members of the Germanic body, 327. The Pro-
teftants levy an army against him, 336. Is unpre-
pared againfi them, 337. Puts them under the ban
of the Empire, 339. The Protestants declare war
against him, 341. Mlarches to join the troops sent
by the Pope, 344. Farnese, the Pope's legate,
returns in difgu{i, 345. His prudent declension of
an aaion with the Proteflants, 348. Is joined by
his Flemifli troops, 349. Proposals of peace made
by the Protef-ants, 360. Their army disperse, 361.
His rigorous treatment of the Proteflant Princes,
364. Dismisses part of his army, 367. The Pope
recalls his troops, 368. His reflection on Fiefco's
iiifurrection at Genoa, 385. Is alarmed at the hof-
tile preparations of Francis, 39I. Death of Francis,
393. A parallel drawn between him and Francis,
iib. Consequences of Francis's death to him, 397.
1Marches against the Elector of Saxony, 398. Passes
the Elbe, 399. Defeats the Saxon army, 404.
Takes the Elecor prisoner, 405. His harsh recep-
tion of him, 406. Invests Wittemberg, 407. Con-
demns the Eleaor to death by a court-martial,
409. The Eleaor by treaty surrenders the eleto-
rate, 4II. The harsh terms imposed by him on the
Landgrave of Hesse, 416. His haughty reception of
the Landgrave, 419. Detains him priolner, 421.
Seizes the warlike fiores of the league, 426. His
cruel exactions, 427. Aflembles a diet at Augsburg,
430. Intimidates the diet by his Spanish troops, ib.
Re-eftahbliihes the Romish worship in the churches of
Augsburg, 431. Seizes Placentia, 436. Orders
the diet to petition the Pope for the return of the
council to lrent, 439. Protests against the council
ol Bologna, 441. Causes a system of faith to be
prepared for (,ermany, 443. Lays it before the
diet, 445. The Interim opposed, 4.5. And re-
jcqlcd by the Imperial cities, 452. Reduces the city
of Augsburg to fubmiflion, 453. Repeats the fame

7 violence

violence at Ulm, 454. Carries the Elecor and
Landgrave with him into the Low Countries, 456.
Procures his Ton Philip to be recognized by the
States of the Netherlands, 457. Eflablifhes the
Interim there, 459. Re-aflembles the diet at Augf-
burg, under the influence of his Spanish troops, I'V.
9. The city of Madgeburg refuses to admit the In-
terim, and prepares for refifrance, 18. Appoints
Maurice Elector of Saxony to reduce it, 19. Pro-
mises to protect the Protestants at the council of
Trent, 2 I. Arbitrarily releases Maurice and the Elec-
tor of Brandenburg from their engagements to the
Landgrave for the recovery of his liberty, 22. En-
deavours to secure the Empire for his son Philip, 24.
His brother Ferdinand refuses to resign his preten-
sions, 25. Besieges Parma, but is repulsed, 32.
Proceeds rigorously against the Protestants, 34.
Endeavours to support the council of Trent, 35.
Puts Magdeburg under the ban of the Empire, 36.
Absolves the city, 42. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Protestant deputies, con-
cerning their fafe-condut, 44. Begins to fufpea
Maurice of Saxony, 59. Circumstances which
contributed to deceive him with regard to Maurice,
6r. Maurice takes the field against him, 63.
Maurice seconded by Henry II. of France, 65. His
distress and consternation, 66. An ineffectual nego-
ciation with Maurice, 67. Flies from Illfpruck,
72. Releases the Eletor of Saxony, 73. Is soli-
cited to latisfy the demands of Maurice, 81. His
present difficulties, 83. Refutes any direct compli-
ance with the demands of Maurice, 88. Is di(pofcd
to yield by the progress of Maurice's operations, ib.
Makes a peace with Maurice at Paflii, 91. Re-
flections on this treaty, 92. Turns his arms
against France, 1or. Lays siege to Metz, o05.
Is joined by Albert of Brandenburg, Io6. His army
di.trefled by the vigilance of the Duke of Guile,
1o8. Raises the liege and retires in a shattered
condition, i o. Colino di Medici aflbrts his inde-
pendency against him, 112. Siena revolts against

A a z hin,

him, I 2. Is dejeaed at his bad success, x I6. Takes
Terrouane, and demolishes it, 125. Takes Hefden,
;b. Proposes his son Philip as a husband to Mary
Queen of England, 139. The articles of the mar-
riage, 142. Marches to oppose the French opera-
tions, i51. Is defeated by Henry, 152. Invades
Picardy, 153. Grants Siena, subdued by Cosmo di
Medici, to his son Philip, 164. A diet atAugfburg
opened by Ferdinand, 173. Leaves the interior
adminiitration of Germany to Ferdinand, 177.
Applies again to Ferdinand to resign his pretensions
of fucceflion to Philip, but is refused, 178. Recess
of the diet of Augsburg on the fubjeEt of religion,
181. A treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV.
and Henry II. of France against him, 202. Resigns
his hereditary dominions to his son Philip, ib. His
motives for retirement, 203. Had long meditated
this resignation, 206. The ceremony of this deed,
208. His speech on this occasion, 209. Resigns
albo the dominions of Spain, 213. His intended
retirement into Spain retarded, 215. A truce for
five years concluded with France, 216. Endeavours
in vain to secure the Imperial crown for Philip, 230.
Resigns the Imperial crown to Ferdinand, 23I.
Sets out for Spain, ib. His arrival and reception
in Spain, 232. Is distressed by his son's ungrateful
negled in paying his pension, 233. Fixes his retreat
in the monastery of St.Juftus in Plazencia, 234. The
situation of this monastery, and his apartments,
deicribed, ib. Contrast between the conduct of
Charles and the Pope, 235. His manner of life in
his retreat, 280. His death precipitated by his
monastic severities, 284. Celebrates his own fune-
ral, 285. Dies, ib. His charaaer, 286. A review
of the lrate of Europe during his reign, 304. His
acquisitions to the crown of Spain, 308.
Chateau C(ambrcfis, the conferences for peace between

Philip 11. of Spain, and Henry II. of France, re-
moved thither fromI Cercamp, IV. 294. The peace
retarded by the dem;and of Elizabeth of England for
icltitution of Calais, 295. Particulars of the treaty

figne4

signed there between England and France, 297.
Terms of the pacification between Philip and Hen-
ry, 299.
Cheregato, nuncio from the Pope to the diet at Nurem-

burgh, his inftrudions, II. 270. Opposes the assem-
bling a general council, 272.
Chievres, William de Croy, lord of, appointed by

Maximilian to superintend the education of his
grandson Charles, 1I. 26. Adrian of Utrecht made
preceptor under him, 27. His direction of the
studies of Charles, 29. His avarice corrupts the
Flemish court of Charles, 47. Negociates a peace
with France, 49, 5o. Endeavours to prevent an
interview between Charles and Ximenes, 51. At-
tends Charles to Spain, 52. His ascendency over
Charles, 56. His extortions, 58. His death and
the supposed causes of it, 173.
Chrlt-ians, primitive, why averse to the principles of

toleration, IV. 183.
Clement VII. Pope, his election, II. 258. His cha-

rader, ib. Grants Cardinal Wolfey a legatine
commission in England for life, 259. Refutes to
accede to the league against Francis, 263. Labours
to accommodate the differences between the contend-
ing parties, ib. His proceedings with regard to the
reformers, 276, Concludes a treaty of neutrality
with Francis, 290. Enters into a separate treaty
with Charles after the battle of Pavia, and the con-
sequences of it, 305. Joins in an alliance with
Francis Sforza and the Venetians, agaiift the Em-
peror, 345. Absolves Francis from his oath to ob-
serve the treaty of Madrid, 346. Cardinal Colonna
seizes Rome, and invests him in the caffle of St.
Angelo, 354, 355. Is forced to an accommoda-
tion with the Imperialists, 355. His revenge against
the Colonna family, 359. Invades Naples, ib. His
territories invaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity
on the occasion, 362. Concludes a treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, ib. His conftcrnation
on Bourbon's motions towards Rome, 366. Rome
taken, and himself besieged in the castle of St. An-
g;lo, 369. Surrenders himself prisoner, 372. Tlhe

A a 3 Florn-.

Florentines revolt against him, III. 4. Pays
Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other flipula-
tions, Io. Makes his escape from confinement,
ix. Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec, ib. Is
jealous of the intentions of Francis, and negociates
with Charles, i8. His motives and fleps towards
an accommodation, 27. Concludes a separate
treaty with Charles, 29 His interview with the
Emperor at Bologna, 37. Crowns Charles King
of Lombardy and Errperor of the Romans, 41.
His representations to the Emperor against calling a
general council, 45. Has another interview with
Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties raised by
him to the calling a general council, 60. Agrees
to a league of the Italian States for the peace of
Italy, 62. His interview and treaty with Francis,
67. Marries Catherine di Medici to the Duke of
Orleans, ib. His protracion of the affair of the
divorce bolicited by Henry VIII. 68. Reverses
Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, 69. Henry renounces his fu-
premacy, ib. His death, 70. Reflections on his
Pontificate, 7 1.
Clergy, Romish, remarks on the immoral lives of, and

how they contributed to the progress of the Reform-
ation, II. 137. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, I39. ITheir usurpations in Ger-
many, during the disputes concerning investitures,
4I-. Their other opportunities of aggrandizing
themselves there, 142. Their perfbnal immunities,
143. Their encroachments on the laity, 144.
'The dreadful ef:fets of spiritual censures, 145.
Their devices to secure their ufirpations, 146. The
united effett of all these circumstances, 151. Op-
pose the advancement of learning in Germany,
I56.
Cleves, invaded and over-run by the Emperor Charles

V. 1. 250. Cruel treatment of Duren, ib. Hu-
miliating ubnmiflion of the Duke, 251.
Cnippcrloli;1g, a leader of the Anabaptifis at Mulifler,

an account of, I1I. 75, 76. See AnabaptiJfs.

Cognac,

Cognac, an alliance formed there against Charles V.

by the Pope, the Venetians, the Duke of Milan,
and Francis I. II. 345.
Coligny, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends St.

Quintin against the Spanish general Emmanuel
Phillibert Duke of Savoy, IV. 245. His brother
D'Andelot defeated in an endeavour to join the gar-
rifon, 246. But D'Andelot enters the town, 247.
His character, 252. The town taken by assault,
and himself taken prisoner. ib.
Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia,

brother to the Emperor Charles V. elected King of
the Romans by the college of Electors there, III. 53.

Herman, Count de Wied, Archbishop and

EleEtor of, inclines to the Reformation, and is op-
posed by his canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III. 293. Is deprived and excommuni-
cated, 18. Resigns, 365.
Colonna, Cardinal Pompeo, his character, and rival-

ship with Pope Clement VII. II. 353. Seizes
Rome, and inveffs the Pope in the catle of St.
Angelo, 354, 355. Is degraded, and the reft of the
family excommunicated by the Pope, 359. Is pre-
vailed on by the Pope, when prisoner with the Im-
perialifts, to solicit his delivery, III. 9.

Prosper, the Italian general, his character,

II. I8/. Appointed to command the troops in the
invasion of Milan, ib. Drives the French out of
Milan, 190. His army how weakened at the death
of Pope Leo X. I91. Defeats Marechal de Lau-
trec, at Bicocca, I95. Reduces Genoa, 197. The
bad ifate of his troops when the French invade Mi-
lan, 256. Is enabled to defend the city by the ill
conduct of Bonnevet the French commander, 258.
Dies, and is succeeded by Lannoy, 263.
Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Fcr-

dinand of Aragon, to obtain Joanna's consent to
his regency of Castile, II. xI. Thrown into a
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, ib.
Confefion of Augflburg, drawn up by Melandshon, III.

48.

A a 4 Con'yance

Conflance, the privileges of that city taken away by the

Emperor Charles V. for disobedience to the Interinis
III. 459.
CGrfairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of, II1. 91.

See Algiers, Barbarofja.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, 1I. 3. Not allowed to assemble
in the name of Charles V. 59. Their opposition
to his desires, 60. Is prevailed on by the Emperor
to recognize his son Philip as fucceffbr to that king-
dom, 1II. 243. See Spain.
- of Castile, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, II. 3. Is prevailed on to ac-
knowledge Ferdinand Regent, according to Isabel-
la's will, 8. Acknowledges Philip and Joanna King
and Queen of Castile, and their son Charles, Prince
of Aiturias, 17. Declares Charles King, and votes
him a free gift, 56. Summoned by Charles to meet
at Compoftella in Galicia, 84. Tumultuary pro-
ceedings thereupon, ib. A donative voted, 86.
Loses all its influence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 238, 239. Its backwardness to grant sup-
plies for the Emperor's wars in Italy, 356. Refuses
his prefling Solicitations for a supply, III. 9. Assem-
bled at Toledo to grant supplies to the Emperor,
169. The remonstrances of, 170. The ancient
confiitution of, subverted by Charles, 171. See Spain.
--- of Valencia, prevailed on by the Emperor

Charles V. to acknowledge his son Philip fucceflbr
to that kingdom, III. 243. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Florence for the

Pope, expelled by the Florentines, on the Pope's
captivity, III. 4.

Cosmo di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmer, Archbilhop of Canterbury, annuls the mar-

riage of Henry VIII. with Catherine of Aragon,
which was refused to Henry by the Pope, Ill. 68.
His sentence reversed by the Pope, 69.
Crefty, peace of, between the Emperor and Francis,

11l. 279.

Crl'y

Cray, William de, nephew to Chievres, made Arch-

bishop of Toledo, by Charles V. II. 58. Dies,
237.

D
D'Albert, John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre

by Ferdinand of Aragon, II. 23. Invades Navarre,
but is defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 45.
D'Alembert, M. his observation on the order of Je-

suits, III. 203. Note.
D'Andelot, brother to Coligni, is defeated by the Duke

of Saxony in an endeavour to succour St. Quintin,
IV. 24.7. But enters the town with the fugitives,
ib. The town taken by assault, 252
Dauphin of France, eldest son of Francis I. is deliver-

ed up with the Duke of Orleans to the Emperor
Charles V. in exchange for his father, as hostages
for the performance of the treaty of Madrid, II.
329. His death imputed to poison, III. I4i. The
most probable cause of it, 142.
*--.-- late Duke of Orleans, second son of Francis I.

commands an army, and invades Spain, III. 240.
Is forced to abandon the siege of Perpignan, 241. Is
dissatisfied at the peace of Crefpy, 285. Makes a
secret protestation againfi it, ib.
------ of France, son of Henry II. contracted to

Mary the young Queen of Scotland, I11. 438. Is
married to her, IV. 271.
Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions in,

during the sixteenth century, IV. 334.
---- King of, joins the Protestant league at Smal-
kalde, I11. 165.
De Retz, Cardinal, writes a history of Fiefco's con-

fpiracy while a youth, III. 384. Note.
Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry It. of France,

assists the Guises in persuading Henry to an alliance
with Pope Paul IV. against the Emperor, IV. 198.
Induces Henry to break the treaty of Vaucelles, 223.
Marries her grand - daughter to one of Montmorcncy's

fonls,

sons, 279. Joins Montmorency againlt the
Guises, ib.
Doria, Andrew, assists Lautrec in subduing Genoa,

III. 7. Conquers and kills Moncada in a sea-en-
gagement before the harbour of Naples, 17. His
character, 19. Is disgusted with the behaviour of
the French, o2. Revolts to the Emperor, 21.
Opens to Naples a communication by tea, 22.
Rescues Genoa from the French, 23. Refores
the government of, to the citizens, 25. The
refped paid to his memory, 26. Attends the Em-
peror Charles in his difafirous expedition against
Algiers, 225. His partial fondness for his kinsman
Giannetino, 371. His narrow escape in Lavagno's
insurrection, 38 . Returns on Lavagno's death,
and the dispersion of his party, 384. See Genoa and
Lavagno.
--- Giannetino, his characer, I1I. 371. Is mur-

dered by Lavagno's conspirators, 381.
Dover, an interview there between Henry VIII, and

the Emperor Charles V. II. 99.
Dragut, a corsair, commands the Turkish fleet which

ravages the coast of Naples, 1V. 116.
Du Prat, Chancellor of France, his character, II. 252.

Commences a law-suit againfi Charles Duke of
Bourbon, for his estate, at the instigation of Louise
the King's mother, ib.
Duelling, the cuflom of, how rendered general, IlI.

15. Its influence on manners, ib.
Duren in Cleves, taken by the Emperor Charles V. the

inhabitants put to the sword, and the town burnt,
III. 250.

E
Eccius, an advcrfary of Luther's holds a public dif-

putation with him at Lcipfic, on the validity of the
papal authority, II. 125.
Ecclefijlical cenfilrcs of the Romifli church, the dread-

ful cffc6ts of, II. 145.

r/?,-,4

EcclefiafJical Reservation, in the recess of the diet of

Augsburg, remarks on, III. 58.
Edinburgh plundered and burnt by the Earl of Hert-

ford, III. 274.

Edward VI. of England, his charaAer, IV. 139.
Egmont, count of, commands the cavalry at the battle

of St. Quintin, and puts Montmorency's troops to
flight, IV. 248,249. Engages Marshal de Termes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival of an English
squadron, 274.
Egypt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman Em-

pire, II. 65.
Ehrenberg, the castle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony,

IV. 70.
Eionotz, a facion in Geneva so termed, an account of,

III. 118.
Elizabeth, sifter of Mary, her accession to the crown of

England, IV. 290. Her charater, 291. Is address-
ed by Philip of Spain, and Henry of France, for
marriage, ib., Her prudent conduct between them,
292. How determined against Henry, 293. Her
motives for rejecing Philip, 294. Returns Philip
an evasive answer, ib. Demands restitution of
Calais at the conferences at Chateau Cambrefis,
295. Establishes the Protestant religion in Eng-
land, 296. Treaty between her and Henry signed
at Chateau Cambrefis, 297.

Emmanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy. See Savoy.
England, by what means that kingdom was freed from

the Papal supremacy, and received the doctrines of
the Reformation, III. 69. Mary, Queen of, mar-
ried to Prince Philip, son of the Eimperor Charles V.
contrary to the sense of the nation, IV. I41. The
marriage ratified by parliament, 145. Is reluclantly
engaged by Philip, now King of Spain, in the war
against France, 243. Mary levies money by her
prerogative, to carry on the war, ib. Calais taken
by the Duke of Guise, 266. Guifnes andl Hames
taken, ib. Death of Mary, and accession of Eliza-
beth, 290. 'The Protestant religion cflablifled by
Elizabeth, 296. 'I'rcaty with France signed at

Ch;atcau

Chateau Cambrefis, 297. Its interior firength how
increased by the condud of Henry VIII. 315. Its
power no longer fruitlessly wafted on the continent,
317. Alteration of its conduct towards Scotland,
318.
Enguien, the count de, besieges Carignan, III. 267.

Desires of Francis pcrmiflion to engage Guafto,
268. Defeats Guafto in a pitched battle, 270.
Erard de la Mark, ambassador of Charles V. to the

diet of Frankfort, his private motives for thwarting
the pretensions of Francis I. of France to the Im-
perial crown, II. 76. Signs the capitulation of the
Germanic body on behalf of Charles, 77.
Erasmus, some account of, II. 157. Preceded Luther

in his censures against the Romish church, ib. Con-
curs with him in his intentions of reformation, I58.
Motives which checked him in this, ib.
Escurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in memory of

the battle of St. Quintin, IV. 254.
Europe, a short view of the slate of, at the death of the

Emperor Maximilian, II. 62. The contemporary
monarchs of all, illustrious at the time of Charles V.
102, 103. 'The method of carrying on war in,
how improved beyond the practice of earlier ages,
226. The sentiments of, on Charles's treatment of
the Pope, III. i. A review of the slate of, during
the reign of the Emperor Charles V. IV. 303. The
remarkable change in, at this period, 304. How
affeRed by the revolt of Luther against the church
of Rome, 320.
Eutemi, King of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in his

service, and is murdered by him, II. go, 9I.
Excommunication in the Romifl church, the original

institution of, and the use made of it, II. I45.

F
Farnese, Alexander, his unanimous eledion to the

Papacy, III. 70. See Paul II.

---- ardinal, accompanies the troops sent by the
Pope to the Emperor, againfi the army of the Pro-

ieftant

teftant league, IIT. 345. Returns disgusted, ib.
Leads the troops home again by the Pope's order,
368. Contributes to the elecion of Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, IV. 6.
Farnese, Odavio, grandson of Pope Paul I1I. endea-

vours to surprise Parma, and enters into treaty with
the Emperor, IV. 3. Is confirmed in Parma, by
Julius, 29. Procures an alliance with France, 3I.
Is attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully pro-
ted;ed by the French, 32. Placentia restored to
him by Philip II. of Spain, II. 257.
----- Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope Paul IIT.
obtains of his father the dutchies of Parma and
Placentia, III. 296. His character, 434. Is aflaf-
iinated, 435.
Ferdinand King of Aragon, how he acquired his king-

doms, II. 2. Invites his daughter Joanna, and her
husband, Philip Archduke of Aufiria, to Spain, 3.
Becomes jealous of Philip, 4. Carries on his war
with France vigorously, notwithtianding Philip's
treaty with Lewis, 6. His Queen Isabella dies,
and leaves him regent of Castile, under refiridions,
7. Resigns the kingdom of Castile, and is acknow-
ledged Regent by the Cortes, 8. His character,
ib. His maxims of government odious to the Caf-
tilians, 9. Required by Philip to resign his regency,
-o. Joanna's letter of consent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself confined, II. Is
deserted by the Caffilian nobility, ib. Determines
to exclude his daughter from the fucceflion by mar-
rying, 12. Marries Germaine de Foix, niece to
Lewis XII. of France, I3. A treaty between him
and Philip at Salamanca, by which the regency of
Castile is jointly vetled in them and Joanna, 14.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to detain Philip
for three months, when driven on that coait, i5.
The Castilians declare against him, ib. Religrns the
regency of Cafile by treaty, z6. Interview between
him and Philip, ib. Is absent, at Naples, when
Philip died, 21. Returns and gains, with the re-
gency of Caflile, the good- will ot the natives by his

prudent

prudent administration, 22. Acquires by difho-
nourable means the kingdom of Navarre, 23. How
he destroyed his constitution, 24. Endeavours to
diminish his grandson Charles's power, by a will in
favour of Ferdinand, 24, 25. Alters his will in fa-
vour of Charles, 26. I)ies, ib. Review of his ad-
ministration, 31. Ximenes appointed, by his will,
regent. of Castile until the arrival of Charles V.
ib.
Ferdinand, second Ton of Philip Archduke of Austria,

born, II. 5. Left regent of Aragon, by his grand-
father Ferdinand, 25. This revoked by a fubfe-
quent will, by which he obtains only a pension, 26.
Discontented with his disappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of Cardinal Ximenes, 35.
Sent by Charles V. to visit their grandfather Maxi-
milian, 59. Is elected King of Hungary and Bo-
hemia, 374. Signs a deed called the Reverse, ib.
The Emperor endeavours to get him elected King of
the Romans, III. 52. He is opposed by the Pro-
teftants, 53. Is crowned King of the Romans, 54.
Forms a confederacy against the Anabaptists at Mun-
fter, 8I. Opposes the restoration of Ulric Duke of
Wurtemberg, 85. Recognizes his title, and con-
cludes a treaty with him, 87. His kingdom of
Hungary wrested from him by John Zapol Scaepius,
2I5. Besieges the young King Stephen and his
mother in Buda, but is defeated by the Turks, 218.
His mean offers. of fubmiflion to the Porte, ib.
Which are reje&ted, 220. Courts the favour of the
Protestants, 260. Opens the diet at Worms, 288.
Requires it to submit to the decisions of the council
of Trent, 389. Agrees to pay a tribute to Soly-
man for Hungary, 4.o. Encroaches on the liberties
of Bohemia, 427. His rigorous treatment of Prague,
4.29. Disarms the BolohemIials, 430. Obtains the
bovereignty of the city of Conitance, 459. Invades
Transylvania by invitation of Martinuzzi, IV. 47.
Obtains the resignation of Transylvania frorm Queen
Isabella, 48. Orders M4artinuzzi to be aflaffinated,
51. Enters into negociation with Maurice on behalf

of

of the Emperor, 81. His motives for promoting
the Emperor's agreeing with Maurice, 86. Isabella
and her son Stephen recover possession of Tranfyl-
vania, 128. Opens a diet at Augsburg, and excites
suspicions in the Protestants, 173. The Emperor
leaves the internal administration of German affairs
to him, 177. Is again applied to by the Emperor
to resign his pretensions of fuccefion to Philip, but
refuses, I78. Endeavours therefore to gain the
friendship of the diet, 80o. Again refuses the Em-
peror's solicitations, 230. Charles resigns the Im-
perial crown to him, 231. Assembles the college
of Elecors at Frankfort, which acknowledges him
Emperor of Germany, 267. The Pope refuses to
acknowledge him, 268.
Feudal government, a view of, as it existed in Spain,

II. 209.

Fiefco, Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna.
- - Jerome, engages in his brother's conspiracy,

and fails in securing Andrew Doria, III. 380. His
imprudent vanity on his brother's death, 382. Shuts
himself up in a fort on his estate, 385. Is reduced
and put to death, 393-

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt against Pope Cle-

ment VII. on the news of his captivity, and recover
their liberty, Ill. 4. Are reduced to fubjeEtion to
Alexander di Medici, by the Emperor, 41. Alex-
ander di Medici, Duke of, aflaffinated by his kinf-
man Lorenzo, 155. Colmo di Medici advanced to
the fovercignty, 156. Colfmo supported by the Em-
peror, defeats the partizans of Lorenzo, I57. Cosmo
asserts his independency on the Emperor, IV. 112.
FonJfca, Antonio de, comnlmnder in chief of the forces

in Spain, ordered by Cardinal Adrian to besiege the
insurgents in Segovia, II. 207. Is denied liberty of
taking military ilores, by the inhabitants of Medina
del Campo, ib. Attacks and .lmolt burns the
whole town, 208. Is repulscd, ib. Hlis houle at
Valladolid burnt, ib.

Fran ce,

France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, during the

reign of the Emperor Charles V. IV. 310. The
character of the people of, 3I2. The good confe.-
quences of the civil wars in that kingdom to the
reft of Europe, 314.
Francis I. King of France, concludes a peace with

Charles V. and the conditions of the treaty, II. 49,
50. Sends a fruitless embaffv to Charles for the re-
ftitution of Navarre to the young king, 60. Aspires
to the Imperial crown at the death of Maximilian,
64. Reasons by which he supported his pretensions,
65. Remarks on the equipages of his ambafladors
to the German States, 68. His pretensions adopted
by the Venetians, 69. Loses the election, 77.
Rife of the rivalfhip between him and Charles, 9o.
Courts the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 97. Pro-
mises Wolfey his interest for the Papacy, 99. Has
an interview with Henry VIII. of England, Ioo.
Wrestles with Henry, and throws him, xoI, Note.
His advantages over Charles, at the commencement
of hostilities between them, I68. Concludes an
alliance with the Pope, 171. Invades and reduces
Navarre, in the name of Henry D'Albret, son of
John, the former King, 175. The French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre their general,
who is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, 176, I77.
Retakes Moufon from the Imperialists, I80. Invades
the Low Countries, but loses the opportunities of
success by imprudence, ib. Rejedts the demands of
Charles at the Congress at Calais, xI8. A league
concluded between Charles and Henry VIII. against
him, 182. His imprudent appointment of the
Marechal de Foix to the government of Milan, I85.
De Foix attacks Reggin, but is repulsed by the go-
vernor Guicciardini the historian, 186. The Pope
declares against hin, ib. His cmbarraflinents on the
invasion of Milan, 187. His mother seizes the mo-
ney appointed for payment of the Milancle troops,
I88. Milan taken, and the French driven our,
90o. Levies a body of Swils, I94. Who insist

on

on giving a precipitate battle to the Imperialifis,
which is loft, 196. War declared against him by
Henry VIII. 197. His expedients to supply his
treasury, 198. The plan pursued by him to resist
the incursions of the English, 200. Picardy invaded
by Henry, ib. The Venetians league with the Em-
peror against him, 248. To which Pope Adrian
accedes, ib. His expeditious movement against the
Milanese, 249. Disconcerted by the Duke of Bour-
bon's conspiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his
cause, which Bourbon denies, 254. Bourbon escapes
to Italy, and Francis returns, ib. Appoints the Ad-
miral Bonnivet to command againrf the Milanese,
255. Picardy invaded by the Duke of Suffolk, who
is driven back, 261. Repulses the invasion of Gui-
enne and Burgundy by Charles, 262. His successful
close of the campaign, ib. His prudent care to difap-
point the Imperialifis in their invasion of Provence,
282. Assembles an army, which causes the Imperial-
ifts to retire from Marseilles, ib. Determines to in-
vade the Milanese, 284. Appoints his mother Louise
regent during his absence, 285. Enters Milan, and
takes possession of the city, 285, 286. Advised by
Bonnivet to besiege Pavia, 288. His vigorous at-
tacks on Pavia, ib. Concludes a treaty of neutrality
with Pope Clement, 290. His imprudent invasion
of Naples, 291. Resolves, by Bonnivet's advice, to
attack Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief of
Pavia, 294. Is routed at the battle of Pavia, ib.
Is taken prisoner, 295. Is Tent to the castle of
Pizzitchitone under the custody of Don Ferdinand
Alarcon, 297, 298. Refuses the propofitiQns made
to him by Charles, 308. Is carried to Spain on his
desire of a personal interview with Charles, 309.
Is rigorously treated in Spain, 3I8. Falls danger-
oufly ill, ib. Is visited by Charles, 319. Re-
solves to resign his kingdom, 323. Is delivered
from this captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 325.
His secret protestations against the validity of this
treaty, 327. Marries the Queen of Portugal, ib.
Recovers his liberty, and the Lauphin and the Duke

VoL. IV. B b of

of Orleans delivered up hostages to Charles for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 329. Writes
a letter of acknowledgment to Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, 343. His reply to the Imperial ambassadors,
ib. Enters into a league with the Pope, the Vene-
tians, and Sforza, againit Charles, 345. Is absolved
from his oath to observe the treaty of Madrid, 346.
His behaviour to the Emperor's second embalfy,
349. Is dispirited by his former ill success, 350.
Enters into a treaty with Henry VIII. of England
against the Emperor, III. 3. Successes of his
general Lautrec in Italy, 7. His reply to the
Emperor's overtures, 12. Declares war against
him, and challenges him to single combat, 13, 14.
Treats Andrew Doria ill, who revolts from him to
the Emperor, 21. His army, under Saluces, driven
out of Italy, 23. His troops in Milan routed, 26.
His endeavours toward an accommodation, 27.
Terms of the peace of Cambray, concluded by the
mediation of his mother Louise and Margaret of
Austria, 30. Remarks on the sacrifices made by
him in this treaty, and on his condut of the war,
31. Leagues secretly with the Proteflant Princes,
55. His measures to elude the treaty of Cambray,
64. His negociations with the Pope, 65. His
interview and treaty with the Pope, 66. Cives the
Duke of Orleans in marriage to Catberine di Medici,
67. Negociates a treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke
of M/ilan, 109. His envoy Merveille executed at
Milan for murder, 1 o. Is disappointed in his
endeavours to negociate alliances against the Em-
peror, ib. Invites Melanethon to Paris, I 1.
Evidences his zeal. for the Romish religion, 112.
Causes of his quarrel with the Duke of Savoy, I 5.
Seizes the Duke's territories, t x6. His pretensions
to the dutchy of Milan, on the death of Francis
Sforza, 1.2. The Emperor's invcetive against him
before the Pope in council, 124. Is invaded by
Charles, 129, His prudent plan of defence, 133.
loins the almiy under Montmorency, 138. Death
ut the l)auphin, 141. Obtains a decree of the par-

4 liamcnt

liarnent of Paris against the Emperor, I43. Invades
the Low Countries, i44- A suspension of arms in
Slanders, and how negotiated, ib. A truce in
Piedmont, I45. Motives to there truces, 147.
Concludes an alliance with Solyman the Magnifi-
cent, ib. Negotiations for a peace with the Em-
peror, 149. Concludes a truce for ten years at
Nice, 51. Refle&ions on the war, ib. His inter-
view with Charles, 152. Marries Mary of Guise
to James V. of Scotland, i59. Refuses the offers
of the deputies of Ghent, 179. Informs Charles of
the offer made by them, ib. Grants the Emperor
leave to pass through France to the Netherlands,
i8i. His reception of the Emperor, 183. Is
deceived by the Emperor in refpet to Milan, I87.
His ambassador to the Porte, Rincon, murdered by
the Imperial governor of the Milanese, 236. Pre-
pares to resent the injury, 237. Attacks the Em-
peror with five armies, 239. His firIt attempts
rendered abortive, by the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleans, 241. Renews his negociations with
Sultan Solyman) 248. Invades the Low Countries,
250. Forces the Emperor to raise the siege of
Landrecy, 252. Difmifles Barbarossa, 267. Gives
the Count d'Enguein permiflion to engage Guafto,
269, Relieves Paris, in danger of being surprised
by the Emperor, 278. Agrees to a separate peace
with Charles, 279. Henry's haughty return to his
overtures of peace, 284. Death of the Duke of
Orleans, 295. Peace of Campe, 334. Perceives
a neceflity of checking the Emperor's ambitious
designs, 388. Forms a general league against him,
ib. Dies, 393. His life and character summarily
compared with those of Charles, ib. Consequences
of his death, 397.
Francis II. his acceflion to the crown of France, and

chara&er, IV. 302.
Francfort, the diet of, aflnmblled for the choice of

an Emperor at the death of Maximilian, II. 72.
Names and views ofthe Electors, 72, 73. 'he Em-
pire offred to Frederick of Saxony, 73. WVho rejets

3 b 2 it,

it, with his reasons, 74. Chufes Charles V. Em-
peror, 77. His confirmation of the Germanic pri-
vileges required and agreed to, 78. 'City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, 270. The college of
Elecors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is ac-
knowledged Emperor of Germany, IV. 267.
Frederick Duke of Saxony, assembles with the other

Electors at the diet of Francfort, to chufe an Em-
peror, II. 72. The Empire offered to him, 73.
Reje&s it, and votes for Charles V. 74. Refuses
the presents of the Spanish ambassadors, 75. This
disinterested behaviour confirmed by the testimony
of historians, ib. Note. Chufes Martin Luther phi-
lofophical protelfor at his university of Wittemberg,
IIo. Encourages Luther in his opposition to in-
dulgences, 113. Protecs him against Cajetan, I20.
Causes Luther to be seized at his return from the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wartburg,
i64. Dies, 341.
Fregofo, the French ambassador to Venice, murdered

by the Marquis del Guafto, the Imperial governor
of the Milanese, III. 236.
Fron/perg, George, a German nobleman, 'ome ac-

count of, he joins the army of Charles V. II. 356.

G
General of the Jesuits, an enquiry into his office and

despotic authority, III. 193.
Geneva, an account of its revolt against the Duke of

Savoy, III. 117.
(jczoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, 1I. 7.

The French endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour
of Savona, 20. Is rescued from the French by An-
diew Doria, 24. The government of, fettled by
the difinterefledncfs of Doria, ib. The honour paid
to Doria's memory, 26. Is visited by the Emperors
37'. A I'hcnic formed to overturn the constitution
of, by l'ielco Count of Lavagno, 373. He as-
lmniblcs Iis adherents, 376. l'he conspirators
l'illy forth from Lavagno's palace, 380., Deputies
flnt to know lavagno's termis, 381. Lavagno

drownied,

drowned, 382. The infurrecion ruined by the im-
prudence of his brother Jerome Fiefco, ib. The
conspirators disperse, 383. Jerome reduced and put
to death, 393.
Germanada, an association in Valencia, so termed, on

what occasion formed, II. 239. Refuse to lay
down their arms, ib. Their relentment levelled at
the nobility, who raise an army against them, 240.
Defeat the nobles in several actions, 241. But are
routed and dispersed by them, ih.
Germany, slate of, at the death of the Emperor Maxi-

milian, II. 62, 63. Charles V. of Spain, and Fran-
cis I. of France, form pretensions to the Imperial
crown, 64. Their refpetive reasons offered in favour
of their claims, 65, 66. Views and interests of the
other European States in relation to the competitors,
68. Henry VIII. of England advances a claim, 69.
But is discouraged from prosecuting it, 7o. How
the Papacy was likely to be affeeed in the choice of
an Emperor, ib. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
German Princes, 7 I. Opening of the diet at Franc-
fort, 72. In whom the election of an Emperor is
vested, ib. Views of the Eletors, 73. The Em-
pire offered to Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who re-
jeas it, and his reasons, ib. Charles V. chosen, 77.
The capitulation of the Germanic privileges con-
firmed by him, 78. Charles lets out for, 87. Charles
crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle, o02. Commence-
ment of the Reformation there, by Martin Luther,
104. Treatment of the bull of excommunication
published againit Luther, i28. The usurpations
of the clergy there, during the disputes concerning
investitures, 141. The clergy of, mostly foreigners,
147. The benefices of, nominated by the Pope, 148.
The expedient of the Emperors for restraining this
power of the Pope, ineffeutual, 149. The great
progress of Luther's doctrines in, 269. Grievances
of the peasants, 331. InsurreCtion in Suabia, 332,
333. The memorial of their grievances, ib. I he
inlurrcedion quelled, 3A4. Another infurre'tion in
T huringia, ib. How the IHoulc of Austria became to

3 b 3 formi-

it, with his reasons, 74. Chufes Charles V. Em-
peror, 77. His confirmation of the Germanic pri-
vileges required and agreed to, 78. 'City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, 270. The college of
Electors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is ac-
knowledged Emperor of Germany, IV. 267.
Frederick Duke of Saxony, assembles with the other

Electors at the diet of Francfort, to chufe an Em-
peror, II. 72. The Empire offered to him, 73.
Rejecs it, and votes for Charles V. 74. Refuses
the presents of the Spanish ambassadors, 75. This
disinterested behaviour confirmed by the testimony
of historians, ib. Note. Chufes Martin Luther phi-
lofophical profelTor at his university of Wittemberg,
l o. Encourages Luther in his opposition to in-
dulgences, 11 3. Protecs him against Cajetan, I20.
Causes Luther to be seized at his return from the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wartburg,
164. Dies, 341.
Fregofo, the French ambassador to Venice, murdered

by the Marquis del Guafto, the Imperial governor
of the Milanese, III. 236.
Fronfperg, George, a German nobleman, some ac-

count of, he joins the army of Charles V. II. 356.

G
General of the Jesuits, an enquiry into his office and

despotic authority, III. 193.
Geneva, an account of its revolt against the Duke of

Savoy, III. 117.
Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, II1. 7.

The French endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour
of Savona, 20. Is rescued from the French by An-
drew Doria, 24. The government of, fettled by
the difintercftednefs of Doria, ib. The honour paid
to Doria's memory, 26. Is visited by the Emperor,
37. A f'hcme formed to overturn the constitution
of, by Fielco Count of Lavagno, 373. He as-
fcmblcs his adhercnts, 376. The conspirators
.illy forth from Lavagno's palace, 380., Deputies
sent to know lavagno's termls, 381. Lavagno

drowned,

drowned, 382. The infurreEtion ruined by the im-
prudence of his brother Jerome Fiefco, ib. The
conspirators disperse, 383. Jerome reduced and put
to death, 393.
Germanada, an association in Valencia, so termed, on

what occasion formed, II. 239. Refuse to lay
down their arms, ib. Their relentment levelled at
the nobility, who raise an army against them, 240.
Defeat the nobles in several ations, 241. But are
routed and dispersed by them, ih.
Germany, fiate of, at the death of the Emperor Maxi-

milian, II. 62, 63. Charles V. of Spain, and Fran-
cis I. of France, form pretensions to the Imperial
crown, 64. Their respective reasons offered in favour
of their claims, 65, 66. Views and interests of the
other European States in relation to the competitors,
68. Henry VIII. of England advances a claim, 69.
But is discouraged from prosecuting it, 70. How
the Papacy was likely to be affeaed in the choice of
an Emperor, ib. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
German Princes, 7 x. Opening of the diet at Franc-
fort, 72. In whom the eletion of an Emperor is
veiled, ib. Views of the EleAors, 73. The Em-
pire offered to Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who re-
jeEts it, and his reasons, ib. Charles V. chosen, 77.
The capitulation of the Germanic privileges con-
firmed by him, 78. Charles sets out for, 87. Charles
crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle, Ioz. Commence-
ment of the Reformation there, by Martin Luther,
104. Treatment of the bull of excommunication
published against Luther, 128. The usurpations
of the clergy there, during the disputes concerning
inveiRitures, 141. The clergy of, mostly foreigners,
147. The benefices of, nominated by the Pope, 148.
The expedient of the Emperors for restraining this
power of the Pope, ineffetual, 149. The great
progress of Luther's doctrines in, 269. Grievances
of the peasants, 331. Infurrediion in Suabia, 332,
333. The memorial of their grievances, ib. I he
inlurrection quelled, 3J4. Another infurre&ion in
''huringia, ib. How the Houre of Aufiria became to

1 b 3 forimi-

formidable in, 375. Proceedings relating to the Re,
formation there, ib. Great progress of the Re-
formation there, III. 42. Ferdinand King of Hun-
gary and Bohemia, brother to Charles V. eleced
King of the Romans, 53. The Proteflant religion
eflablifhed in Saxony, I67. The Proteflant religion
established in the Palatinate, 299. The league of
Smalkalde raise an army againfR the Emperor, 335,
Are put under the ban of the Empire, 339. The
Proteflant army dispersed, 361. The Interim en-
forced by the Emperor, 454. Maurice of Saxony
raises an army, and declares in favour of the Pro-
teftants, IV. 64. Maurice favoured even by the
Catholic princes, and why, 83. Treaty of Pas-
fau, between the emiperor and Maurice of Saxony,
9I. Truce between the Emperor and Henry of
France, 2I7. Charles resigns the Imperial crown
to his brother Ferdinand, 231.
Ghent, an infurreEion there, Ill. I73. The preten-

sions of the citizens, 174. Form a confederacy
against the Queen-dowager of Hungary, their go-
vernefs, I75. Their deputies to the Emperor, how
treated by him, ib. Offer to submit to France, 176.
Is reduced by Charles, i85.

Ghibeline faction in Italy, a view of, II. 353.
Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of

the army of the Holy Junta, II. 223. Resigns his
commiflion, and Padilla replaced, 226.
Goletta in Africa, taken by the Emperor Charles V.

II. 99.
Gonzago, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures

Cardinal Farnese to be afaffinated, and takes posses-
sion of Placentia forthe'Empervr, IIl. 436. 'Pre-
pares to seize ]Parma, IV. 29. Is repulted'by the
Frnctch, 32.
Gouffer, feit by Francis I. King of France, to nego-

ciate a peace with Charles V. II. 49.
Granvelle, Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the count

de Sancerre to furrcnder St. Difiere to the Emperor,
Ill. 275. 'Endeavours to lull the I' oterfarts into
security with regard to the Emnperor's condu(t to-
wardl them, 30o. Is commniflioLed by Philip to ad-

drc(f

dress the aflembly at the Emperor's resignation of his
hereditary dominions, IV. 212.
Gravelines, an interview there between the Emperor

Charles V. and Henry VIII. of England, II. ioI.
Grapper, canon of Cologne, is appointed a manager of

the Protestant and Catholic conferences before the
diet at Ratisbon, III. 211. Writes a treatise to
compose the differences between them, ib. The
sentiments of both parties on this work, 212.
Granada, archbishop of, president of the council of

Castile, his imprudent advice to Cardinal Adrian,
relating to the infurrestion in Segovia, II. 206.
GQuaIo, the Marquis del, appointed governor of Milan,

by the Emperor, III. 40o. Procures Rincon the
French amhaffador to the Porte, to be murdered on
his journey thither, 236. Defends Carignan against
the French, 268. Defeated by d'Enguien in a
pitched battle, 271.
Guicciardini, his account of the publication of Indul-

gences contradited, II. 114. Note. Defends Reggio
against the French, I85. Repulses an attack upon
Parma by the French, I92. His sentiments of the
Pope's treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 363.
Guie, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is made governor

of Metz by Henry II. of France, IV. 103. His
charater, ib. Prepares to defend it against the Em-
peror, ib. His brother d'Aumale taken prisoner by
the Imperialists, 107. The Emperor raises the
siege, to1. His humane treatment of the difireffed
and sick Germans left behind, Ix i . Persuades Henry
to an alliance with Pope Paul IV. I)8. Marches
with troops into Italy, 236. Is unable to effet any
thing, 237. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat
of St. Quintin, 255. His reception in France, 261.
Takes the field against Philip, 262. Invests and
takes Calais from the English, 266. Takes also
Guifnes and Hames, ib. Takes Thionville in
Luxembourg, 273.
Guise, Mary of, married to James V. of Scotland, III.

i59. Fruitrates the intended marriage between her
.daughter Mary and prince Edward of England, 266.

B b 4 Gutk,

Gurk, Cardinal de, why he favoured the eleaion of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 76. Signs
the capitulation of the Germanic body on behalf of
Charles, 78.
Gufman, chancellor to the Emperor Ferdinand, is sent

to Pope Paul IV. to notify the election, who refuses
to fee him, 1V. 268.

H
Hamburgh, city of, embraces the reformed religion,

II. 269.
Haro, the Conde de, appointed to command the army

of the Castilian nobles againfi the Holy Junta, I1.
225. Attacks Tordefillas, and gets poffeflion of
Queen Joanna, ib. Routs the army of the Junta,
and takes Padilla prisoner, who is executed, 233.
Hafcen lga, deputy-governor of Algiers, his piracies

against the Christian flates, III. 222. Is besieged in
Algiers by the Emperor Charles V. 225. Makes
a successful rally, 227. The Emperor forced by
bad weather to return back again, 230.
Hayradin, a potter's son of Lesbos, commences pirate,

III. 91. See Barbaroj7a.
Heathens, ancient, why the principles of mutual tolera-

tion were generally admitted among them, 1V. I83.
Heldo, vice chancellor to Charles V. attends the Pope's

nuncio to Smalkalde, III. 162. Forms a Catholic
league in opposition to the Proteflant one, 165.
HenrylI. King of France, his motives for declining

an alliance with Pope Paul III. against the Emperor,
1II. 438. Procures for Scotland a peace with Eng-
land, IV. 31. The young Queen Mary contracted
to the Dauphin, and ient to France for education,
ib. Enters into an alliance with Odtavia Farnese
Duke of Parma, ib. Protefis against the council
of Trent, 33. Makes alliance with Maurice Elec-
tor of Saxony, 54. Seconds the operations of Mau-
rice, 65. His army marches and seizes Metz, 68.
Attempts to surprise Strafburgh, 77. Is firongly
lolicited to spare it, 78. Returns, 79. The Em-

peror

peror prepares for war against him, IOI. Initigates
:the Turks to invade Naples, 115. Terouanne taken
and demolished by Charles, 125. Hefdin taken, ib.
Leads an army into the Low Countries against
Charles, 126. Endeavours to obftrua the marriage
of Mary of England with Philip of Spain, 148.
The progress of his arms against the Emperor, i5o.
Engages Charles, I52. Retires, ib. Cosmo di
Medici, Duke of Florence, makes war against him,
155. Appoints Peter Strozzi commander of his
army in Italy, I56. Strozzi defeated, I59. Siena
taken, I6I. Pope Paul IV. makes overtures to an
alliance with him against the Emperor, 196. Mont-
morency's arguments against this alliance, 197. Is
persuaded by the Guises to accept it, 198. Sends
the Cardinal of Lorrain with powers to conclude it,
ib. The Pope signs the treaty, 201. A truce for
five years concluded with the Emperor, 216. Is
exhorted by Cardinal Caraffa to break the truce,
220. Is absolved from his oath, and concludes a
new treaty with the Pope, 223. Sends the Duke of
Guise into Italy, 239. The Conflable Montmo-
rency defeated and taken prisoner at St. Quintin, 248.
Henry prepares for the defence of Paris, 250. St.
Quintin taken by assault, 252. Colleats his troops
and negociates for afliflance, 253. His kind reception
of the Duke of Guise, 261. Calais taken by
Guise, 266. Impowers Montmorency to negociate
a peace with Philip, 279. Honours him highly on
his return to France, 280. Writes to Queen Eli-
zabeth with proposals of marriage, 291. How he
failed in his suit, 293. His daughter married to
Philip, and his fitter to the Duke of Savoy, 298.
'erms of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 299.
The marriage of his fifler and daughter celebrated
with great pomp, 301. His death, 302.
Henry VII. of England detains the archduke Philip

and his duchess when driven on his coast, three
months, at the infligation of Ferdinand, II. i5.
Henry VIII. of England fends an ambaflador to Ger-

many to propose his claims to the Imperial crown,

5 I1.

II. 69. Is discouraged from his pretensions, and
takes no part with the other competitors, 70. His
personal chara6ter and political influence in Europe,
94. Entirely guided by Cardinal Wolfey, 95. Re-
ceives a visit from the Emperor Charles V. 99
Goes over to France to visit Francis, ioo. Wrestles
with Francis, and is thrown by him, IOI, Nots. Has
another interview with Charles at Gravelines, ib,
Charles offers to submit his differences with Francis
to his arbitration, ib. Publishes a treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, against Martin Luther, I66.
Obtains of the Pope the title of Defender of the Faith,
.167. Takes part with Charles againit Francis,
169. Sends Wolfey to negociate an accommodation
between the Emperor and Francis, x80. Concludes
a league with Charles against Francis, 182. His
avowed reasons for this treaty, ib. His private mo-
tives, 183. Declares war against Francis, 197. Is
visited by Charles, 198. Makes descents upon the
coast of France, .199. Advances with an army into
Picardy, ib. Obliged to retire by the Duke de
Vendome, 200. Enters into a treaty with the Em-
peror and Charles Duke of Bourbon, 252, 253.
How he raised supplies for his wars beyond the grants
of his parliament, 26i. Sends the Duke of Suffolk
to invade Picardy, who penetrates almost to Paris,
but is driven back, ib. Engages to afift Charles in
an invasion of Provence, 280. Causes of his not
supporting the Imperialists, 282, 283. Effecs of
thetbattle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis, on him,
301. Particulars of his embassy to Charles, 303.
Concludes a defensive alliance with France, 3I0.
Is declared Proteaor of'the league of Cognac against
the Emperor, 345. His motives for affiffing the
Pope against the Emperor, IIi. 2. Enters into a
league with Francis, and renounces the Englilh
claim to the crown of France, 4. Declares war
againfi the LFmpcror, 13. Concludes a truce with
the governess of the Low Countries, 19. Projects
his divorce from Catharine of Aragon, 34. Motivcs
which withheld the Popefrom granting it, 35. Ac-

quiefccs

quiefces in the peace of Cambray, 36. Sends a sup-
ply of money to the Protestant league in Germany,
55. Procures his marriage to be annulled by Cran-
mer archbishop of Canterbury, 68. The divorce
reversed by the Pope under penalty of excommuni-
cation, 69. Renounces the Papal supremacy, 70.
Refutes to acknowledge any council called by the
Pope, 88. Opposes James V. of Scotland mar-

ing Mary of Guise, 159. His disgusts with

Francis and intercourse with the Emperor, x6o. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, 245. Makes war
with Scotland, 246. Particulars of his treaty with
Charles, ib. Invades France, and invests Bou-
logne, 274. Refuses the Emperor's plan of opera-
tions, 279. Is deserted by the Emperor, 284.
Takes Boulogne, ib. His haughty proposals to
Francis, ib. Peace of Campe, 334. Is succeeded
by his son Edward VI, 390. A review of his po-
licy, IV. 3I5.
lertford, earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, IIf.
274. Joins Henry after, in his invasions of France,
ib.
Iefe, the Landgrave of, procures the restoration of

his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, III. 85,
His views compared with those of the Elecor of
Saxony, 305. The Emperor's deceitful professions
'to him, 315. Quiets the apprehensions of the Pro-
teflant league with regard to the Emperor, ib. Is
appointed joint commander of.the army of the league
with the Eleator of Saxony, 343. Their charac-
ters compared, ib. Urges an attack of the Empe-
ror, but is opposed bythe JElector, 348. IHis letter
to Maurice Duke.of Saxony, 357. The army of
the league disperse, 36r. ds reduced to accept harsh
terms from Charles, 416. :His humiliating reception
by the Emperor, 419. Is detained in confinement,
421. His offers of fubmiflion flighted by the IEm-
peror, 452. Is carried b.y she Emperor with him
into the Netherlands, 456. Renews his endoavours
for liberty, IV. 22. !Charles releases arbitrarily the
Eleaor of Brandenburgh, and MIaurice, from their

cngage,

engagements to him, 23. Obtains his liberty by
the treaty of Paffau, 91. Is arreRted by the Queen
of Hungary, but freed by the Emperor, 98. The
effets of his confinement on him, 99.
Heut:erus, his account of Lewis XII. hewn to contra-

did the relations given by Bellay and other French
hi iorians of the education of Charles V. II. 27, Note.

Holy Juzwta. See 7unta.
Holy League, against the Emperor Charles V. formed

at Cognac, under the proteation of Henry VIII. of
England, II. 35, 46.
Hocrlc, a potter's Ion of Lesbos, commences pirate,

with his brother Hayradin, III. 91. See Barba-rofa.
Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnificent, and

its King Lewis II. killed, II. 373. His successes,
and the number of prisoners carried away, ib. The
archduke Ferdinand elected King of, together with
Bohemia, 374. John Zapol Scaepius wrests it from
Ferdinand, III. 215. Stephen succeeds on the death
of his father John, 216. Is treacherously seized by
Solyman, 219. See Isabella and Martinuzzi.

I

fames V. of Scotland levies troops to aflifl Francis in

Provence, but his intention frustrated, III. 158.
His negociations for marriage with Francis's daugh-
ter, 159. Marries Mary of Guise, ib. Dies, and
leaves Mary his infant-daughter to succeed him,
246. See Mary.
./efuits, the order of, by whom founded, II. 176.

Characer of that order, ib. Character of Ignatio
Loyola their founder, III. 90o. The order con-
firmed by the Pope, ib. An examination into the
conflitution of the order, 19 . Office and power of
their general, 193. The rapid progress of the or-
der, 197. Engage in trade, and eftablifl an empire
in South America, 199. Bad tendency of the order,
201. Arc rcfponfible for most of the pernicious es-
lets of Popery since their institution, 202. Advan-
tages resulting from their institution, ib. Civilize

the

the natives of Paraguay, 203. Their precautions
for the independency of their empire there, 205.
How the particulars of their government and initi-
tution came to bedifclofed, 208. Summary of their
character, 209.
*Indulgences, in the Romish church, the doctrine of,

explained, II. 1os. By whom first invented, ro6.
Martin Luther preaches against them, i I. Writes
againfi them to Albert Ele6or of Mentz, ib. A
bull issued in favour of, I23. The sale of, opposed
in Switzerland by Zuinglius, 125.
Infantedo, Duke of, his haughty resentment of a casual

blow on his horse, III. 179. Is protected by the
Constable of Castile, ib.
Innocent, a young domeflic of Cardinal di Monte, ob-

tains his Cardinal's hat on his election to the Pa-
pacy, IV. 7.
Interim, a fyltem of theology so called, prepared by

order of the Emperor Charles V. for the use of
Germany, III. 445. Is disapproved of, both by
Protestants and Papists, 447.
.Invefiitures, usurpations of the Romish clergy in Ger-

many, during the difpures between the Emperors
and Popes, concerning, II. 14r.
Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother of Charles

V. visits Spain with her husband Philip Archduke of
Austria, II. 3. Is flighted by her husband, 4. Her
character, ib. Is abruptly left in Spain by her hus-
band, 5. Sinks into melancholy on the occasion,
and is delivered of her second Ton Ferdinand, ib. Her
letter of consent to her father's regency of Caffile
intercepted, and herself confined, x r. Made joint
regent of Castile with Ferdinand and Philip, by the
treaty of Salamanca, 14. 'ets out for Spain with
Philip, are driven on the coast of England, and de-
tained three months by Henry VII. 15. Acknow-
ledged Queen by the Cortes, 17. Her tenderness to
her husband in his sickness, and extraordinary at-
tachment to his body when dead, 18. Is incapable
of government, 19. Her {on Charles afliumes the
crown, 36. The Cortes acknowledge her son

King,

King, with a reservation in her favour, 56. Her
reception of Padilla the chief of the Spanish male-
contents, 212. The Holy Junta removed to Tor.
defillas, the place of her residence, 213. Relapses
into her former melancholy, ib. The proceedings
of the Holy Junta carried on in her name, 214* Is
seized by the Conde de Haro, 225. Dies, after
near fifty years confinement, IV. 207.
sohn Zapol Scapius, by the afliftance of Sultan Soly-

man, eftablithes himself in the kingdom of Hungary,
III. 2 15. Leaves the kingdom to his son Stephen,
216. See Hungary, Isabella, and Martinuzzi.
Isabella, daughter of John II. of Cartile, and wife of

Ferdinand King of Aragon, her history, I. 2,
Her concern at the Archduke Philip's treatment of
her daughter Joanna, 4. Her death and characers
7. Appoints Ferdinand regent of Castile, under
reftriaions, ib.
----- daughter to Sigismund King of Poland, mar-

ried to John King of Hungary, IlI. 216. Her cha-
racAer, 2I7. Is treacherously carried, with her in-
sant son, into Transylvania by Sultan Solyman~ 219.
The government of this province and the education
of her son committed to her jointly with Martinuzzi,
IV. 46. Is jealous of Martinuzzi's influence, and
courts the Turks, ib. Is prevailed on to resign
Transylvania to Ferdinand, 48. Retires to Silesia,
49. Recovers pofleffion of Transylvania, I28.
---- of Portugal, married to the Emperor Charles

V. II. 330.
Italy, consequences of the league between Pope Leo X,

and the Emperor Charles V. to, II. 184. The cha-
racers of the Italians, Spaniards, and French, con-
trailed, ib. State of, at the acceflion of Clement
VII. to the Papacy, 263. Views of the Italian
States with respeCt to the Emperor and Francis on
the expulsion of the French from Genoa and the Mi-
lanefc, 279. Their apprehensions on the battle of
Pavia and captivity of Francis, 304. The principal
States join in the Holy league against the Emperor,
345. Are dilgufted at the tardiness of Francis, 352.

A view

A view of the Ghibeline fadtion, 353. Sentimenti
of the States of, on the peace of Cambray, III; 331
Is visited by the Emperor Charles, 36. The mo-
tives of his moderation toward the States of, 38. A
league among the Rates of, formed by Charles, 631
Placentia granted to Oscavio Farnese by Philip II1
of Spain, IV. 257. The investiture of Siena given
by Philip to Cosmo di Medici, 360. The confe-
quence of there grants, 361.
Junta, Holy, a view of the confederacy in Spain, so

termed, II. 211. The authority of Adrian disclaimed
by, 212. Removed to Tordefillas, where Queen
Joanna resided, 213. Their proceedings carried on
in'the name of Joanna, ib. Receives letters from
Charles to lay down their arms, with promises of
pardon, 215. Remonstrance of grievances drawn
up by, 216. The particulars of this remonfirance,
217. Remarks on the spirit of it, 221. Are in-
timidated from presenting it to Charles, 222. Pro-
pose to deprive Charles of his royalty during the
life of Joanna, ib. Take the field, 223. Charac-
ter of their army, ib. The Queen leized by the
Conde de Haro, 225. How they obtained money
to support their army, 227. Lose time in nego-
ciating with the nobles, 228. Propose to make
their peace with Charles at the expence of the nobles,
230. Their irresolute condut, 231. Their army
defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken prisoner, 232.
Padilla executed, 233. His letters to his wife, and
the city of Todelo, 234, Note. The ruin of the
confederacy, 235.
7ulius II. Pope, observations on the pontificate of, II.

136.
---- III. Pope, his characer, IV. 6. Bestows his

Cardinal's hat infamously, 7. Is averse to the call-
ing a council, 8. Summons one at Trent, 9. As-
ferts his fiprenme authority peremptorily in the bull
for it, 2o. Repents confirming (aC)vio Farnese in
Parma, 29. Requires OL5avio to relinquiit his
alliance with France, 3i. The manner of his
death, 176.

La

L
La Chau, a Flemish gentleman, aflociated by Charles

V. with Cardinal Ximenes in the regency of Castile,
II. 44.
Landrecy, siege of, by the Emperor Charles V. III.

251. Is abandoned by him, 252.
Lannoy, mortgages the revenues of Naples, to supply

the exigencies of the Emperor, II. 287. Francis
surrenders himself prisoner to him at the battle of
Pavia, 296. His cautious disposal of him, 297.
Delivers him up in pursuance of the treaty of Ma-
drid, and receives the Duke of Orleans and the Dau-
phin, as hostages in exchange, 330. Is Sent am-
baffador to Francis to require his fulfilment of the
treaty of, 348. Concludes a treaty with the Pope,
362. Marches to join the Imperialifis at Rome,
where the troops refuse to obey him, III. 5.
Lanuza, Don John de, made viceroy of Aragon, on

the departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 86.
Composes the disturbances there, 242.
Lavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his charater,

III. 372. Meditates subverting the government of
Genoa, 373. His preparations, 374. His artful
method of alembling his adherents, 376. His ex-
hortation to them, 377. His interview with his
wife, 378. Sallies forth, 380. Andrew Doria
escapes, 381. Deputies sent to know his terms, ib.
Is drowned, 382. His brother's vanity ruins their
design, ib. See Fierco.
Lautrec, Odet de Foix, marechal de, the French go-

vernor of Milan, his character, II. x85. Alienates
the affeftions of the Milanese from the French, ib.
Inveits Reggio, but is repulsed by Guicciardini the
historian, then governor, i86. Is excommunicated
by the Pope, ib. The money for paying his
troops seized by Louise of Savoy, i88. Is left by
his Swiss troops, 189. Is driven out of the Mila-
nefe territories, 191. A new body of Swiss under
him insist on giving battle to the Imperialists, who
defeat him, i95. lThe Swiss leave him, ib.

Retires

Retires into France with the residue of his troops,
196. Delivers up the Dauphin and Duke of Or-
leans, in exchange for Francis I. as hostages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 329. Is ap-
pointed generalifimo of the league againit the Em-
peror, III. 6. His fuccefles in Italy, 7. Motives
which withheld him from"fubduing the Milanese, 8.
Obliges the Prince of Orange to retire to Naples, 16.
Blockades Naples, I7. His army wafted, and him-
seif killed by the pe tilence, 23.
Learning, the revival of, favourable to..the reformation

of religion, II. 154,
Leifpic, a public disputation held there by Martin Lu-

tner, and Eccius, on the validity of the Papal autho-
rity, II. 125.
Leo X. Pope of Rome, his character, II. 70. His

apprehensions on the election of an Emperor of
Germany, at the death of Maximilian, 71. His
counsel to the German Princes, ib. Grants Charles
V. a tenth of all ecclefialtical benefices in Castile,
80. Lays Castile under an interdit, but takes it
oit at the instance of Charles, 8.. His conddct on
the profpec of war between Charles and Francis,
92. Situation of the Papacy at his acceflion, land
his views of policy, o15. His inattention to Mar-
tin Luther's controversy with the Dominicans,
concerning Indulgences, 16. Is iniUgated againfit
himn, and summons him to Rome, ii. Desires the
Elecrlor of Saxony not to protect him, ib. Is pre-
vailed on to permit Luther's doctrines to be exa-
mined in Germany, 117. Cardinal Cajetan ap-
pointed to try him, ib. Iffies a bull in favour of
Isidulgenrces, 1 3. A fufpcnfion of proceedings
agalinlt Luther, and why, 124. Publishes a hull of
excolnmmunication against hIim, 127. The political
views of his conduct between Charles and Francis,
170. Concludes a treaty with Francis, 171. Con-
cludes a treaty also with Charles, I72. I'he con-
ditions of the treaty with Charles, 173. Its confc--
quences to Italy, 184. Is disappointed in a fchlcle
.lrlmccl by Moroni, chancellor of Milan, for attack-

V C: . LV. Cc ing

tng that dutchy, 185. Excommunicates Matethal
de Foix for his attack of Reggio, and declares
againfi France, I86. Takes a body of Swiss into
pay, ib. The French driven out of the Milanese,
I91. He dies, ib. The spirit of the confederacy
broken by his death, ib.
L'Efparre, Foix de, cammands the French troops in

Navarre for Henry D'Albert, II. 175. Reduces
that kingdom, ib. His imprudent progress into
Castile, 176. Is taken prisoner by the Spaniards,
and the French driven out of Navarre, 177.
Leonard, Father, forms a scheme of betraying Metz

to the Imperialists, IV. 167. Introduces soldiers
clad like friars, i68. Is detected, 170. Is murder-
ed by his monks, I71.
LeveJque, Don, his account of the motives which in-

duced the Emperor Charles V. to resign his heredi-
tary dominions, IV. 205. Note.
Lewis II. King of Hungary and Bohemia, his charac-

ter, II. 373. Is invaded and killed by Solyman the
Magnificent, ib.
- XII. King of France, receives homage of the

Archduke Philip, for the earldom of Slanders, II. 3.
Concludes a'treaty with him, while at war with
Ferdinand of Aragon, 6. Beflows his niece, Ger-
main de Foix, on Ferdinand, and concludes a
peace with him, 13. Loses the confidence of Phi-
lip on that occasion, 27. Note. Bestows his eldest
daughter, already betrothed to Charles V. on the
count of Angouleme, ib.
Leyva, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the Emperor

against Francis, II. 288. His vigorous defence, 289.
Sallies out at the battle of Pavia, and contributes
to the defeat of Francis, 295. Is left governor of
Milan by the Duke of Bourbon, 359. Defeats the
forces there, III. 26. Is appointed generalissimo of
the Italian leaguc, 63. Direats the operations of the
invasion of France, under the Emperor, 129. Dies,
138. Literature, its obligations to the order of Jcfuits, III.

202.

Lorenzs

Lorenzo di Medici. See Medici.
Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of France, her

characer, I[. 187, 188. Her motives for seizing
the money appointed for payment of Marechal Lau-
trec's troops, i88. Cause of her aversion to the
house of Bourbon, 250. Her advances toward a
marriage with Charles Duke of Bourbon, rejeced
by him, 251, 252. Determines to ruin him, 252.
Initigate a law-suit against him for his estates, ib.
Goes to dissuade Francis from his intended invasion
of the Milanese, who will not wait for her, 284. Is
appointed regent during his absence, 285. Her
prudent condu& on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity
of her son Francis, 300. Concludes a defensive
alliance with Henry VIII. 3IO. Ratifies the treaty
of Madrid for the recovery of her son's liberty, 328.
Undertakes with Margaret of Savoy to accommodate
the differences between the Emperor and Francis,
III. 28. Articles of the peace of Cambray, 30.
Loyola, Ignatio, commands the castle of P'ampeluna in

Navarre, and is wounded in its defence, II. 175.
His enthusiastic turn of mind, 176. The founder of
the society of Jesuits, ib. Prevails on the Pope to
establish the order, III. go9. An examination into
the constitution of the order, 191. Office and power
of the general, 193. The rapid progress of the or-
der, I97. See 7efuits.
Lorrain, Cardinal of, persuades Henry II. of France,

to accept the offered alliance with Pope Paul 1 V.
and is sent to Rome to negociate it, IV. I99. His
imprudent behaviour towards the duchess of Va-
lentinois, 278.
Lunenburgh, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 270.
Luther, Martin, the happy consequences of the opi-

nions propagated by him, 11. o04. Attacks Indul-
gences, log9. His birth and education, ib. Chofcn
philosophical professor at the univertity of Wit-
temberg, zio. Inveighs against the publishers of
Indulgences, Ill. Writes to Albert EleAor of
lMentz against them, ib. Composes theres against

C c 2 Indul.

Indulgences, x 12. Is supported by the Atrgrfiinians,
and encouraged by Frederick Elector of Saxony,
113. Is summoned to Rome by Pope Leo, 16.
Obtains of the Pope leave to have his dotrines ex-
amined in Germany, 117. Appears before Cardinal
Cajetan at Augsburg, i i8. His resolute reply to the-
peremptory order of Cajetan, to retrac his prin-
ciples, Ix9. Withdraws from Augiburg, and ap-
peals from the Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed, concerning him, 120. Appeals to
a general council, 122. The death of Maximilian,
how of service to him, 123. Questions the Papal
authority in a public disputation, 125. His opi-
nions condemned by the universities of Cologne and
Louvain, 126. A bull of excommunication pub-
lifhed againti him, 127. Pronounces the Pope to
be Antichrist, and burns the bull, 128. Reflec-
tions on the condut of the court of Rome toward
him, '30. Refledions on his condu&, 132.
Causes which contributed to favour his opposition to
the church of Rome, 34.. Particularly the art of
printing, I53. And the revival of learning, I54.
He is ifmmoned to appear at the diet of Worms,
162. A fafe-condutc granted him thither, ib. His
reception there, 163. Refufcs to retract his opinions,
ib. Departs, i64. An edir& published against him,
ib. He is seizcd and concealed at Wartburg, ib.
Progress of his doEtrines, I65. The univerlity of
Paris publiflles a decree againll him, I66. Wrote
againit by Henry VIII. of England, ib. Answers
both, I67. Withdraws from his retreat to check
the inconsiderate zeal of Carloftadius, 267, 268.
Unldertakes a translation of the Bible, 268. His.
doctrincs avowed by several of the Cerman Princes,
269. His moderate and prudent conluct, 340.
Marries Catherine ;a Boria, a nun, ib. 'The great
progress of hi; dotrinecs among the Germanic
States, III. 42. Encourages the Protcftants difpi-
rited by the lEmperor's decree against him, 50. His
concern at the lrli.ttices of the Anabaptists at Mun-
iter, 8x. Is invited to Lcipfick, by Henry Duke

of

of Saxony, 167. His opinion of Gropper'streatife
to unite the Proteffants and Catholics, 212. Dies,
309. Summary of his charater, Rxo. Extrac
from his last will, 3I4. Note. See Proteflants. A
view of the extraordinary ef'eits of his revolt from
the church of Rome, on that court, and on Europe
in general, IV. 320.
Luxemburg, invaded by Robert de la Marck, lord of

Bouillon, II. 178. Invaded and over-run by the
Duke of Orleans, III. 240. Is again invaded by
Francis, 250.

M
Madrid, treaty of, between the Emperor Charles V.

and his prisoner Francis I. King of France, II. 324,
325. Sentiments of the public with regard to this
treaty, 326.
3Magdeburg, the city of, refuses to admit the Interim

enforced by Charles V. and prepares for defence,
IV. 18. Maurice ElecEor of Saxony appointed to
reduce it, 19. Is put under the ban of the Empire,
36. The territories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. 'The inhabitants defeated in a
sally, 37. Maurice of Saxony arrives and besieges
the city, 38. Surrenders, 39, The senate elects
Maurice their burgrave, 40.

Mfahmned, King of Tunis, hiffory of his Cons, III. 94.
lajorca, an infurretion there, 11. 242. WVhich is
quelled with difficulty, ib. The moderation of
Charles towards the insurgents, on his arrival in
Spain, 243.
AlajeJty, the appellation of, assumed by Charles V. on

his eleEtion to the Imperial crown, and taken by all
the other monarchs of Europe, II. 79.

,Malines, council of, an account of, I1I. 176.
.Malta, the island of, granted by the Emperor Charles

V. to the knights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes
by the Turks, II. 202.
lam, alukes, extirpated by Sultan Selim II. II. 65.

C 3 cA/'Ian/cl/ s,

Alammelukes, a facion in Geneva, so termed, some

account of, III. 118.
Manuel, Don John, Ferdinand's ambassador at the

Imperial court, pays his court to the archduke Philip
on Queen Isabella's death, II. lo. Intercepts Jo-
anna's letter of consent to Ferdinand's regency of
CafRile, ii. Negociates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, x4.. Declares for Maximilian's
regency on Philip's death, 20. Is made Imperial
ambaflador at Rome, and concludes an alliance be-
tween Charles V. and Leo X. 172. The condi-
tions of the treaty, 173. Procures Adrian of Utrecht
to be eleEted Pope, 193.
M/aarcellus II. Pope, his characer, 1V. I88. Dies,

189.
Marciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi and the

marquis de Marignano, IV. 158.
Margaret of Austria, and Dowager of Savoy, aunt to

Charles V. undertakes. with Louise, mother of Fran-
cis I. of France, to accommodate the differences.
between those two monarchs, III. 28. Articles of
the peace of Cambray, 30.
Mxarignano, marquis of, appointed commander of the

Florentine army, acting against the French, IV.
156. Defeats the French army under Peter Strozzi,
I59. Lays siege to Siena, ib. Converts the siege
into a blockade, I6r. Siena surrenders, ib. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, i64. His troops ordered into
Piedmont by the Emperor, ib.
Marck, Robert de la, Lord of Bouillon, declares war

against the Emperor Charles V. 1I. 177. Ravages
Luxemburg with French troops, 178. Is com-
manded to disband his troops by Francis, ib. His
territories reduced by the Emperor, 179.
kfiarf illes, besieged by the Impcrialifts, 11. 281. Re-

icued by Francis, 282. Interview and treaty there
between the Pope and Francis, Ill. 67.
Jliiartinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, is appointed guardian

to Stephen King of Hungary, III. 216. His
charaLtcr, 217. Solicits the afiftance of Sultaii
,olyman i aainlt Ferdinand, 218. Solyman seizes

the

the kingdom, 219. Is appointed to the government
of Transylvania and the education of the young
King, jointly with the Queen, IV. 46. Negotiates
with Ferdinand, 47. Prevails with the'Queen to re-
sign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 48. Is appointed
governor of Transylvania, and made a Cardinal, 49.
Is assassinated by Ferdinand's order, 5r.
Martyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the ex-

tortions of the Flemiih minifRers of Charles V.
II. 58.
Mary of Burgundy, contracted to Lewis XII. of

France, but married to the Emperor Maximilian,
II. 2.
Mary of England, her acceflion, IV. 139. Receives

proposals from the Emperor Charles V. of marrying
his son Philip, 140. The English averse to this
union, ib. The House of Commons remonstrates
against the match, 14i. The articles of marriage,
a42. The marriage ratified by parliament and
.completed, 145. Re-establishes the Romish reli-
gion, I46. Persecutes the Reformers, ib. Invites
Charles to England on his resignation and paflage to
Spain, which he declines, 232. Is engaged by
Philip to aflift him in his war against France, 243.
Levies money by her prerogative to carry on the
war, ib. Her negleEt in the security of Calais, 264.
Calais inveffed and taken by the Duke of Guise,
265. Dies, 290.
.Mary, daughter of James V. of Scotland, succeeds to

the crown an infant, III. 245. Is contrafled to the
Dauphin of France, 440. Is educated at the court
of France, IV. 31. 271. The marriage completed,
ib. Aflumes the title and arms of England on.the
death of Mary, 293.
'atthias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the

Anabaptills at Munffer, III. 74. Seizes the city,
and establishes a new form of government there, 75.
Repulfcs the Bishop of Munfier, 78. Is killed, ib.
See Boccold and 4nabapti/ls.
Mawraice, Duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceding

to the Proteltant league of Smalkaldc, II. 255.

C c 4 AIarches

Marches to the affiltance of Ferdinand in Hungary,
256. His difference with his cousin the Eletor, 257.
His conduct at the diet of Worms, 292. Joins the
Emperor against the Proteflants, 337. His motives,
353. His insidious condu6c toward the Elector,
354. Seizes the electorate of Saxony, 358. Saxony
recovered by the Ele6tor, 366. His ineffectual en-
deavours to reduce Wittemberg for the Emperors
408. Obtains pofleffion of the electorate, 414. Is
formally inverfed at the diet of Augsburg, 447. Be-
comes dissatisfied with the Er.peror, IV. Io. HiS
motives to discontent explained, I. His address
and caution in his condu&, 13. Enforces the In-
terim in his territories, 14. Makes, nevertheless,
profeflions of his attachment to the Reformation, 15.
Undertakes to reduce Magdeburg to submit to the
Interim, I6. Protests againit the Council of Trent,
17. Is commiflioned by the Emperor to reduce
Ml1agdeburg, 19. Joins George of Mecklenburg
before Magdeburg, 36. The city capitulates, 39.
Begins to intrigue with Count Mansteldt, ib. Is
elected Burgrave of Magdeburg, 40. Difmiilles his
troops, 42. His address in amusing the Emperor,
43. Makes an alliance with Henry II. of France,
to make war on the Emperor, 53. Makes a formal
requisition of the Landgrave's liberty, 56. Joins
his troops, and publifies a manifesto, 63. Takes
pofTeffion of Augsburg and other cities, 66. An
ineffecual negotiation with Charles, 67. Defeats
a body of the Emperor's troops, 70. Ta.kes the
castle of Lhrenburg, ib. Is retarded by a mutiny in
his troops, 71. Enters Inlpruck, and narrowly
miiTcs taking Charles, 72. A negotiation between
him and Ferdinand, 8?.. Besieges Francfort on the
Main, 89. His inducements to an accomnmodatiol!,
91. Signrs a treaty with the Emperor at Paflau, ib.
Reflections on his conduca in this war, 92.
Mal.lches into F-ungary to opprfe the Turks, 97.
Is placed at the head of the league na!i;aift Albert of
Brandcnburgh, I19. I)efeats Albeit, but is killed

J3 ii

in the battle, 2.o. His charater, 121. Is. fuc.
ceeded by his brother Auguflus, 123.
jMaximilian, Emperor of Germany, claims the regency

of Caltile on his son Philip's death, 1I. 19. Is sup-
ported in his claim by Don John Manuel, 20.
Loses it, 22. Obtains the government of the Low
Countries by the death of Philip, 26. Appoints
William de Croy, Lord of Chievres, to superintend
the education of his grandson Charles, 27. Con-
cludes a peace with France and Venice, 50. Dies,
62. State of Europe at this period, ib. His en-
deavours to secure the Imperial crown to his grand-
son Charles, 63. How obftru&ted, ib.
jAfecklenburg, George of, invades the territories of

Magdeburg for the Emperor, IV. 36. Defeats the
Magdeburgers, who sally out on him, 37. Is
joined by Maurice of Saxony, who afiumes the fu-
preme command, is.

,.Medecino, John James. See Marignano.
Medici, Alexander, restored to the dominions of Flo-

rence, by the Emperor Charles, III. 41. Is afTafl-.
nated, 154.
Medici, Cardinal de, eleced Pope, and assumes the

title of Clement VII. II. 258. bee Clement VII.
Med;ici, Catherine di, is married to the Duke of Or-

leans, III. 67. Is conjeclured, by the Emperor
Charles V. to have poisoned the Dauphin, I42.
.Medici, Cosmo de, made Duke of Florence, 111. 156.

Is supported by the Emperor, and defeats the parti-
zans of Lorenzo, 157. Aflerts his independency
against the Emperor, IV. iit. Offers to reduce
Siena for the Emperor, 154. Enters into a war
with France, 155. See Marignano. His address in
procuring the invefliture of Siena from Phillip I. 'of
Spain, 258. It is granted to him, 260.
Medici, Lorenzo de, aiitflinates his kinfinan Alexander,

Ili. 155. Flies, ib. Attempts to oppose Cofino,
but is defeated, 156.
Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of, rcfufe to let

Fonseca take the military florcs there for the liege
of the insurgents in Segovia, II. 2c7. T'he town

alilof:

camoft bcrnt by Fonseca, 208. The inhabitants re-
pulse him, ib. Surrenders after the battle of Villa-
lar, and dissolution of the Holy Junta, 235.
A'elangahon, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,

II. 130. Is employed to draw up a confeflion of
faith by the Proteflant Princes at the diet of Augf-
burg, 1II. 48. Is dejeCed by the Emperor's decree
against the Proteftantsj but comforted by Luther,
51. Is invited to Paris by Francis, ji . His
conference with Eckius, 210. Is prevailed on to
favour the Interim enforced by the Emperor, IV.
14.
Melito, Conde de, made Viceroy of Valencia, on the

departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 86. Ap-
pointed to command the troops of the Nobles againfl
the Germanada, 241. Defeated by them in several
acdions, ib. Defiroys the association, ib.
Mentz, Archbishop of, artfully declares before the

Emperor, the diet of Augsburg's acceptance of the
Interim, without being authorised by it, II. 445.
Mierville, a Miilanefe gentleman, employed as envoy

from Francis I. to Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan,
his fate, III. og9.
,2Z7t-z, seized by IvXontmorencv the French general,

IV. 68. The Duke of Guise made Governor of,
103. Is besieged by the Emperor, I05. The
Emperor defifis, and retires in a difireffed condition,
Icg. A scheme formed by Father Leonard to betray
the city to the Imperialists, 167. The conspiracy
detected by the Go(vernor, 169. Leonard murdered
by his monks, and his associates executed, 171 .
A'fezieres, in France, besieged by the Imperialists, II.

179. Gallant defence of, by the Chevalier Bayard,
i80. The siege raised, ib.
X4ilann, Marechal de Foix, appointed to be the French

Governor ot,f II. 185. His charater, ib. The
Milanese alienated from the French by his oppref-
lions, ib. Invaded by the Ecclesiastical troops under
Prosper Colonna, 187. The French driven out,
i89. (Jppreted by the Imperial troops, 248. In-
vautd by the Fiench, 256. Who are driven out by

Colonna,

Colonna, 257. The Imperial troops there mutiny
for pay, but are appeased by Morone, 264. Aban-
doned by the French,. ib. Over-run again by
Francis, who seizes the city, 286. The French
retire on news of the battle of Pavia, 297. The
invefliture of, granted to Sforza, 311. Taken
from him and granted to the Duke of Bourbon, 321.
Disorders committed by the Imperial troops there,
345. Oppreflive measures of Bourbon to supply his
mutinous troops, 357. The French forces there
defeated by Antonio de Leyva, III. 27. Is again
granted by the Emperor to Sforza, 40. Death of
Sforza, 121. The. pretensions of Francis to that
dutchy, ib. Is seized by the Emperor, 122. The
Marquis del Guaflo appointed Governor, 140.
Mohacz, battle of, between Solyman the Magnificent

and the Hungarians, II. 373.
Monaf/ic orders, enquiry into the fundamental prin-

ciples of, 111. 19r. Peculiar constitution of the
order of Jesuits, 193.
Moncado, Don Hugo di, the Imperial Ambassador at

Rome, his intrigues with Cardinal Colonna, against
Pope Clement 1II. 354. Reduces the Pope to an
accommodation, 355. Is defeated and killed by
Andrew Doria in a naval engagement before the har-
bour of Naples, III. 17.
Monluc, is sent by the Count d'Enguien to Francis for

permiflioni to give battle to the Marquis del Guafto,
III. 268. Obtains his suit by his spirited argu-
ments, 269. Commands in Siena, when besieged
by the Marquis de Marignano, 1V. Ito. His vi-
gorous defence, ib. Is reduced by famine, and ca-
pitulates, I61.
.Monte Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena retire

thither after the reduction of that city by the Flo-
rentines, and establish a free government there, IV.
I62.
,jlontecuculi, Count of, accused and tortured for poi-

soning the Dauphin, charges the Emperor with in-
fligating it, II1. 14. .

Mont-.

.lMontmoreicy, marechal, his character, III. 133.

Francis adepts his plan for refifling the Emperor,
and commits the execution to him, 134. His pre-
cautions, ib. His troops dcfpife his conduSt, I37.
Observations on his operations, 139. Is disgraced,
239. Conducts the army of Henry II. to join
Mlaurice of Saxony, and seizes Metz, IV. 68. Dif-
fuades Henry from accepting the offered alliance
with Pope Paul IV. IV. I97. Commands the French
army against the Duke of Savoy, 246. Detaches
D'Andelot to relieve St. Quintin, ib. Exposes him-
self imprudently to an action, and is defeated, 247.
is taken prisoner, 248. Negociates a peace between
Philip and Henry, 279. Returns to France, and is
highly honoured by Henry, 280. His assiduity in
forwarding the negociations, 294. His expedient
for promoting the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,
398.
,Montpelier, a fruitless conference held there for the

reltitution of the kingdom of Navarre, II. 60.
Moronr, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his character,

II. 185. Retires from the French exations in
Miilan to Francis Sforza, ib. His intrigues, how
rendered abortive, 186. Quiets the mutiny of the
Imperial troops in Milan, 264. Is disgusted with
the behaviour of Charles, 311. Intrigues against
the Emperor with Pescara, 313. Is betrayed to the
Emperor by Pescara, 315. Is arrefled at his visit
to Pfclara, 317. Is let at liberty by the Duke of
Bourbon, and becomes his confident, 357.
AIleufon in France, taken by the Imperialilts, II. 179,

ketaken by Francis, 180.
.l.irazjfln, battle of, between the Emperor Charles V.
and the Elector of Saxony, 11. 404.
Ainley Hafcen, King of '1 unis, his inhuman treat-

ment of his father and brothers, Ill. 95. Is ex-
pelled by Barbarolla, 96. Engiages the lEmperor
Charles V. to reltore him, 98. is ellablifllcd again
by the surrender of Tunis, 0o5. His treaty with
Charlts, if.

'Miincrr',

Muncer, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, opposes him

with-fanatical notions, II. 336. Heads the infur-
rection of the peasants in Thuringia, 337. His
extravagant schemes, ib. Is defeated and put to
death, 339.
Munfler, the first settlement of the Anabaptists in that

city, III. 74. The city seized by:them, 75. They
eflablifh a new form of government there, ib. Is
called Mount Sion, 76. The bishop of, repulsed
by them, 77. Is blockaded by the bilhop, 82, The
city taken, 83. See Anabaptists.
Murder, the prices of composition for, by the Romith

clergy, II. 140.
,Mtflapha, the declared heir to Sultan Solyman the

Magnificent, is invefled with the adminifiration of
Diarbequir, IV. 132. His father rendered jealous
of his popularity, by the arts of Roxalana, 133.
Is Wrangled by his father's order, I37. His only
son murdered, 138.

N
.Naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to

supply the Emperor in his exigencies, II. 287. In-
vaded by the French under the Duke of Albany,
291. Invaded by Pope Clement VII. 359. Treaty
between the Pope and Lannoy viceroy of, 362.
''he prince of Orange retreats thither before Lau-
trec, III. I6. Is blockaded by Lautrec, 17. Sea
engagement in the harbour of, between Andrew
Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which disappointed
the French operations against, I8.. Doria revolts,
and opens the communication by sea again, 21.
Opprefred by the Spanish viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, becomes disaffected to the Emperor Chailes
V. IV. 1I5. Is harafied by a Turkish flect, i 6.
a.qau, Count of, invades Bouillon at the head of the
Imperialists, II. I79. Invades Franc, talces Mou-
son, and besieges MAezieres, but is repulsebd, ib.
,ATgavarre the kingdom of, uji)uftll accquirted by i'er-

dinanld of Aratgon, II. 23. D'.Albre's invalion of,

dclc.tct

defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 45. Its castles dif-
mantled, except Pampeluna, which Ximenes
strengthens, 46. Invaded by Francis I. in the
name of Henry d'Albret, 175. Reduced. by
L'Efparre, the French general, ib. The French
driven out by the Spaniards, and L'Efparre taken
prisoner, 177.
.letherlands, the government of, firit assumed by

CharlesV. II. 29. The Flemings averse to Charles's
going to Spain, 51. Invaded by Francis I. King
of France, 180. A truce concluded with, by Henry
VIII. of England, III. i9. Invaded by Francis
again, 144. A suspension of arms there, ib. An
infurreAion at Ghent, 173. See Ghent. Is once
more invaded by Francis, 250. Resigned by the
Emperor to his son Philip, 1V. 208. A review of
the alterations in, during the sixteenth century,
333, 334.
Nice, a truce for ten years concluded there between the

Emperor and Francis, III. I51. Besieged by the
French and Turks, 254.
Noyen, treaty of, between Charles V. and Francis I. of

France, II. 50. The terms of, negleced by Charles,
90.
Nuremburgb, the city of, embraces the reformed reli-

gion, 11. 269. Diet of, particulars of Pope Adrian's
brief to, refpeaing the reformers, 270. The reply
to, 271. Proposes a general council, 272. Presents
a lift of grievances to the Pope, 273. The recess,
or edic of, 274. This diet of great advantage to
the reformers, ib. Proceedings of a second diet
there, 277. Recess of the diet, 278. An accom-
modation agreed to there, between the Emperor
Charles V. and the Protestants, III. 57.

0
Oran, and other places in Barbary, annexed to the

crown of Caflilc, by Ximenes, 11. 23.
Orange, Phillibert de Chalons, Prince of, general of

the Imperial army on the death of the Duke of

I I Bour-

Bourbon, takes the cafle of St. Angelo, and Pope
Clement VII. prisoner, II. 371. Retires to Naples
on the approach of Lautrec, III. 16. Takes his
successor, the marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Averfa,
23·
Orleans, Duke of, delivered up to the Emperor

Charles V. with the Dauphin, as hoflages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, II. 329. Is
married to Catherine di Medici, Ill. 67. Becomes
Dauphin by the death of his brother, 142. See
Dauphin.

- Duke of, brother to the former, commands the

army appointed by Francis I. for the invasion of Lux-
embourg, III. 240. Is prompted by envy to aban-
don his conquests, and join his brother the Dauphin
in Roufillon, 241. Dies, 296.

P
Pacheco, Donna Maria, wife to Don John de Padilla,

her artful scheme to raise money to supply the army
of the Holy Junta, II. 227. Her husband taken
prisoner and executed, 233. His letter to her, ib.
Note. Raises forces to revenge his death, 237. Is
reduced, and retires to Portugal, 238.
Padilla, Don John de, his family and characer, II.

204. Heads the infurretion at Toledo, ib. Routs
the troops under Ronquillo, 207. Calls a conven-
tion of the malcontents at Avila, 211. Forms the
confederacy called the Holy Junta, ib. Dilclaims
Adrian's authority, 212. Gets pofl'efion of Qneen
Joanna, ib. Removes the Holy Junta to Torde-
fillas, the place of her recidence, 2I3. Sent with
troops to Valladolid, and deprives Adrian of all power
of government, 214. Is superseded in the command
of the army of the Junta, by Don Pedro de Giron,
223. Is appointed commander at the resignation of
Giron, 226. His army supplied with money by
an expedient of his wife, 227. Beliedgcs 'lorrclo-
baton, 230. Talces and plunders it, i;. Concludes
a truce with the nobles, 231. Is wounded and taken

pri loner

prisoner in an action with the Conde de Haro, 232,
Is put to death, 233. His letter to his wife, ib.
Note. His letter to the city of Toledo, 234. Note.
Palatinate, the Reformation eftablithed there by the

Eleaor Frederick, III. 299.
Palatine, Count, ambassador from the diet at Francforr,

brings Charles V. the offer of the Imperial crown,
which he accepts, II. 80.
Pampeluna, cafile of, in Navarre, its fortifications

strengthened by Cardinal Ximenes, II. 46. Taken
by L'Efparre, the French general for Henry D'AI-
bret, 177. Retakeri by the French, ib.
Papacy, how liable to be affeeed by the disposal of the

Imperial crown, II. 71.
Paraguay, a sovereignty established there by the order

of Jesuits, III. 204. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, ib. Precautions used by the Jesuits to
preserve the independency of their empire there, 205.
Paris, a decree publiflied by the university of, against

Martin Luther the Reformer, II. 166.' A decree
of the parliament of, published againfl the Emperor
Charles V. III. 143.
Parma, the dutchy of, confirmed to Oaavio Farnese,

by Pope Julius III. IV. 29. Is attacked by the
Imperialitts, and successfully proteEted by the French,
32.
Pafau, a treaty concluded there between the Emperor

Charles V. and Maurice of Saxony, IV. 91. Re-
flecions on this peace, and the conduct of Maurice,
92.
Pavio, besieged by Francis I. of France, II. 288.

Vigorously defended by Antonio de .eyva, 289.
Battle of, between Francis and the Duke of Bour-
bon, 294. The Imperial troops in that city mutiny,
305.
Paul ill. Pope, elced, Ir.. 71. Iis charater, ib.

Proposes a general council to be held at Mantua, 88.
Negociates personally between the Emperor and
Francis, 149. lfluis a bull for a council atMantua,
16i. Prorogues and transfers it to Viccnzi, 163.
A partial returnnation of abuses by, 164. Summons

the

the council of Trent, 258g Prorogues it, 259,
Summons it again, 287. Grants the dutchies of
Parma and Placentia to his illegitimate son, 396.
Deprives and excommunicates the eleaoral bishop
of Cologne, 318. Presses the Emperor to declare
_against the Protestants, 3I9. Concludes an alli-
ance with him against the Protestants, 325; Indif-
creetly publishes this treaty, 326. His troops join
the Emperor, 345. Recalls them, 368. . Removes
the council from Trent to Bologna, 433. .Refuses
the Emperor's request to carry the council back to
Trent, 434. His resentment against the Emperor
for the murder of his son Cardinal Farnese, 436.
Is petitioned by the diet of Augsburg for the return
of the council to Trent, 439. Eludes the comply-
ing with this request, 44i. His sentiments of the
Interim, published by Charles, 450. Dismisses the
council of Bologna, 456. Annexes Parma and Pla-
centia to the Holy See, IV. 2. Dies, 3. The
manner of his death enquired into, 4.
Paul IV. Pope, eleced, IV. 189. His character and

history, 19go. Founds the order of Theatines, 19 I
Is the principal occasion of establishing the Inquifi-
tion in the Papal territories, 192. Lays aside his
austerity on his election, 193. His partiality to his
nephews, ib. Is alienated from the Emperor by
his nephews, 196. Makes overtures to an alliance
with France, ib. Is enraged by the recess of the
diet of Augsburg, 199. Signs a treaty with France,
202. Is included in the truce for five years, con-
cluded between the Emperor and Henry, 216. His
insidious artifices to defeat this truce, 219 Ab-
solves Henry from his oath, and concludes a new
treaty with him, 222. His violent proceedings
against Philip, now King of Spain, 223. The
Compagna Romana seized by the Duke d'Alva,
226. Concludes a truce with Alva, 227. Con-
traft between his condu& and that of Charles, 235.
Renews his hostilities against Philip, 237. Is un-
provided for military operations, 238, Is reduced
to make peace with Philip, by the recall of the Duke

VoL. IV. D d of

of Guise after th detat .of :St. Quintin, B56,. Re-
ceives an -mbafiadl r froln 'the iEmperor ;terdinand
to notify -hisz lesion, but !rfuiifes tofee :him, -or to

' acknowledge the Emperor, 257. D.ies, 3a.
Paulin, a French officer, sent latnbafldor-from Francis

I. to Sultan SOlyman, II .'2. H2is successful ne-
gociations at the Porte, ib.'
Pembroke, Eal of, int by :Q.aenMary of England with

a body of men tto -join -the Spanih'army in the Ltw
Countries, 4V. 243. ::
Perpignan, 'the capita ioof Roufilion, efieged by the

Dauphin of France, ill. 24o. :The siege raised,
241. -
Pefara, Marquis de., takes Milan by assault, II. igo.

Drives Bonnivet baet to France, 265. His gene-
rous care of the Chevalier Bayard, 266. Commands
in the invasion of Provenee, 281. Besieges Mar-
feilles, ib. His army reti's. toward Italy, on the
appeaiance of the French ~troops, 282. Resigns
Milan to the!-Ffench, 286. Prevails on the Spanilh
troops not to murmur at present for their pay, 287.
Contributes to the defeat of Fr-anis -atuthe battle of
Pavia, 295. Is disgusted at Francis being taken to
Spain without- his concurrence, 31t2. His resent-
ment inflaned by Moronre, 314. Betrays -Morone's
designs to the 'Emperor, 316. ArreRs'Morone, 317.
Dies, 321.
Philip, Archduke of Autria, and father of CharlesV.

vilits Spain, with his wife. Jganna, 1I. 3. Does
homage by the way to Lewis XII. of France .for the
earldom of Slanders, ii. His title to the crown ac-
knowledged by the Cortes, ib. Is disgusted with the
formality of the Spanilh court, 4. Ferdinand be-
comes jealous of his power, i&. Slights his wife,;ib.
His abrupt departure from Spain, 5. Pafles through
France, and enters into a treaty with Lewis, 6. His
sentiments on Ferdinand's obtaining the regency of
Castile, 9. Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resign his regency of Castile, o1. The
regency of Castile velted jointly in him, Ferdinand,
and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, I4. Sets

out

,out for-Spainu, -pdj4; dvpy1 Pn ihe epoatf ps FJglapd,
where i.e is .de:lmipd ,tiyee iptths by enrt' VT11I.
rr..'Arivres a /t i

rqna,: b.: The .C'aftilinq npFpi-

lity dclare openly for hii, lb. Ferdinand resigns
the regency ps CaUi e to hi.q, z6. Jnterview,be-
t ween thenm ib. Ackcnpwlededd King of CafRile
by the Corfes, xI. D ies, i,. Joana's extraprdi-
nary condu&t in regard to his body, i8. See
oasnn.
Philip, Prince, 'fop to the Emperor Charles V.. his

right of fscceflion irecoaifed by the Cortes of Ara-
gon and Valencia, III. 243. Is acknowledged by
the-States of the Netherlands, 458. His deport-
ment digutts the Flemings, 459. His charae r,
IV. 26. Is married to .vlary ieen of Enfglkapd,
·142.1 z4.. The p glih psrliatient jealous of him,
1;8. -Is father gns ihere ditary inions to
him, 20. Is called by his father out of England,
208. The ceremony of investing him, ib. His
father's address to him ;X,I2. Cornmisions .Cardinal
Granvelle jop acdrefs the; afiembly in, his ,name, 212.
Mary Queen Dowager of Hungary resigns her re-
_gpecy,- 2z3. The don~niops. xf Spain, resigned to
him, i, .'is unpoljternps to fie Frenqch .mba;dor
Coligoi, 217, Noate. The, Pope's violent'proceed-
ings against him, 223. His scruples concerning
commencing hostilities against the Pope, 225. His
ungrateful neglet in paying .his father's pension,
233. I Tle Pope renews hoftlittes aainit him, 237.
AflembJes an army in the Low Coun'tries against
France, 241. Goes over to England to engage that
kingdom in the war, ib. Vilits the camp at St.
Quintin, after the vitory, 250. Opposes the
scheme of penetrating to Paris, and orders the siege
of St. Quintin to be prosecuted, 25 r. St. Quintin
taken iby afrault, 2Z5. The small advantages he
reaped by there fuccefles, 254. Builds the Escurial
in memory of the battle of St. Quintin, ib. Con-
cludes a peace with the Pope, 256. Reitores Pla-
centia to Ota vio Farnese, 257. Grants the invei-
titure of Siena to Cosmo di Medici, 260. Enters into

D d a negoci-

negociations for peace with his prisoner Montmo-
rency, 279. Death of Queen Mary, 290. Ad-
drefles her fucceflor Elizabeth for marriage,' 291.
Elizabeth's motives for rejecting him, 293. Her
evasive answer to him, 294. Supplants his son Don
Carlos, and marries Henry's daughter Elizabeth,
298. Articles of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,

299. Phillibert, Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. See Savoy.
Phillipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats Moncada,

in a fea-engagement before the harbour of Naples,
III. 17.
Piadena, Marquis de, invades Transylvania for Ferdi-

nand, IV. 47. Misrepresents Cardinal Martinuzzi
to Ferdinand, and obtains a commission to aftaflinate
him, 5x. Is forced to abandon Transylvania, 128.
Picardy, invaded by Henry VIII. II. i99. Henry

forced by the Duke de Vendome to retire, 200.
Invaded again under the Duke of Suffolk, 261.
-Who penetrates almost to Paris, but is driven back,
26I, 262. Ineffeaual invasion by the Imperialifs,
I1I. 140.
Placentia, the dutchy of, granted together with that

of Parma by Pope Paul III. to his natural son, Car-
dinal Farnese, III. 296. Farnese affafinated there,
435. Is taken possession of by the Imperial troops,
436. Reflored to Ofavio Farnese, by Philip II.
of Spain, IV. 257.
Pole, Cardinal, arrives in England with a legatine

commission, IV. 14'6. Endeavours to mediate a
peace between the Emperor and the King of France,
without success, 172. Is recalled from the court of
England by Pope Paul IV. 237.
Printing, its effects on the progress of the Reformation,

II. 153.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand King of

Bohemia, III. 429.
Prottc/ants, the derivation of the name, III. 45. Of

whom they originally confited, ib. A severe decree
published against them by the Emperor, 49. They
enter into a league, 50. See Smalkalde. Renew

their

- their league, and apply to Francis King of France,
'and Henry VIII. of England, for protection, 54.
Are secretly encouraged by Francis, 55. Receive a
fqpply of money from Henry, 56. Terms of the
pacification agreed' to between them and the Em-
peror at Nuremburg, 57. Afifi the Emperor against
the Turks, 59. Their negociations with the Pope,
relative to a general council, 61. Renew the league
of Smalkalde for ten years, 89. The motives for
refusing to aflift the King of France against the Em-
peror, 113. Refuse to acknowledge the council
summoned by the Pope at Mantua, 162. A con-
ference between their principal divines and a depu-
tation of Catholics, at Ratisbon, 210. This con-
ference how rendered fruitless, 2z2a Obtain a pri.
vate grant from Charles in their favour, 214. Drive
the Duke of Brunswick from his dominions, 260.
All rigorous edias against them suspended by a recess
of the diet of Spires, 264. Their remonfRrances to
Ferdinand at the diet of Worms, 290. Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess of Spires, ib. Dif-
claim all connecion with the council of Trent, 291.
Are itrengthened by the acceflion of Frederick Elec.
tor Palatine, 299. Are alarmed at the proceedings
of the Emperor, 303. 324. The Emperor leagues
with the Pope againit them, 326. Prepare to relfit
the Emperor, 331. Levy an army, 335. The
operations of the army diftraaed by the joint com-
manders, 343. The army dispersed, 36i. The
Eletor.of Saxony reduced, 405, The Landgrave
deceived by treaty, and confined, 420, 421. The
Emperor's cruel treatment of him, 426. The IJnte
rim, a fyflem of theology recommended by the Em-
peror to the diet at Augsburg, 445. Are promised
proteAion by the Emperor at the council of'
Trent, IV. 20. The Emperor proceeds rigorously
against them, 34. Their deputies obtain a fate-con-
duEt from the Emperor, but are refused by the'coun-
cil, 44. Maurice of Saxony raises an army in their
cause, 63. See 4faurice. Treaty of Pailau, g9.
The Proteflant Princes again unite to flrcngthen the

D d 3 Pro.

' P"rottdant interest, 179,. Ritess of the diet of Autr-

burg on the furbe&abfre.gidn, i8t. Whyoriginally
dverfe to the principles of .leration, r86.
Piovence, is laid waste' h;i/R~. Marefcaf Modntmore'rcy

on the approach of the Eijpe'ror ChiarteSV. III. r34.
Is entered 3y the E'imperot, 1i5. The disastrous
retreat of thii EripeY6rroibtt, r'38.
Prugfia, when& coRiqiered' by 'thle Teutonic order, II.

34I. Is ere&ed' irt6 a dut'chy, and finally intd a
kingdom, and enjoyed b: the lndufe of Brandin-
bu'rg, 342

· . . . R
Rat/Joni, a confe'rence between a depftation of Pro-

teftarit and Catholic divi'nes,. before the Emperor
and diet there,. III. 2io. This coriferenfe' how
rendered fruitless, ii2. A diet opened there by the
Em.peror, 32i.' The Cath-olic memrers of, assert
tihe authority of thi council of Trent, 323. The
I.rotean'dts: present a rme'ribfia'l againfi it, ib. The
Proteffant deputies retire, 35..
.eforjmaiion in religion, the rife o', exptained, II. o04.

The diet at Worms dcaled by Ciarles V. to- check
the pr6giefs of, ib. Accourit-of Martin Luther, the
Reformer, IO9. Beginninig of, in Switietrland by
ZuingHus, r25. State of, in German'y,. at the ar-
rival' of Charles V. 129. tReflecffionsd'n the condoa
of the court of Rome toward Luther, '13 . And on
Luther's c6ndu&, 132. Inquiry irntd the causes
whichE cdnrhibuted to the progress of, 34:. Obffer-
vationis on the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. 136. The irmmor'a lives of the Ronmiih
clergy, 137. The progress of, favoured by the in-
vention of printing, I53. And the revival'of learn-
ing, x54. The great progress of, in Germany,
269. Advantages derived' to, from the diet at Nu-
remburgh, 274. Its tendency in favour of civil
liberty, 335, The difclnfions between' the Ernperor
and the Fope, favourable to, 375. The great spread
oft among the German Princes, III. 42. The

consef-

? cik'bffio' of Augsburg draiwni up by MMelari&ho,

48. Causes which.led to that of England, 67.
'The-excdffes it gave riif toa 71. See Prate/Rauot
Matriei; and Smaasd*.. Ia :eiabihed: in Saxony,
x67. The; great alterationt cdcafione i by, .ins the
court of Roma,, IV. 33o.; Coatributed toiimprbve
both the morals and learning of the Roifuih church,
325.
Reggio, invefied by- the Frencthi who; are repulsed by

the governor Guicciardini the historian, .

11. ..
Remonjrance of grievances dawnr opub by the FIoiy junta,

the particulars of, II 2I6. 2r.7. ,RPemark on,- zi.
Reverse, a deed: so called,: signed by the Archduke Ser-

dinand on being ele'ted King of Bohemia, II. 374.

RhFggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, 11. 2.53.
Rhodes, the island of, besieged by Solyman ,tbhe Mag-

nificent, II. 201. Taken by him, 202. The island
of Malta granted to the knights of, by the Emperor
Charles V. ib.
Richlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's history

of Fiefco's conspiracy, IH'l 384- Not..
Rincon, the French. ambassador at the Porte, the mo-

tives of his return to France III. 235. Is mtrdered
in his journey back to Constantinople, by order of
the Imperial governor of the AMiainefe, 2,36
Rome, reflections on the condut of the court of, re-

fpedting the proceedings again/t Martin Luther, II.
131. The exorbitant wealth: of the church of, pre-
vious to the reformation, 4i Venality of,. x5.
How it drained other countries of their wealth, 15 .
The city. seized by Cardinal Colonaa, and Pope
Clement VII. besieged in the castle of St. Angelo,
354. The city taken by the Imperialifts,'ard Bour.
bon killed~ 3!55. Is plundered, i&. The great re-
volution in the court of, during the. sixteenth cen-
tury, IdI. 32z. How aftesed by the revolt of Lu-
ther,. 329. The fpiuit of its government changed
by, 332. '

· ' ;
Ron quio, sent by Cardinal Adrian with troopsto fiup

press the infurrecfion in Segovia, HI. 20oy.1w. routed
by the insurgents, ib.

Dd 4 Rovere,

Rovere, Flancefco Maria de, restored to his dutchy of

Urbino by Pope Adrian, II. 246.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, becomes the favourite

mistress of Sultan Solyman the Magnificent, IV.
I29. Her only daughter married to Ruftan the
Grand Vizier, I30. Procures herself to be declared
a free woman by the Sultan, 131. 'Is formally mar-
ried to him, ib. Renders Solyman jealous of the
virtues of his son Muftapha, 132. Muftapha firan-
gled, 137.
Ruftan, Grand Vizier to Solyman the Magnificent, is

married to his daughter by Roxalana, IV. 130.
Enters into Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muftapha, ib. Is sent with an army to destroy
him, 135. Draws Solyman to the army by faife
reports, ib.

S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon,

and his fon-in-law Philip, II. 14.
Salerno, Prince of, heads the difaffeded Neapolitans,

against the oppreflions of the viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, IV. X11. Solicits aid from Henry II. of
France, who inltigates the Turks to invade Naples,
ib.
Salutes, Marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in the command

of the French army before Naples, III. 23. Retires
to Averfa, where he is taken prisoner by the Prince
of Orange, ib. Betrays his charge in Piedmont,
132.
Sancerre, Count de, defends St. Difiere against the

Emperor Charles, III. 273. Is deceived into a fur-
render by the Cardinal Granvelle, 275.
Sauvage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Caflile by

Charles, on the death of Ximenes, II. 58. His ex-
tortions, ib.
Savona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by the

French, to favour its rivallhip with Genoa, III.
zo.

Savoy,

Savoy, Charles Duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal,

sifter to the Emperor Charles V. III. iiS. The
cause of Francis's displeasure against him, ib. His
territories over-run by the French troops, i6.
Geneva recovers its liberty, 117. His situation by
the truce at Nice, between the Emperor and Fran-
cis, 152. Is besieged at Nice, by the French and
Turks, 253.
-·-- Emanuel Phillibert, Duke of, appointed by
Philip of Spain to command his army in the Low
Countries, IV. 243. Invefis St. Quintin, 244.
Defeats D'Andelot in an endeavour to join the gar-
rifon, 246. But does not hinder him from entering
the town, 247. Defeats the Confiable Montmo-
rency, and takes him prisoner, 248. Is graciously
visited in the camp by Philip, 250. Takes St.
Quintin by afault, 252. Assisis Montmorency in
negotiating peace between Philip and Henry, 280.
Marries Henry's sifter Elizabeth, 299. 301.
.Saxony, Eledor of, appointed joint commander of the

army of the Protestant league, with the Landgrave
of Hesse, Ill. 343. Their characters compared, ib.
Opposes the Landgrave's intention of giving battle
to the -Emperor, 348. His electorate seized by
Maurice, 358. The army of the league disperse, 36 I,
Recovers Saxony, 366. Is amused by Maurice with
a negociation, ib. Raises an army to defend him-
self againfi the Emperor, 399. Is irresolute in his
measures, 400. Charles pafles the Elbe, ib. Is
attacked by the Imperialists, 404. Is taken prisoner
and harshly received by the Emperor, 405. Is con-
demned to death by a court-martial, 409. His refo-
lution on the occasion, 411. Is induced by regard
to his family to surrender his electorate, 413. Re-
fuses the Emperor's desire of his approving the Inte-
rim, 450. The rigour of his confinement increased,
451. Is carried by tje Emperor with him into the
Netherlands, 456. Is released by the Emperor on
Maurice's taking arms againit him, but choofes to
continue with the Emperor, IV. 73. Obtains his
liberty after the treaty of Paffau, 99.

Saxony,

-SaxAy, George Duke ofy a enemy to the Reforma-
tion, IlL. 67. His death an adanttage t the Re-
formation, ib. The Protestant reliigioit efIablihed
by Henry Duke of, ib. Henry is succeeded by
his son Maurices 255. His motives for not acceding
to the league of Salilkadde, ib. Marches to the
affitlance of Ferdinand in Hungary, 256. Joins
the Emperor against the Protefants, 336. 354. See
Maurice.
Schertel Sebastian, a comnnander irr the army of the

Protestant league, his vigorous commencement of
hhoftiiities, 111. 341. Is injudiciously recalled, 343.
Is expelled from Augsburg on the difperflon of the
Proteffant army+ 363?.
Scotland, James V. of, ma:ried to Mary of Guise,

dutrhefs-dowager of Longgueville, III. 159. Death of
JaWnes and acceflion of his infant daughter Mary,
24.6. Mary contraded tohe Dauphin of France,
438. The marriage celebrated, IV. 271. Mary
alimies the title and arms of England on the death
of Mary of England, 293. 1nclidedt in the treaty
of Chateau Cambtreis, 298. Alteration in the con-
du& of Etgland towatd, 3 t8.

Seas in religior, relediions on the origin of, III. 71.
gegovial an infurteEti'o there, - on accon-t of their re-

presentative Tordefiilas votng for the donative to
Charles V. II. zo4- Is killed by the populace,
205. The insurgents' there defeat Ronquillos sent
to suppress them by Cardinal Adriart, 2o6. Sur-
renders after thebwttle of Villalar, 235.
Selint I. Stltan, exrirpates the Mamalukes, and adds

Egypt and Syria to his empire, II. 65. Confideied
as formidable ro the European powersy ib.
Sferza, obtains of Charles V. the inveftittre of Milan,

IL 312. Forfeits the dutchy, by )is; intrigtes with
Molon&, 317. Joins in a league against Chartes for
the recovery of Milan- 34'J Is forced to surrender
Milan to the Imperialits, 552. Obtains again of
the Emperor the investiture of Milan, 11. 40. En-
ters into a private treaty with Francis, 1o9. Mer-

veillc,

veille, Francis's' envoy, executed for murder, 'iio.
)ies, i2t.
Siena, the inhabitants of, implore the affrffance- of the

Emperor Chartes'V. to defend' the-m agaiinf their
nobles, IV. rr3. The Imperial; troops; endeavour
to enslave' them, ib. Regain pofleflion of their city,
11I4. Repuie an attack of the Germaans, V27. Are
besieged by the Marquis de Marignalo, r5'qc The
commander Mon:uc' repulftes the aiffiralt vigorouafy,
i6o. The town reduced By famine, r6x. Num-
bers of the citizens retire,.and' effablifhi a free go-
vernment at Monte Alcino, r6-. Thie remaining
citizens oppreffied, 163. And flock to Monte' Al-
cino, ib'. I's-granted by the Emperor to his son Phi-
lip, 364. The investiture given by Philip to Cos-
mo.di Medici, 260.
Sieverhaufren, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony and

Albert of Brandenburg, IV. 12o.
Sion, Cardinal' of, his scheme for weakteniig the French

army in the Milanese, I. t89.- Leaves the Imperial
arrmy to attend the. conceave on the death of Leo X.
I9I. Smalkalde, the Protestants enter into a' league there for

their matuaal support,. HI. 51. The league renewed
at a fecotd meeting there, 54. The league of, re-
newef for tet years, 89. A mranifefto, refusing to
acknoiwledge a cobncil called' by the Pope, 162.
T'he King of Denmark j:oins the league, ix6. The
Princes of, protefi against the authority of the Im-
perial chamber, and-the rece'ss of the diet at Nurem-
burg, 2fr. Pab'lifh a nmanifefto against the pro-
ceedingg of the counci' at Trient, 303. Are alarmed
at the proceedings of the Emperor, /b. A want of
unity amorfg the mnembers, 305. The views of the
Ele&or of Saxony, and the Landgrave, explained,
i1. Appeav at thed'iet of Ratisbon by deputies, 322.
Their deputies protest against the council of Trent,
324. Thleir deputies, alarmed at the Emperor's
proceedings 'and declarations, leave the diet, 326.
The Emperor leagues with the Pope against them,
327. Prepare to resist the Emperor, 328. Are

difap-

disappointed in their application to the Venetians and
Swiss, 332. As also with Henry VIII. and Francis,
334. Assemble a large army, 335. Are put under
the ban of the Empire, 339. Declare war against
the Emperor, 341. Hoitilities begun by Schertel,
ib. They recall him, 342. The Eleator of Sax-
ony and Landgrave of Hesse appointed joint com-
manders of their army, 343. The characters of
the two commanders compared, ib. Their opera-
tions difiraded by this joint command, 344. Can-
nonade the Emperor's camp, 348. Make overtures
of peace to the Emperor, 360. Their army dif-
perse, 361. The Eleclor of Saxony reduced, 405.
The Landgrave deceived and confined, 420. Their
warlike itores seized by the Emperor, 426. See
Maurice.
Solyman the Magnificent ascends the Ottoman throne,

11. 102. Invades Hungary and takes Belgrade, 20I.
Takes the island of Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hun-
garians at Mohacz, 373. His successes, and the
number of prisoners he carried away, ib. Besieges
Vienna, III. 38. Enters Hungary again with a vast
army, but is forced to retire by the Emperor Charles,
58. Takes Barbarofra the pirate under his protece
tion, 94. Concludes an alliance with Francis
King of France, I47. Prepares to invade Naples,
148. Proteas Stephen King of Hungary, and defeats
Ferdinand, 218. Seizes Hungary for himself, 219.
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfilment of his treaty
with Francis, 252. * Concludes a truce with the
Emperor, 320. Loses Transylvania, IV. 49. Ra-
vages the coaRts of Italy, 86, i I6. Carries a mighty
army into Hungary, 88. Re-eftablilhes Isabella
and her son in Transylvania, 128. His violent at-
tachment to his concubine Roxalana, .129. Is pre-
vailed on to declare her a free woman, 131. For-
mally marries her, ib. Is rendered jealous of the
virtues of his (on Muftapha, by the arts of Roxalana,
133. Orders him to be firangled, 137. Orders
the murder of Muftapha's son, 138.

Spain,

Spain, the slate of, at the death of Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, II. 30. Charles king of, aspires to the Impe-
rial crown on the death of Maximilian, 64. Is eled-
ed Emperor, 77. RefleXions of the Spaniards on
that event, 79. Charles appoints viceroys, and
departs for Germany, 87. Infurreaions there, 204.
A view of the feudal system in, 209. An account
of the confederacy termed the Holy Junta, 21 1.
Causes which prevented an union of the malcontents
in the refpeAive provinces, 244. The moderation
of Charles toward them on his arrival, ib. In-
stance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, III. 172.
Is invaded by the Dauphin, 240. The dominions
of, resigned by Charles to his son Philip, IV. 208.
The arrival of Charles, and his reception there, 232.
The place of his retreat described, 234. The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles, 307. The
foreign acquisitions added to, 308. See Aragon,
Castile, Galicia, Valendia, Cortes, Germanada, and
Holy Junta.
Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative to the Reforma-

tion, II. 375. Another diet called there by the
Emperor, 111. 43. Another diet at, 26i. Recess
of, in favour of the Protestants, 264.
Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the dreadful

effets of, II. 145.
St. Difier, in Champagne, invested by the Emperor,

III. 273. Is obtained by the artifice of Cardinal
Granvelle, 275.
St. Juftus, monastery of, in Plazencia, is chosen by

the Emperor Charles V. for his retreat after his
resignation, IV. 23.. His situation described, ib.
His apartments, 235.
St. .uintin, invested by the Spanish troops, and de-

fended by Admiral Coligni, IV. 244. D'Andelot
defeated in an endeavour to join the garrison, 246.
But enters the town, 247. Montmorency defeated
by the Duke of Savoy, ib. The town taken by as-
fault, 248.
Strozzi, Peter, Come account of, IV. 156. Is intrust-

ed with the command of the French army in Italy,

157.

* . S7,. rls defeatcd by .th .Maqui? 4 rign®neJ

S*/
2 rlsan infurrctiOn .of ti Reai ts ginil sthe nobles
. there, t. 333. They pnblish a iemorial of their

grievances,. i. The finfrgents dispersed, 334.
Tli^ Protelant relg~ipn fipJieri d #ber( bly the ELn-
peror CJarles V. r, 3TV ,
S-4lk, Duke .of, irnvades Picady, eetrates almoi; to

Paris, bwt.is driven bac, 1- . z6. -,
Svrr: Earl of, created high apiral to the Emperor

Charles V. 11. 199. .Obligied tp rtire ogt ps Pi-
'ardy by the Duke ,de Vndome, 00o.
'Sw*un, a fninmary -view ,of tfie revfolutions ip, during

the fixteextbh setrry, IV. 334.
Switzerland, the Cantons of, efponfe the pretensions of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 4g. Com-
mencement of the R.ormtion there by Zuinglius,
25 . The regulation under which they hire out
their tCPops, 189. Theprecipitate battle inififed on
by'their troops under Lautrec, loft, 95.-
Syria, how and by whorn added to he Ottoman eme

£ire, II. ó5,

7erm.es marefchal de, governor of Calais, takes Dun-

ermrrs, marefchai de, governor of Calais, takes Dun-
kirk by florm, IV. 273. Engages the count of Eg-
moQnt and' is defeate4 by the accidental arrival of
an English squadron on the coast, ib. Is taken
pWrifoner, 275S
Tr4auane, .taken.anddemolifhed by the Emperor Charles

V. IV. Iz5.
7'etzd, a Dominican friar, his (hameful condu& in the

sale of Indulgences in Germany, II. ip6. His forro
of absolution, .and recomncndation of the virtues of
Indulgences, 1.07, Npe. His debauched course of
life, o08. Publifles theses against Luther, Ix3.
.eutonic order, a charader .of, I. 34- . Conquer the

province of Pruflia, ib. Their grand mailer Al-
bert made DuIke of Prussia, 342.
Thbeatwes, the order of, by Whpm founded, IV. xlI.

Thonville,

Yhi/~/ilk, i inu exemboPtg,. alken by .the, 'aeg of
* ,GueIV, I . ,- . .
Thkur.singia; an inl rrseiqn oftkp esfitPts tlbee, ,aganfit

rthe nohility J, '335,. Thfe anatii al otions Jnpired
* ioO thbem:y.T:bows,[Ml ear, 337., Their ifor-
derly army defeated, 39. . .

.,
Telcda, infurme 'o, in, at the departre of Cbar)s ./

i or Garmaly, IL.87. 20o4 The:cathedral of,flripped
of its riches to fupport.the arny of. the ;tIry Juita,
227. Padila's letter to,.athis x ,c3.tioi %34, ,NdT.
Is infiigated to continue. in arms.by Padila's wife,
236. Is riedeed, 2.38. .
o/aedo, Ludovico le., iepht:w to Cofino di Medici,
. .nt by his .uocle to.negoqiate, with Philip.II- of

Spain, for the investiture of Siena,. IV. 259.
a'ekdo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, oppreffe.s,.tt
Neapolitans, IV. 115. And oecatiQnsa.th.e TrIc to
ravage the coasts of Naples, ib.
Toleration, refleEtions on thIe progress of, in Germany,

IV. 182. Why mutually allowed among the ancient
* Heathers, 183. .-Ho.w the primitive .Chrliians '.b

came averse to, ib..

.amorri, Paul, a Franciscan m.onk, achbifiop of Go-
* locza, is made general of the Hungarian army against
Solyman ithe Magnificent, and is defeated by him,
1I. 373.
Tordefillas, the residence of Queen Joanna, the cQnfe-

.deracy of malcontents .called the Holy Junta, ire-
moved thither, II, 213. The Queen taken thee by
the Conde de fsaro, 225.
---.- one of the representatives ps Segovia, killed by

the populace for voting the donative to Charles V.
at the Cortes aflembled in Galicia, II. 205.
Trianfylania, 'is furtende:ed to Ferdinand King of thp

Romans, by Queen Isabella, IV. 49.-
Tremouille, La, drives the Englilh :under the Duke of

Suffolk out of Picardy, 11. 262.
'trent, the council of, :fumrnoned, III. 258. Prorogued,
ib. Again summoned, 287. Is opened, 300. DeC
clares the apocryphal scriptures canonical, 307. Efti-
blifhes the authority of the church-tra iitions,ij. The

2 council,

council, on rumours of an infealion in the city, is
translated to Bologna, 433. Henry II. of France
protests against the council, IV. 33. The council
breaks up on the approach of Maurice of Saxony,
74. Historical remarks on this council, 75. Cha-
ra6ters of its historians, 76.
Trent, Cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles V.

to conclude an alliance with the Pope, III. 324.
The nature of this treaty, 325.
Tunis, the means of its coming under the power of Bar-

barofla, traced, III. 94. The Emperor and other
Christian powers unite to expel Barbarossa, and re-
store Muley Hafcen, 98. Is taken by the Emperor,
104. Muley Hafcen restored, and his treaty with
Charles, 105.
Tuscany, a review of the fate of, during the sixteenth

century, IV. 331.

V
Falencia, an infurreEtion in, IT. 8r.. The people there

greatly oppressed by the nobles, ib. The nobles re-
fuse to assemble the Cortes except the King is pre-
sent, 82. Charles authorises the people to continue
in arms, 81. They expel the nobles, ib. Associate
under the Germanada, and appoint their own magi-
firates, ib. Don Diego de Mendora, Conde de
Melito, appointed regent, on the departure of Charles
for Germany, 86. The Germanada refuse to lay
down their arms, 239. Defeat the nobles in several
aEtions, 241. Are at length routed by the Conde
de Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles to-
ward the insurgents on his arrival, 244..

Yalentinois, Duchess of. See Diana of Poitiers.
Valladolid, the first public entry of Charles V. to that

city, 11. 55. The inhabitants rife, burn Fonseca's
house, and fortify the town, II. 208. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, and dissolution of the
Holy Junta, 235.
Yaucelles, treaty of, between Charles V. and Henry IT.

of France, IV. 21 6.

Vtndomt,

yendome, duke of, his plan of operations in opposing

the progress of the invasion of Picardy by Henry
VIII. 11. 200. Obliges him to retire, i6.
ygnice, the republic of, incline in favour of the pre-

tensions of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial
crown, II. 69. Their views and apprehensions on
the approaching rupture between the Emperor
Charles V. and Francis, 92. Leagues with the
Emperor against Francis, 248. A final accommo-
dation between, and the Emperor, III. 39. Refuses
to enter into the league of the Italian Rates, formed
by the Emperor, 63. A review of the Rtate of
that republic during the sixteenth century, IV.
329.
herrina, the confident of the Count of Lavagno, en-

courages him in his scheme of overturning the go-
vernment of Genoa, IlI. 373. Is protected by
Francis on the ruin of that conlpiracy, 392.
Vielleville, the French governor of Metz, deteas Father

Leonard's conspiracy to betray the city to the Impe-
rialifis, IV. 17o. Executes the conspirators, 171.
Vienna is besieged by Sultan Solyman the Magnificent,

lIl. 38.
1illalar, battle of, between Padilla and the Conde de

Haro, II. 231.
Fillena, marquis de, his spirited reply to the request of

the Emperor to lodge Bourbon in his palace, II. 320.
Ulm, the government of that city violently altered, and

its reformed ministers carried away in chains, by the
Emperor Charles V. I1t. 454.
United Provinces of the Netherlands, a brief view of

their revolt againit the dominion of Spain, IV. 333.
Urbino, restored by Pope Adrian to Francesco Maria

de Rovere, 11. 246.

W
Wallop, Sir John, joins the Emperor Charles V. at the

siege of Landrecy, with a body of Englilh troops,
III. 252.

VOL.IV. Ec Yar,

War, the method of carrying on, in Europe, how im.

proved at this period from the pracice of earlier
ages, II. 260. General reflections on the viciflitudes
of, IV. 302.
Wartburg, Martir Luther concealed there by the Elec-

tor of Saxony, II. 164.
tIentworth, Lord, governor of Calais, remonfirates in

vain with the English Privy Council to provide for
its security, IV. 264. Is attacked by the Duke of
Guise, and forced to capitulate, 266.
JWittemberg, inveRted by the Emperor Charles V. and

defended by Sybilla of Cleves, wife to the Ele&or
of Saxony, IlI. 407.
Wolfey, Cardinal, his rife, characer, and influence

over Henry VIII. of England, II. 95. Receives
a pension from Francis I. of France, 97. And from
the Emperor Charles V. 98. Detached from the
French interest by the latter, 99. Inclines Henry
to join the Emperor against Francis, i69. Sent by
Henry to Calais, to negociate an accommodation
between the Emperor and Francis, x80. Has an
interview with Charles at Bruges, and concludes a
league with him on the part of Henry, against
France, 182. Meditates revenge againit Charles
on his second disappointment of the Papacy by the
elecqion of Clement VII. 259. Obtains of Clement
a legantine commiflion in England for life, ib.
Negotiates a league with Francis against the Em.
peror, III. 3.
TAorms, a diet called there by Charles V. to check the

progress of the Reformers, II. 103. Proceedings
of, 161. Martin Luther cited before it, i62. Re-
fures to retrac his opinions, ib. An edit pub-
lifhed against him, 164. Diet at, opened, 11I.
288.
IVurtemburg, Ulric Duke of, why expelled his domi-

nions, 111. 85. Recovers his dominions by the
assistance of Francis King of France, and receives
the Protctant religion, 86.

sPyat, e r.

'MWyat, Sir Thomas, raises an infurreaton in Kent

against Queen Mary of England, on account of the
Spanish match, IV. i44. Is subdued and punilhed,
145.

X
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinand

of Aragon, in his dispute with the archduke Philip
concerning the regency of Castile, II. I. Espouses
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Castile on Phir
lip's death, 2 . Conquers Oran, and other places
in Barbary, for the crown of Castile, 23. Ap-
pointed regent of Castile, by Ferdinand's will, until
the arrival of Charles V. in Spain. 31. His rife
and chara&er, 32. Admits the claim to the regency
of Cardinal Adrian, sent with that commifion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with him, 34.
Takes the Infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under
his own eye, 35. Procures Charles, who assumed
the regal title, to be acknowledged by the Castilian
nobility, 37. Schemes to extend the regal preroga-
tive, ib. Depresses the nobility, 38. Frees the
king from the feudal limitations, and establishes a
regal army to check the Barons, 39. Supprefles a
mutiny headed by the grandees, 40. Resumes the
grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 41. His prudent
application of the revenue, 42. His bold assertion
of his authority to the discontented nobles, 43.
Other associates in the regency appointed at the
instigation of the Flemish courtiers, 44. Retains
the superior management, 45. Defeats John
D'Albret's invasion of Navarre, ib. Dismantles all
the catles there, except Pampeluna, which he
flrengthens, 46. The troops sent by him against
Barbarossa defeated, and his equanimity on that
occasion, 47. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemiih court, he persuades Charles to visit Spain,
48. Falls sick on his journey to meet Charles at
his arrival, 53. His letter of counfcl to Charles,

2 54-

V

.54. Requests an interview, ib. The ingratitude
of Charles to him, ib. His death, 55. His cha-
raaer, ib. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, ib.

Z
Zamora, bishop of, raises a regiment of priests to de-

fend Tordefillas, for the Holy Junta, which is forced
by the Conde de Haro, II, 225.
Zuinglius attacks the sale of Indulgences at Zurich in

Switzerland, II. 125.

F I N I S.
lbTAN]

E t ó~~~~~~~~~
