THE

HISTOR Y

OF THE

REIGN

OF TI { E

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BY

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the University ofEDINBURGH, and

HISTORIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for

SCOTLAND,

A NEW EDITION.

V OL U M E III.

VIENNA,

Printed for F. A. SCHREMBL, corner in the

Iiarnthner -Street, Nro. to53.

S7 8 7

,8 0%

I ,'

# BOOK V. General indignation excited against the Emperor. 1527.

THE

HISTOR Y

OF THE s

R E IGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.

General indignation excited against the Emperor. 1527.

THE account of the cruel manner in which
the Pope had been treated, filled all Europe
with astonishment or horror. To fee a Christian
Emperor, who , by pofleffing that dignity ,
ought to have been the protestor and advocate
of the holy fee, lay violent hands on him who
represented Christ on earth, and detain his fa-
cred person in a rigorous captivity, was confi-
dered as an impiety that merited the severest
vengeance, and which called for the immediate
interposition of every dutiful son of the church.
Francis and Henry, alarmed at the progress of
the Imperial arms in Italy, had, even before
the taking of Rome, entered into a closer alliance;

Hill, of Charl. V. Vol. III. A

and, in order to give some check to the Empe.
ror's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous
diverflon in the Low Countries. Thle force of
every motive, which had influenced them at
that time, wag now increased; and to these
were added the desire of rescuing the Pope out
of the Emperor's hands, a measure no less po-
litical, than it appeared to be pious. This,
however, rendered it necessary to abandon their
designs on the Low Countries, and to make
Italy the feat of war, as it was by vigorous
operations in that country they might promise
most certainly upon delivering Rome, and set-
ting Clement at liberty. Francis being now
sensible, that, in his system with regard to
the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an excess of
remissness, he had allowed Charles to attain
advantages which he might easily have prevent-
ed, was eager to make reparation for an error,
of which he was not often guilty, by an asti-
vity more faitable to his temper. Henry thought
his interposition necef'ary, in order to hinder
the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of
power, as would enable him, for the future,
to di&ate without controul to the other princes
of Europe. Wolsey, whom Fr'ancis had taken
care to secure by flattery and presents, the
certain methods of gaining his favour, neglefted
nothing that could incense his master against

the Emperor. Besides all there public confide.
rations , Henry was influenced by one of a
more private nature; having begun, about this
time, to form his great scheme of divorcing
Catherine of Aragon: towards the execution of
which he knew that the fan&tion of papal autho-
rity would be necessary, he was desirous to
acquire as much merit as possible with Clement,
by appearing to be the chief instrument of his
deliverance.

Confederacy against him. July lI. 1s27.

The negociation, between princes thus dif-

posed, was not tedious. Wolsey himself con-
dutted it, on the part of his sovereign, with
unbounded powers. Francis treated with him
in person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appear-
ed, and was received with royal magnificence.
A marriage between the duke of Orleans and
the princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of
the confederacy ; it was resolved that Italy should
be the theatre of war; the strength of the army
which should take the field, as well as the
contingent of troops or of money, which each
prince should furnish, were fettled; and if the
Emperor did not accept of the proposals they
were jointly to make him, they bound them-
selves immediately to declare war, and to begin
hoffilities. (Aug. I8.) Henry, who took every
resolution with impetuolty, entered to eagerly
into this new alliance, that, in order to give

A z

Francis the strongest proof of his friendship and
refpeft, he formally renounced the ancient claim
of theEnglifh monarchs to the crown of France,
which had long been the pride and ruin of the
nation; as a full compensation for which, he
accepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns ,
to be paid annually to himself and his successors. a)

The Florentines recover their freedom.

The Pope, being unable to fulfil the con-

ditions of his capitulation, still remained a pri-
foner under the severe custody of Alarcon. The
Florentines no sooner heard of what had hap-
pened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a
tumultuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di
Cortona, who governed their city in the Pope's
name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke
in pieces the statues of Leo and Clement; and,
declaring themselves a free fcate, reestablished
their ancient popular government. The Vene-
tians, taking advantage of the calamity of their
ally the Pope, faized Ravenna, and other pla-
ces belonging to the church, under pretext of
keeping them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino
and Ferrara laid hold likewise on part of the
spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
considered as irretrievably ruined. b)

a) Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Foed. 14. 0o3.

b) Guic. I. 8. 453.

The Imperial troops ina&ive.

Lannoy, on the other hand, laboured to

derive rome solid benefit from that unforeseen
event, which gave such splendor and fuperio-
rity to his mafter's arms. For this purpose he
marched to Rome together with Moncada, and
the marquis del Guaffo, at the head of all the
troops which they could assemble in the king-
dom of Naples. The arrival of this reinforce-
ment brought new calamities on the unhappy
citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their li-
cence, and with the utmost rapacity gathered
the gleanings, which had escaped the avarice
of the Spaniards and Germans. There was not
now any army in Italy capable of making head
against the Imperialists; and nothing more was
requisite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns
in the ecclesiastical state, than to have appeared
before them. But the soldiers having been so
long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an entire
relaxation of discipline; and having tasted the
sweets of living at discretion in a great city,
almost without the controul of a superior, were
Lecome so impatient of military subordination,
and so averse to service, that they refused to
leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to be impossible.
At the fame time, they declared, that they
would not obey any other person than the prince
of Orange, whom tho army had chosen general.

Lannoy, finding that it was no longer safe for
him to remain among licentious troops, who
despised his dignity, and hated his person, re-
turned, to Naples; soon after the marquis del
Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to quit
Rome for the fame reason. The prince of Orange,
a general only in name, and by the most pre-
carious of all tenures, the good-will of soldiers
whom success and licence had rendered capri-
cious, was obliged to pay more attention to
their humours, than they did to his commands.
Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping any of
the advantages which he might have expeted
from the reduction of Rome, had the mortifica-
tion to fee the most formidable body of troops
that he had everbroughtinto the field, continue
in a state of ina&ivity from which it was im-
possible to rouse them. c)

The French army marches into Italy. His operations, 1527.

This gave the King of France and the Ve-

netians leisure to form new schemes, and to
enter into new engagements for delivering the
Pope, and preserving the liberties of Italy.
The newly reffored republick of Florence very
imprudently joined with them, and Lautrec,
of whose abilities the Italians entertained a
much more favourable opinion than his own
master, was, in order to gratify them, appoint-

c) Guie. I, Jg. 454.

ed generaliflimo of the league. It was with
the utmost reluftance he undertook that office,
being unwilling to expose himself a second time
to the difficulties and disgraces, which the neg-
ligence of the King, or the malice of his favou-
rites, might bring upon him. The best troops
in France marched under his command; and the
King of England, though he had not yet de-
clared war against the Emperor, advanced a
considerable fum towards carrying on the ex-
pedition. Lautrec's first operations were pru-
dent, vigorous, and fixccefsful. By the afiiftance
of Andrew Doria, the ablest fea-officer of that
age, he rendered himself master of Genoa, and
reeitablifhed in that republick the faEtion of
the Fregofi, together with the dominion of France.
He obliged Alexandria to surrender after a short
siege, and reduced all the country on that fide
of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had to
long resifted the arms of his sovereign, by as-
fault, and plundered it with that cruelty, which
the memory of the fatal disaster that had befallen
the French nation before its walls naturally in-
spired. All the Milanese, which Antonio de
Leyva defended with a small body of troops,
kept together, and supported by his own ad-
dress and industry, must have soon submitted
to his power, if he had continued to bend the
force of his arms against that country. But
Lautrec durst nor complete a conquest which
would have been so honourable to himself, and

of such advantage to the league. Francis knew
his confederates to be more desirous of circum-
scribing the Imperial power in Italy, than of ac-
quiring new territories for him; and was afraid,
that if Sforza were once reestablished in Milan,
they would second but coldly the attack which he
intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this reason he inftru&edLautrec not to push
his operations with too much vigour in Lom-
bardy; and happily the importunities of the
Pope, and the folicitations of the Florentines,
the one for relief, and the other for prote&ion,
were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext
to march forward, without yielding to the in-
treaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who insisted
on his laying siege to Milan. d)

The Emperor sets the Pope at liberty. 1527.

While Lautrec advanced slowly towards Ro-

me, the Emperor had time to deliberate concerning
the disposal of the Pope's person, who still re-
mained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion,
with which he usually endeavoured to cover his
adions, Charles, in many instances, appears to
have been but little under the influence of reli-
gious considerations, and had frequently, on this
occasion, expressed an inclination to transport the
Pope into Spain, that he might indulge his am-

d) Guic. 1. '8. 47T. Bellay , 1o7. &c,. Mauroc. Hist. Venet.

lib. iii. 238.

bition with the fpeitacle of the two most illuitri-
ous personages in Europe fucceflively prisoners
in his court. But the fear of giving new offence
to all Christendom, and of filling his own sub-
je&s with horror, obliged him to forego that fa-
tisfa&ion. e) The progress of the confederates
made it now necefl'ary,either to set the Pope at
liberty, or to remove him to some place of con-
finement more secure than the castle of St.
Angelo. Many considerations induced him to
prefer the former, particularly his want of the
money, requisite as well for recruiting his army,
as for paying off the vast arrears due to it. In
order to obtain this, he had assembled (Feb. i x.)
the Cortes of Castile at Valladolid about the be-
ginning of the year, and having laid before them
the state of his affairs, and represented the ne-
ceflity of making great preparations to resist the
enemies, whom envy at the success which had
crowned his arms would unite againfi him, he
demanded a large supply in the most prefling
terms; but the Cortes, as the nation was al-
ready exhaufied by extraordinary donatives, re-
fused to load it with any new burden, and in
spite of all his endeavours to gain or to intimi-
date the members, perfified in this resolution. f)
No resource, therefore, remained, but the extort-
ing from Clement, by way of ransom, a fum
fufficient for discharging what was due to his

,e) Guic. .- IS. 457.
f) Sandov. i. p. 814.

troops, without which it was vain to mention
to them their leaving Rome.

Nor was the Pope inative on his part, or

his intrigues unfuccefsful towards hastening
such a treaty. By flattery, and the appearance
of unbounded .confidence, he disarmed the re-
fentment of Cardinal Colonna, and wrought
upon his vanity, which made him desirous of
fhewing the world, that as his power had at
first depressed the Pope, it could now raise him
to his former dignity. By favours and pro-
mises he gained Morone, who, by one of those
whimsical revolutions which occur so often in
his life, and which so strongly display his cha-
ra&er, had now recovered his credit and au-
thority with the Imperialists, The address and,
influence of two such men easily removed all
the obstacles which retarded an accommodation,
and brought the treaty for Clement's liberty to
a conclusion, upon conditions hard indeed, but
not more intolerable than a prince in his fitua-
tion had reason to expet. He was obliged
to advance, in ready money, an hundred thou-
sand crowns for the use of the army; to pay
the fame fum at the distance of a fortnight;
and, at the end of three months, an hundred
and fifty thousand more. He engaged not to
take part in the war against Charles, either in
Lombardy or in Naples; he granted him a cru-
zado, and the tenth of ecclesiastical revenues in
Spain; and he not only gave hostages, but put

the Emperor in poffeffion of several towns, as
a security for the performance of these arti-
cles g). Having raised the first moiety by a
sale of ecclesiastical dignities and benefices, and
other expedients equally uncanonical, a day was
fixed for delivering him from imprisonment.
(Dec. 6. 1527. ) But Clement, impatient to
be free, after a tedious confinement of fix
months, as well as full of the suspicion and
distrust natural to the unfortunate, was so much
afraid, -that the Imperialists might still throw
in obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he
disguised himself the preceding night in the
habit of a merchant, and Alarcon having re-
mitted somewhat of his vigilance upon the con-
clufion of the treaty, he made his escape un-
discovered. He arrived before next morning
at Orvieto, without any attendance but a single
officer; and from thence wrote a letter of thanks
to Lautrec, as the chief instrument of procuring
him liberty h).

Overtures of the Emperor to Francis and Henry.

During these tranfa&ions, the ambassadors

of France and England repaired to Spain , in
consequence of the treaty which Wolsey had
concluded with the French King. The Empe-
xor, unwilling to draw on himself the united

g) Guic. 1. ig. 467, &c.
h) Guic. 1. iS. 467, &c. Jov. Vit, Colon. 16p. Mauroc. Hist,

Venet. lib. iii, a,

forces of the two mbnarchs, discovered an in-
clination to relax somewhat the rigour of the
treaty of Madrid, to which, hitherto , he had
adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept of
the two millions of crowns, which Francis had
proposed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy
of Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty, on
condition that he would recall his army put of
Italy, and restore Genoa, together with the
other conquests which he had made in that
country. With regard to Sforza, he insisted
that his fate should be determined by the jud-
ges appointed to inquire into his crimes. The-
fe propositions being made to Henry, he tranf-
tnitted them to his ally the French King, whom
it more nearly concerned to examine, and to
answer them; and if Francis had been sincerely
iblicitous, either to conclude peace, or preserve
consistency in his own conduft, he ought in-
itantly to have closed with overtures which
differed but little from the propositions which
he himself had formerly made i). But his views
were now much changed; his alliance with
Henry, Lautrec's progress in Italy, and the
superiority of his army there above that of
tae Emperor, hardly left him room to doubt
of the success of his enterprize against Naples.
'Full of those sanguine hopes, he was at no
loss to find pretexts for rejecting or evading

i) I~ecuell des Trairte , 2. 249,

what the Emperor had proposed. Under the
appearance of Sympathy with Sforza, for who-
fe interests he had not hitherto difcoveredmuch
solicitude, he again demanded the full and un-
conditional reestablishment of that unfortunate
prince in his dominions. Under colour of its
being imprudent to rely on the Emperor's fin-
cerity, he insisted that his sons should be set
at liberty before the French troops left Italy,
or surrendered Genoa. The unreasonableness
of these demands, as well as the reproachful
insinuation with which they were accompanied,
irritated Charles to such a degree, that he could
hardly listen to them with patience; and re-
penting of his moderation, which had made to
little impreflion on his enemies, declared that
he would not depart in the smallest article from
the conditions which he had now offered.
Upon this the French and English ambassadors,
for Henry had been drawn unaccountably to
concur with Francis in these strange propofi-
tions, demanded and obtained their audience
of leave k).

They declare war against the Emperor. Francis challenges

the Emperor to single combat.

Next day,(Jan.22. 1528.) two heralds,who had

accompanied the ambassadors of purpose, though
they had hitherto concealed their charafter, having

k) Rym, 14. coo. Herbert, 85. Gaic. 1. ig. 471.

assumed the ensigns of their office, appeared in
the Emperor's court, and being admitted into
his presence, ,they, in the name of their re-
foecive masters, and with all the folemnities
customary on such occasions, denounced war
against him. Charles received both with a dig-
nity suitable to his own rank, but spoke to each
in a tone adapted to the sentiments which he
entertained of their sovereigns. He accepted
the defiance of the English monarch with a
firmness tempered by some degree of decency
and refpe&t. His reply to the French King
abounded with that acrimony of expression,
which personal rivalfhip, exasperated by the
memory of many injuries infli&ed as well as
fuffered, naturally suggests. He desired the
French herald to acquaint his sovereign, that
he would henceforth confider him not only as
a base violater of public faith, but as a itranger
to the honour and integrity becoming a gentle-
man. Francis, too high-fpirited to bear such
an imputation, had recourse to an uncommon
expedient in order to vindicate his chara&er.
He instantly sent back the herald with a cartel
of defiance, in which he gave the Emperor the
lie in form, challenged him to single combat,
requiring him to name the time and place of
the encounter, and the weapons with which
he chose to fight. Charles, as he was not in-
ferior to his rival in spirit or bravery, readily
accepted the challenge; but, after several mef-

figes concerning the arrangement of all the cir-
cumitances relative to the combat, accompanied
with mutual reproaches, bordering on the most
indecent scurrility, all thoughts of this duel,
more becoming the heroes of romance than the
two greatest monarchs of their age, were enti-
rely laid aside 1).

The effe& of this in promoting the cuftorn of duelling.

The example of two personages so illu-

firious drew such general attention, and car-
ried with it so much authority, that it had con-
fiderable influence in introducing an important
change in manners all over Europe. Duels, as
has already been observed, had long been per-
mitted by the laws of all the European nations,
and forming a part of their jurisprudence, were
authorized by the magifirate, on many occa-
fions, as the most proper method of terminat-
ing questions with regard to property, or of
deciding in those which refpe&ed crimes. But
tingle combats being considered as solemn ap-
peals to the omniscience and justice of the Su-
preme Being, they were allowed only in public
taufes, according to the prescription of law,
and carried on in a judicial form. Men accu-
ftomed to this manner of decision in courts of
justice, were naturally led to apply it to per-

1) Recmeil des Traitis, 2. Mem. de Bellay, io3, &c. San-

dov. Hit, i. 837.

fonal and private quarrels. Duels, which at
first could be appointed by the civil judge alone,
were fought without the interposition of his
authority, and in cafes to which the laws did
not extend. The tranfaFtion between Charles
and Francis strongly countenanced this praitice.
Upon every affront, or injury which seemed to
touch his honour, a gentleman thought him-
self entitled to draw his sword, and to call on
his adversary to make reparation. Such an
opinion introduced among men of fierce cou-
rage, of high spirit, and of rude manners, when
offence was often given, and revenge was al-
ways prompt, produced most fatal confequen-
ces. Much of the best blood in Christendom
' was shed ; many useful lives were sacrificed;
and, at some periods, war itself hath hardly
been more deftruftive than these contests of ho-
nour. So powerful, however, is the dominion
of fafhiion, that neither the terror of penal laws,
nor reverence for religion, have been able enti-
rely to abolish a pradice unknown among the
ancients, and not justifiable by any principle of
reason; though at the fame time it muff be ad-
mitted, that, to this absurd custom, we must
ascribe in some degree the extraordinary gentle-
ness and complaisance of modern manners, and
that refpeftful attention of one man to another,
which, at prefcnt, render the social intercourfes
of life far more agreeable and decent, than
among the most civilized nations of antiquity.

IRe-

Retreat of the Imperialists from Rome. February. 1528.

'While the two monarchs seemed to eager

to terminate their quarrel by a personal combat,
Lautrec continued his operations, which pro-
mifed to be more decisive. His army, which
was now increased to thirty-five thousand men,
advanced by great marches towards Naples. The
terror of their approach, as well as the remon-
i'rances and the entreaties of the prince of
Orange, prevailed at last on the Imperial troops,
though with difficulty, to quit Rome, of which
they had kept pofleflion during ten months. But
of that flourishing army which had entered the
city, scarcely one half remained; the reft, cut
off by the plague, or wailed by diseases, the
effeCts of their ina1-ivity, intemperance, and-
debauchery, fell viftims to their own crimes m).
Lautrec made the greatest efforts to attack them
in their r'etreat towards the Neapolitan territo-
ries, which would have finished the war at on3
blow. But the prudence of their leaders difap-
pointed all his measures, and conduLFed them.
with little loss to Naples. The people of that
kingdom, extremely impatient to shake off t!he
Spanish yoke, received the French with open
arms, wherever they appeared to take posies-
sion; and Gaeta and Naples excepted, hardly
any place of importance remained in the hands
of the Imperialists. The preservation of the

in) Guic. 1. xviii. 478.
Iit. of Charl. V. Vol. III.

former was owing to the itrength of its fortifi-
cations, that of the latter to the 'prefence of the
Imperial army.

French besiege Naples.

Lautrec, however, fat down before Naples;

but finding it vain to think'of reducing a city
fby force while defended by so many troops, he
was obliged to employ the flower, but less dan-
gerous method of blockade; and having taken
measures which appeared to him effetual, he
confidently assured his master, that famine would
soon compel the besieged to capitulate. These
hopes were irongly confirmed by the defeat of
a vigorous attempt made by the enemy in order
to recover the command of the Lea. The gal-
lies of Andrew Doria, under the command of
his nephew Philippino, guarded the mouth of
the harbour. Moncada, who had succeeded
Lanoy in the vice - royalty, rigged out a num-
ber of gallies superior to Doria's, manned them
with a chosen body of Spanish veterans, and
going on board himself, together with the mar-
quis del Guaffto, attacked Philippino before the
arrival of the Venetian and French fleets. But
he, by his superior skill in naval operations,
easily triumphed over the valour and number of
the Spaniards. The viceroy was killed, most
of his fleet deftroycd, and Guafto, with many
officers of diftin&ion, being taken prisoners,
were put on board the captive gallies, and sent

by Philippino, as trophies of his vi&ory to his
uncle n).

Circumstances which retard the progress of it.

Notwithstanding this flattering profpet of

filccefs, many circumstances concurred to fruf-
trate Lautrec's expe&ations. Clement, though
he always acknowledged his being indebted to
Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and of-
ten complained of the cruel treatment which he
had met with from the Emperor, was not in-
fluenced at this jun&ure by principles of grati-
tude, nor, which is more extraordinary, was
he swayed by the desire of revenge. His past
misfortunes rendered him more cautious than
ever, and his recolleftion of the errors which
he had committed, increased the natural irrefo-
lution of his mind. While he amused Francis
with promises , he secretly negociated with
Charles; and being solicitous, above all things,
to reestablish his family in Florence with their
ancient authority, which he could not expet
from Francis, who had entered into ftri& alliance
with the new republick, he leaned rather to the
fide of his enemy than to that of his benefa&or,
and gave Lautrec no assistance towards carrying
on his operations. The Venetians , viewing
with jealousy the progress of the French arms,
were intent only upon recovering such maritime

n) Guic, 1. xix, 487. P, Heuter. lib. x. c,. 2, p. 431

B a

towns in the" Neapolitan dominions as were to
be poffeffed by their republick, while they were
altogether careless about the redu&ion of Na-
pies, on which the success of the common cause
depended, o) The King of England, instead
of being able, as had been proje&ed, to em-
barrafs the Emperor by attacking his territories
in the Low Countries, found his fubjeats so
averse to an unnecessary war, which would
have ruined the trade of the nation, that in or-
der to silence their clamours, and put a stop to
the infurre&ions ready to break out among them,
he was compelled to conclude a truce for eight
months with the governess of the Netherlands. p)
Francis himself, with the fame unpardonable
inattention of which he had formerly been guil-
ty, and for which he had fuffered so severely,
negle&ed to make proper remittances to Lautree
for the support of his army q).

Revolt of Andrew Doria from France.

These unexpected events retarded the pro-

grefs of the French, discouraging both the ge-
neral and his troops; but the revolt of Andrew
Doria proved a fatal blow to all their measures.
That gallant officer, the citizen of a republick,
and trained up from his infancy in the fea-fer-
vice, retained the spirit of independence na.

o) Guic. 1. xix. 491.
p) Herbert 90. Reymer, 14, g5S.
q) Gujic. , xviii, 47 .

tural to the former, together with the plain li-
beral manners peculiar to the latter. A perfe&t
stranger to the arts of submission or flattery ne-
ceffary in courts, but conscious at the fame time
of his own merit and importance, he always
offered his advice with freedom, and often pre-
ferred his complaints and remonftrances with
boldness. The French ministers, unaccustomed
to such liberties, determined to ruin a man who
treated them with so little deference ; and
though Francis himself had a just sense of Do-
ria's services , as well as an high esteem for his
chara&er, the courtiers, by continually repre-
fenting him as a man haughty, intra&table, and
more solicitous to aggrandize himself, than to
promote the interest of France, gradually un-
lermined the foundations of his credit, and fil-
ded the King's mind with suspicion and distrust.
From thence proceeded several affronts and in-
dignities put upon Doria. His appointments
were not regularly paid; his advice even in
naval affairs, was often slighted; an attempt
was made. to seize the prisoners taken by
his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples ; all
which he bore with abundance of ll- hu-
mour. But an injury offered to his coun-
try, transported him beyond all bounds of
patience. The French began to fortify Savona,
to clear its harbour , and, removing thither
some branches of trade carried on at Genoa,
plainly fhewed that they intended to render

that town, long the objeft ofjealoufy and ha-
tred to the Genoese, their rival in wealth and
commerce. Doria animated with a patriotick
zeal for the honour and interest of his country,
remonstrated against this in the highest tone,
not without threats, if the measure were not
instantly abandoned. This bold ation, aggra-
vated by the malice of the courtiers, and placed
in the nr.oft odious light, irritated Francis to
such a degree, that he commanded Barbefieux,
whom he appointed admiral of the Levant, to
fail dire&tly to Genoa with the French fleet, to
arrest Doria and to seize his gallies. This rash
order, the execution of which could have been
secured only by the most profound secrecy, was
concealed with so little care, that Doria got ti-
rnely intelligence of it, and retired with all his
gallies to a place of safety. Guaflo, his pri-
foner, who" had long observed and fomented
his growing discontent, and had often allured
him by magnificent promises to enter into the
Emperor's service, laid hold on this favourable
opportunity. While his indignation and re-
fentment were at their height, he prevailed on
him to dispatch one of his officers to the Impe-
rial court with his overtures and demands. The
negociation was not long; Charles, fully fen-
fible of the importance of such an acquisition,
granted him whatever terms he required. Do-
ria sent back his commifflon , together with the
collar of St. Michael, to Francis, and hoisting the

Imperial colours , failed with all his gallies
towards Naples, not to block up the harbour
of that unhappy city as he had formerly engag-
ed, but to bring them protection and delive-

rance.

Wretched situation of the French army before Naples.

His arrival opened the communication

with the sea, and reffored plenty in Naples,
which was now reduced to the last extremity;
and the French, having loft their superiority
at Lea, were Loon reduced to great straits for
want of provisions. The pyince of Orange,
who succeeded the viceroy in the command of
the Imperial army, fhewed himself by his pru-
dent condut worthy of that honour which his
good fortune and the death of his generals had
twice acquired him. Beloved by the troops,
who remembering the prosperity which they
had enjoyed under his command, served him
with the utmost alacrity, he let flip no oppor-
tunity of harassing the enemy, and by conti-
nual alarms or sallies, fatigued and weakened
them r). As an addition to all there misfortunes,
the diseases common in that country during the
sultry months, began to break out among the
French troops. The prisoners communicated
to them the peftilenee which the Imperial army
had brought to Naples from Rome, and it raged
with fach violence, that few, either officers or

r) Jovii Hist lib. xxxvi. p. 31, &c. Sigonii Vita Doria, p.

"I39. Belay, 114, &c.

soldiers, escaped the infection. Of the whole
army, not four thousand men, a nomber hardly
fuflicient to defend the camp, were capable of
doing duty s); and being now besieged in their
turn, they fuffered all the miseries from which
the Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after
1Aruggling long with so many disappointments
and calamities, which preyed on his nfind at
the fame time that the pestilence wasted his
body , died, lamenting the negligence of his
sovereign, and the infidelity of his allies, to
which so many brave men h.d fallen viftims. t
By his death, and the. indisposition of the other
generals, the command devolved on the marquis
de Saluces, an officer altogether unequal to such
a trust.

Raise the siege.

He, with troops no less dispirited than reduc-

ed, retreated in disorder to Averfa; which town
being invefced by the prince of Orange, Saluces
was under the necessity of consenting, that he
himself should remain a prisoner of war, that
his troops should lay down their arms and co-
lours, give up their baggage, and march under
a guard to the frontiers of France. This igno-
minious capitulation, the wretched remains of
the French army were saved; and the Emperor,
by his own perseverance and the good condut

s) Beliay, 117 , &e.
t) P. Heuter. terum Autr. lib. c. 2. 231.

of his generals, acquired once more the fupe-
riority in Italy. u)

Geinoa recovers its liberty.

The lots of Genoa followed immediately

npon the ruin of the army in Naples. To de-
liver his country from the domihion of foreig-
ners was Doria's highest ambition, and had
been his principal inducement to quit the fervi-
ce of France, and enter into that of the Empe-
ror. A most favourable opportunity for execut-
ing this honourable enterprize now presented
itself. The city of Genoa, afflicted by the pes-
tilence, was almost deserted by its inhabitants;
the French garrison being neither regularly paid
nor recruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable
nomber; Doria's emissaries found that such of
the citizens as remained, being weary alike of
the French and Imperial yoke, the rigour of
which they had alternately felt, were ready to
welcome him as their deliverer, and to second
all his measures. Things wearing this promif-
ing afpe&t, he failed towards the coast of Ge-
noa; on his approach the French gallies retir-
ed ; a small body of men which he landed,
furprized one of the gates of Genoa in the
night-time; Trivulci, the French governor,
with his feeble garrison, shut himfelfup in the
citadel, and Doria took (Sept. I2. 1528.) pof-
fefilon of the town without bloodshed or refi-

'i) Lellay, Iz?, &c Jovii Hist. lib. xxv, xxvi,

stance. Want of provisions quickly obliged Tri-
vulci to capitulate; the people, eager to abolish
such an odious monument of their servitude , ran
together with a tumultuous violence, and level-
led the citadel with the ground.

Disinterested condu& of Doria.

It was now in Doria's power to have ren-

dered himself the sovereign of his country,
which he had so happily delivered from oppref-
sion. The fame of his former actions, the success
of his present attempt, the attachment of his
friends, the gratitude of his countrymen, to-
gether with the support of the Emperor, all
conspired to facilitate his attaining the supreme
authority, anld invited him to lay hold of it.
But with a magnanimity of which there are few
examples, he sacrificed all thoughts of aggran-
dizing himself to the virtuous fatisfa&ion of
establishing liberty in his country, the highest
obje&t at which ambition can aim. Having as-
fembled the whole body of the people in the
court before his palace, he assured them, that
the happiness of feeing them once more in pof-
session of freedom, was to him a full reward
for all his services; that, more delighted with
the name of citizen than of sovereign , he claim-
ed no pre-eminence or power above his
equals; but remitted entirely to them right of
fettling what form of government they would
now chufe to be established among them. The

people listened to him with tears of admiration
and of joy. Twelve persons were ele&ted to
new-model the constitution of the republick.
The influence of Doria's virtue and example
communicated itself to his countrymen ; the sac-
tions which had long torn and ruined the state,
seemed to be forgotten; prudent precautions
were taken to prevent their reviving; and the
fame form of government which had subsisted
with little variation since that time in Genoa,
was established with universal applause. Doria
lived to a great age, beloved, refpecled, and
honoured by his countrymen; and adhering uni-
formly to his profeffions of moderation, with-
out arrogating any thing unbecoming a private
citizen, he preserved a great ascendant over the
councils of the republick, which owed its being
to his generosity. The authority which he
poffeffed was more flattering, as well as more
fatisfa&tory, than that derived from sovereignty;
a dominion founded in love and in gratitude,
and upheld by veneration for his virtues not by
the dread of his power. His memory is hfill re-
verenced by the Genoese, and he is distinguish-
ed in their public monuments, and celebrated
in the works of their historians, by the most
honourable of all appellations, THE FATHER
OF HIS COUNTRY, AND THE RESTOR-
ER OF ITS LIBERTY x).

x) Guic. I. xix. p. 408. Sigonii Vita Doria,. p. 1146, Tovii

'lft lib, xx;vi. p. 36, &c.

Operation in the IMilanefe. 1529.

Francis, in order to recover the reputa-

tion of his arms, discredited by so many losses,
made new efforts in the Milanese. But the
Count of St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced
officer, to whom he gave the command, was
no match for Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of
the Imperial generals. He, by his superior
skill in war, checked, with a handful of men,
the brisk but ill-concerted motions of the French;
and though so infirm himself that he was car-
ried constantly in a litter, he surpassed them,
when occasion required, no less in activity than
in prudence. By an unexpefted march he fur-
prized, defeated, and took the Count of St.
Pol, ruining the French army in the Milanese
as intirely as the prince of Orange had ruined
that which besieged Naples. y)

Negociations between Charles and Francis.

Amidst these vigorous operations in the

field, each party discovered an impatient desire
of peace, and continual negociations were car-
ried on for that purpose. The French King dif-
couraged, arid almost exhausted by so many un-
fuccefsful enterprizes, was reduced now to think
of obtaining the release of his sons by concef-
fions, not by the terror of his arms. The Pope

y) Guic. I. xix. 520, P. Heuter Rer. Auftr. lib. x. '. 3. 3. p.

233. Mem. de Bellay, 121.

hoped to recover by a treaty whatever he had
loft in the war. The Emperor, notwithftand-
ing the advantages which he had gained, had
many reasons to make him wish for an accom-
modation. Soliman, having over-run Hungary,
was ready to break in upon the Austrian terri-
tories with the whole force of the East. The
Reformation gaining ground daily in Germany,
the princes who favoured it had entered into a
confederacy which Charles thought daingerous
to the tranquillity of the Empire. The Spani-
ards murmured at a war the weight of which
rested chiefly on them. The variety and ex-
tent of the Emperor's operations far exceeded
what his revenues could fapport: his success
hitherto had been owing chiefly to his own good
fortune, and to the abilities of his generals,
nor could he flatter Jhimfelf that they, with
troops destitute of every thing necessary, would
always triumph over enemies full in a condition
to renew their attacks. All parties, however,
were at equal pains to conceal, or to deffemble
their real sentiments. The Emperor, that his
inability to carry on the war might not be sus-
pe&ted, insisted on high terms in the tone of a
conqueror. The Pope, solicitous not to lose
his present allies, before he came to any agree-
ment with Charles, continued to make a thou-
sand protestations of fidelity to the former, \while
he privately negociat-ed with the latter. Francis,
afraid that his confederates might prevent him by

treating for themselves with the Emperor, had re-
course to many dishonourable artifices, in order to
turn their attention from the measures which he
was taking to adjust all differences with his rival.

In this situation of affairs, when all the con-

tending powers wished for peace, but durst not
venture too hastily on the iteps necessary for at-
taining it, two ladies undertook to procure this
blefling so much desired by all Europe. These
were Margaret of Austria, dowager of Savoy,
the Emperor's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mo-
ther. They agreed (May.) on an interview at Cam-
bray, and being lodged in two adjoining hou-
fes, between which a communication was open-
ed, met together without ceremony or obfer-
vation and held daily conferences, to which no
person whatever was admitted. As both were
profoundly skilled in business, thoroughly ac-
quainted with the secrets of their refpettive
courts, and poffeffed with perfe&t confidence in
each other, they soon made great progress to-
wards a final accommodation; and the ambaffa-
dors of all the confederates waited in anxious
suspense to know their fate, the determination
of which was entirely in their hands z).

Separate treaty between the Pope and Charles.

But whatever diligence they used to hasten

forward a general peace, the Pope had the ad-

z) P. Heuter. Rer Auftr. lib. x, c. 3, p. 133. Meem, de Bel-

lay, p. I~3,

dress and induafry to get theftart of his allies,
by concluding at Barcelona a particular treaty for
himself. (June 20.) The Emperor, impatient to
visit Italy in his way to Germany; and defironls
of reestablishing tranquillity in the one country,
before he attempted to compose the disorders
which abounded in the other, found it necessary
to secure at least one alliance among the Italian
states, on which he might depend. That with
Clement, who courted it with unwearied im-
portunity, seemed more proper than any other.
Charles being extremely solicitous to make some
reparation for the insults which he had offered
to the sacred chara&ter of the Pope, and to re-
deem past offences by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, nothwithftanding all his misfortunes, terms
more favourable than he could have expefted
after a continued series of success. Among
other articles, he engaged to restore all the
territories belonging to the ecclesiastical state;
to reestablish the dominion of the Medici in
Florence; to give his natural daughter in mar-
riage to Alexandre the head of that family; and
to put it in the Pope's power to decide concern-
ing the fate of Sforza , and the poffeifion of
the NMilanefe. In return for these ample con-
ceflions, Clement gave the Emperor the invefti-
ture of Naples without the reserve of any tri-
bute, but the present of a white steed, in ac-
knowledgment of his sovereignty; abfolued all
who had been concerned in assaulting and plun.

dering Rome, and permitted Charles and his
brother Ferdinand to levy the fourth of the ec-
clefiaftical revenues throughout their domi-
nions a).

Peace of Cambray between Charles and Francis. Auguit 5.152 9.

The account of this tranfa&ion quickened

the negociations at Cambray, and brought Mar-
garet and Louise to an immediate agreement. The
treaty of Madrid served as the bais of that which
they concluded; the latter being intended to miti-
gate the rigour of the former. The chief articles
were: That the Emperor t'hould not, for the pre-
sent, demand the restitution of Burgundy, referv-
ing , however, in full force, his rights and pre-
tensions to that dutchy; That Francis should pay
two millions of crowns as the ransom of his
sons, and, before they were set at liberty,
should restore such towns as he fill held in the
Milanese; That he should resign the sovereignty
of Slanders and of Artois; That he should re-
nounce all his pretensions to Naples, Milan, Ge--
noa, and every other place beyond the Alps;
That he should immediately consummate the
marriage concluded between him and the Em-
peror's sifter Eleonora. b)

Adventa-

a) Guic, 1. xix. 522.
b) P. Heater. Per. Altffr. lib. x, c, 3. p. 834. Sandov. Hil.

dIel' ih per, Ctri. V. ii, 8.

Advantageous for the Emperor.

Thus Francis, chiefly from.his impatience

to procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every
thing which had at first prompted him to take
arms , or which had induced him; by continu-
ing hostilities, during nine successive cam-
paigns, to protract the war to a length hardly
known in Europe before the establishment of
standing armies, and the imposition of exorbi-
tant taxes, became universal. The Emperor;
by this treaty, was rendered sole arbiter of
the fate of Italy; he delivered his territories
in the Netherlands from an ignominious badge
of fubje&ion; and after having baffled his rival
in the field, he prescribed to him the condi-
tions of peace: The different condut and fpi-
rit with which the two monarchs carried on
the operations of war , led naturally to fac!i
an iflue of it. Charles, inclined by temper,
as well as obliged by his situation, concerted
all his schemes with caution, pursued them
with perseverance, and observing circumstances
and events with attention, let none escape
that could be improved to advantage. Francis,
more enterprizing than steady, undertook great
designs with warmth, but executed them with
remissness; arid diverted by his pleasures, or
deceived by his favaurites, he often loft the
most promising opportunities of success. Nor
had the chara&er of the two rivals themselves
greater influence on the operations of the war,

Hilt. of Charl. V. Vol. IJ. C

than the opposite qualities of the generals whom
they employed. Among the Imperialists, valour
tempered with prudence; fertility of invention
aided by experience; discernment to penetrate
the designs of their enemies; a provident saga-
city in condu&ing their own measures; in a
word, all the talents, which form great com-
manders and ensure vifory, were conspicuous.
Among the French, these qualities were either
wanting, or the very reverse of them abound-
ed; nor could they boast of one man ( unless
we except Lautrec, who was always unfor-
tunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara,
Leyva, Guafo , the prince of Orange, and
:other leaders, whom Charles had to set in op-
position to them. Bourbon, Morone, Doria,
who by their abilities and condu& might have
been capable of balancing the superiority which
the Imperialists had acquired, were loft through
the careleflnefs of the King, and the malice or
injustice of his counsellors; and the most fatal
blows given to France during the progress of
the war, proceeded from the despair and re-
fentment of these three persons, who were
forced to abandon her service.

Dishonourable to Francis.

The hard conditions to which Francis was

obliged to submit were not the most affliting
circumstances to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all

Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary
for adjusting their interests, or afraid that what-
ever he claimed for them must have been p'ur-
chased by farther concessions on his own part,
he gave them up in a body; and without the
least provision in their behalf, left the Vene-
tians, the Florentines, the duke of Ferrara,
together with such of the Neapolitan barons as
had joined his army, to the mercy of the Em-
peror. They exclaimed loudly against this base
and perfidious a&ion, of which Francis himself
was so much ashamed, that, in order to avoid
the pain of hearing from their ambassadors the
reproaches which he justly merited, it was
some time before he would consent to allow
them an audience. Charles, on the other hand,
was attentive to the interest of every person
who had adhered to him; the rights of some
of his Flemish fubje&s, who had estates orpre-
tensions in France, were secured; one article
was inserted, obliging Francis to restore the
blood and memory of the Constable Bourbon,
and to grant his heirs the poffeflion of his lands
which had been forfeited; another, by which
indemnification was stipulated for those French
gentlemen who had accompanied Bourbon in
his exile. c) This condu&, laudable in itself,

C

c) Guic. 1. xix. p 55. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x. c. 4,

P. 235,

and placed in the most fitriking light by a com-
parison with that of Francis, gained Charles
as much esteem as the success of his arms had
acquired him glory.

Henry acquiesces in it,

Francis did not treat the King of England

with the fame negle&t as his other allies. He
communicated to him all the steps of his nego-
ciation at Cambray, and luckily found that mo-
narch in a situation which left him no choice,
but to approve implicitly of his measures, and
to concur with them.

His scheme of being divorced from his Queen.

Henry had been soliciting the Pope for

some time, in order to obtain a divorce from
Catharine of Aragon his Queen. Several moti-
ves combined in prompting the King to urge
his suit. As he was powerfully influenced at
some seasons by religious considerations, he
entertained many scruples concerning the legi-
timacy of his marriage with his brother's wi-
dow; his affections had long been estranged from
the Queen, who was older than himself, and
had loft all the charms which Che pofl'effed in
the earlier part of her life; he was passionate-
ly desirous of having male issue; Wolsey art-
fully fortified his scruples, and encouraged his
hopes, that he might widen the breach between

him and the Emperor, Catharine's nephew,
and, what was more forcible perhaps in its
operation than all these united, the King had
conceived a violent love for the celebrated Anne
Boleyn, a young lady of great beauty, and of
greater accomplishments, whom, as he found
it impossible to gain her on other terms, he de-
termined to raise to the throne. The Papal au-
thority had often been interposed to grant di-
vorces for reasons less specious than those which
Henry produced. When the matter was first
proposed to Clement, during his imprisonment
in the castle of St. Angelo, as his hopes of re-
covering liberty, depended entirely on the King
of England, and his ally of France, he express-
ed the warmest inclination to gratify him. But
no sooner was he Let free, than he discovered
other sentiments. Charles, who espoused the
protef&ion of his aunt with zeal inflamed by
resentment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand
with threats, which made a deep impreflion on
his timid reind; and allured him on the other
with those promises in favour of his family;
which he afterwards accomplished. Upon the
profpet of these, Clement not only forgot all
Lis obligations to Henry, but ventured to en-
danger the interest of the Romish religion in
England, and to run the rirque of alienating
that kingdom for ever from the obedience of the
Papal fee. After amusing Henry during two
years, with all the subtleties and chicane which

the court of Rome can so dexterously employ
to protra& or defeat any cause; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and deceit-
ful policy, the intricacies of which the Eng-
lifh hifftorians, to whom it properly belongs,
have found it no easy matter to trace and un-
ravel; he-, at last, recalled the powers of the
delegates, whom he had appointed to judge in
the point, avocated the cause to Rome, leaving
the King no other hope of obtaining a divorce,

- but from the personal decision of the Pope him-

self. As Clement was now in ftri& alliance
with the Emperor, who had purchased his
friendship by such exorbitant concession, Henry
despaired of procuring any fenience from the
former, but what was ditated by the latter,
His honour, however, and pafions concurred
in preventing him from relinquishing his scheme
of a divorce, which he determined to accom-
plifh by other means, and at any rate; and the
continuance of Francis's friendship being necef-
fary to counterbalance- the Emperor's power,
he, in order to secure that, not only offered
no remonftrances against the total neglet of
their allies, in the treaty of Cambray, but made
Francis the present of a large fum, as a
brotherly contribution towards the payment of
the ransom for his sons. d)

d) Herbert. Mem. de Bellay. p. i^,.

The Emperor visits Italy.

Meanwhile the Emperor landed (Aug. I2.

3529.) in .Italy with a numerous train of the Spa.
nifh nobility, and a considerable body of troops.
He left the government ofSpain during his absence,
to the Empress Ifabel[a. By his long residence
in that country, he had acquired such thorough
knowledge of the chara&er of the people, that he
could perfe&ly accommodate the maxims of his
government to their genius. He could even
assume, upon some occasions, such popular
manners, as gained wonderfully upon the Spa-
niards. A striking instance of his disposition to
gratify them had occurred a few days before he
embarked for Italy: He was to make his pu-
blick entry into the city of Barcelona; and some
doubts having arisen among the inhabitants,
whether they should receive him as Emperor,
or as Count of Barcelona; Charles inftarltly de-
cided in favour of the latter,: declaring that he
was more proud of that ancient title , than of
his Imperial crown. Soothed with this flatter-
ing exprefflion of his regard, the citizens wel-
comed him with acclamations of joy, and the
ifates of the province swore allegiance to his
son Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona.
A similar oath had been taken in all the king-
doms of Spain, with equal fatisfation. e)

e) Sandov. ii. p. 50. Ferrer, ix. xx6,

The Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors
from all the princes and states of that country
attended his c ourt, waiting to receive his de-
cifion with regard to their fate. At Genoa,
where he first landed, he was received with
the acclamations due to the protestor of their
liberties. Having honoured Doria with many
marks of diftin&ion, and bestowed on the re-
publick several new privileges, he proceeded
to Bologna, (Nov. 5. 1529.) the place fixed.
upon for his interview with the Pope. He
affefted to unite in his publick entry into that
city the state and majefly that suited an Empe-
ror, with the humility becoming an obedient
son of the church; and while at the head of
twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able to give
law to all Italy, he kneeled down to kiss the
feet of that very Pope, whom he had so lately
detained a prisoner. The Italians, after fuffer-
ing so much from the ferocity and licentious-
ness of his armies, and after having been long
accustomed to form in their imagination a piture
of Charles , which bore some resemblance to
that of the barbarous monarchs of the Goths
or Huns , who had formerly affli&ed their
country with like calamities , were furprized
to fee a prince of a graceful appearance, affable
and courteous in his department, of regular
manners, and of exemplary attention to all the

I:

offices of religion. f) They were still more
astonished when he fettled all the concerns of
the princes and states, which now depended
on him, with a degree of moderation and equi-
ty much b6yond what they had expe.ted.

His moderation and the motives of it.

Charles himself, when he set out from

Spain, far from intending to give any such ex-
traordinary proof of his felf-denial , seems to
have been resolved to avail himself to the ut-
most of the superiority which he had acquired
in Italy. But various circumiftances concurred
in pointing out the neceflity of pursuing a very
differenit course. The progress of the Turkish
Sultan, who, after over-running Hungary, had
penetrated into Austria, and laid siege (Sept. 13.
1529.) to Vienna with an army of an hundred
and fifty thousand men, loudly calling on him
to colle& his whole force to oppose that tor-
rent; and though the valour of the Germans,
the prudent condut of Ferdinand , together
with the treachery of the Vizier, soon (O&. 16.
1529.) obliged Solyman to abandon that enter-
prize with infamy and loss, the religious difor-
ders still growing in Germany made the Empe-
ror's presence highly necessary there: g) The
Florentines, instead of giving their consent to
the re-establishment of the Medici, which, by

f) Sandov. Hist. del. Emp. Carl. V. ii. 50. 53. Lc.
g) Sleidan, I. Guit. 1, x-:. 550.

the treaty of Barcelona , the Emperor had
bound himself to procure, were preparing to
defend their liberty by force of arms; the vast
preparations for his journey had involved him
in unusual expences; and on this, as well as
many other occaiion ., the multiplicity of his
affairs, together with the narrowness of his re-
venues, obliged him to contra&t his vaft.fche-
mes of ambition, and to forego present and cer-
tain advantages, that he might guard against
more remote but unavoidable dangers. Char-
les, from all these considerations, finding it
necessary to assume an air of moderation, ated
his part with a good grace. He admitted Sfor-
za into his presence, and not only gave him
a full pardon of all past offences , but granted
him the investiture of the dutchy, together
with his niece the King of Denmark's daughter
in marriage. He allowed the duke of Ferrara
to keep poffeffion of all his dominions, adjust-
ing the points in dispute between him and the
Pope with an impartiality not very agreeable to
the latter. He came to a final accommodation
with the Venetians, upon the reasonable con-
dition of their restoring whatever they had
usurped during the late war, either in the Nea-
politan or Papal territories. In return for so
many concessions, he exaded considerable furms
from each of the powers with whom he treat-
ed, which they paid without relu&ance, and
which afforded him the means of proceeding

on his journey towards Germany with a magni.
ficence suitable to his dignity. h)

Re-establishes the authority of the Medici in Florence.

These treaties, which restored tranquillity

to Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of
which had chiefly affefted that country, were
published at Bologna with great solemnity on
the first day of the year one thousand five hun-
dred and thirty, amidst the universal acclama-
tions of the people, applauding the Emperor,
to whose moderation and generosity they afcrib-
ed the blessings of peace which they had so
long desired. The Florentines alone did not
partake of this general joy. Animated with a
zeal for liberty more laudable than prudent,
they determined to oppose the restoration of the
Medici. The Imperial army had already enter-
ed their territories, and formed the siege of
their capital. But though deserted by all their
allies, and left without any hope of succour,
they defended themselves many months with
an obstinate valour Worthy of better success;
and even when they surrendered, they obtain-
ed a capitulation which gave them hopes of
securing some remains of their liberty. But
the Emperor, from his desire to gratify the
Pope, frufirated all their expectations, and abo-
lifhing their ancient form of government, raif-

h) Sandov. ii. 55. &c.

ed Alexander di Medici to the fame absolute
dominion over that itate, which his family
have retained to the present times. Philibert de
Chalons, prince of Orange, the Imperial gene-
ral, was killed during this siege. His estate
and titles descended to his sifter Claude de Cha-
lons , who was married to Rene, count of
Naflau, and she transmitted to her posterity of
the house of Nassau the title of Princes of Orange,
which they have rendered to illustrious. i)

State of affairs, civil and religious, in Germany.

After the publication of the peace at Bo-

logna, and the ceremony of his coronation as
King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans,
(Febr. 22. and 24. 1530.) which the Pope
performed with the accustomed formalities,
nothing detained Charles in Italy; k) and he
began to prepare for his journey to Germany.
His presence became every day more necessary
in that country, and was solicited with equal
importunity by the catholicks and by the fa-
vourers of the new do&trines. During that long
interval of tranquillity, which the absence of
the Emperor, the contests between him and the
Pope, and his attention to the war with Fran-
ce, afforded them, the latter had gained much

i) Guic. I. xx. p. 341. &c. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. ii. c.

4. P. 236.

k) H. Cornel.l Agrippa de duplici Coronatibne Car. V. ap-

Scard. ii. 266.

ground. Most of the princes , who had em-
braced Luther's opinions, had not only efta-
blifhed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romish church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their conduft. Almost
one half of the Germanick body had revolted
from the Papal fee; and its dominion, even in
that part which had not hitherto shaken off the
yoke, was considerably weakened by the ex-
ample of the neighbouring states, or by the
secret progress of those doatrines which had
undermined it among them. Whatever fatis-
faaion the Emperor, while he was at open
enmity with the fee of Rome, might have feti
in those events that tended to mortify and em-
barrafs the Pope, he could not help perceiving
now, that the religious divisions in Germany
would, in. the end, prove extremely hurtful
to the Imperial authority. The weakness of
former Emperors had fuffered the great vassals
of the empire to make such fueaccefsful encroach-
ments upon their power and prerogative, that
during the whole course of a war, which had
often required the exertion'of his utmost strength,
Charles hardly drew any effectual aid from
Germany, and found that magnificent titles or
obsolete pretensions were almost the only ad-
vantages which he had gained by swaying the
Imperial sceptre. He now became fully fen-
fible, that if he did not recover in some degree

the prerogatives which his predecessors had
loft, and acquire the authority, as well as
possess the name, of head of the Empire, his
high dignity would contribute more to obftru&
than to promote his ambitious schemes. No-
thing, he saw, was more eflential towards at-
taining this, than to suppress opinions which
might form new bonds of confederacy among
the princes of the Empire, and unite them by
ties stronger and more sacred than any political
connection. Nothing seemed to lead more cer-
tainly to the accomplishment of his design, than
to employ zeal for the established religion, of
which he was the natural prote&or, as the
instrument of extending his civil authority.

Proceedings of the Diet at Spires, March 15. 1529.

Accordingly, a profpet no sooner opened

of coming to an accommodation with the Pope,
than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of
the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take
into consideration the state of religion. The
decree of the diet assembled there in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft
of Christendom. The greatest delicacy of ad-
dress, however, was. requisite in proceeding
to afny decision more rigorous. The minds of
men kept in perpetual agitation by a controversy
carried on, during twelve years, without in-

termiffion of debate, or abatement of zeal, were
now inflamed to an high degree. They were
accuffomed to innovations, and saw the boldest
of them fuccefsful. Having not only abolished
old rights, but substituted new forms in their
place, they were influenced as much by at-
tachment to the system which they had em-
braced, as by aversion to that which they had
abandoned. Luther himself, of a spirit not to
be worn out by the length and obstinacy of the
combat, or to become remiss upon success, con-
tinued the attack with as much vigour as he
had begun it. His disciples, of whom many
equalled him in zeal, and some surpassed him in
learning, were no less capable than their master
to condu&t the controversy in the propereft
manner. Many of the laity, some even of the
princes, trained up amidst there incessant dif-
putations, and in the habit of listening to the
arguments of the contending parties, who al-
ternately appealed to them as judges, came to
be profoundly skilled in all the questions which
were agitated, and, upon occasion, could shew
themselves not inexpert in any of the arts with
which these theological encounters were man-
aged. It was obvious from all there circum-
stances, that any violent decision of the diet
must have immediately precipitated matters into
confusion, and have kindled in Germany the
flames of a religious war. All, therefore,
that the Archduke, and the other commilffioners

appointed by the Emperor, demanded of the
diet, 'was, to enjoin those states of the Em-
pire which had hitherto obeyed the decree if-
sued againift Luther at Worms, in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-four, to per-
severe in the observation of it; and to prohibit
the other states from attempting any farther
innovation in religion, particularly from abo-
lifhing the Mass, before the meeting of a gene-
ral council. After much dispute, a decree to
that effe& was approved bs by a majority of
voices. 1)

The followers Luther protest against them.

The Eleftbr of Saxony, the marquis of

Brandenburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the du-
kes of Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, to-
gether with the deputies of fourteen Imperial
or free cities, m) entered a solemn protest
(April x9, 1530.) against this decree, as un-
just and impious. On that occount they were
distinguished by the name of PROTESTANTS n),
an appellation which hath since become better
known, and more honourable, by its being ap-

plied

i) Sleid. Hist. 117.

- m) The foarteen cities were Strafburgh, Nuremberg, Ulna,

Constance, Reutlingen, Windfheim , Meiningen, Lindaw,
Kempten, Hailbron, Ifna, Weiffenburgh, Nordlingen, and
St. Gal.

a) Sleid. Hil. 119. F. Paul. Hist. p. 45. Seckend. ii. i^7.

plied indiscriminately to all the fe&s, of what-
ever denomination, which have revolted from
the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this decla-
ration of their descent from the decree of the
diet, the Proteffants sent ambassadors into Italy;
to lay their grievances before the Emperor,
from whom they met with the most difcourag-
ing reception.

Deliberation of the Pope and Emperor.

Charles was at that time in close union with

the Pope, and solicitous to attach him invio-
lably to his interest. During their long refid-
ence at Bologna, they held many consultations
concerning the most effe&ual means of extir-
pating the herefies which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and timid
mind the .proposal .of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond what Popes, the con-
ftant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to dissuade the Em-
peror from consenting to that measure. He re-
presented general councils as fa&ious, ungovern-
able, perfumptuous, formidable to civil autho-
rity, and too flow in their. operations to reme-
dy disorders which required an immediate cure.
Experience, he said, had now taught both the
Emperor and himself, that forbearance and le-
nity exasperated the spirit of innovation, which
they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous me-

Hilt. of Chart V. Vol. III D

,bb
 _ rn i, tr lrT rqliT '-:111r rlm

thods which itich a desperate chfe rquired;
Leo's sentence of excommunication, together
with the decree of the diet at Worms, tfhould
be carried into execution, and it was incumb-
ent on the Emperor to ermploy his whole pow-
er, in order to overawe those, on whom. the
reverence due either to ecclesiastical or pivilau-
thority had no longer any influence. Charles ;
whose views were very different from the Po-
pe's, and who became daily more sensible how
obstinate and deep-rooted the evil was, thought
of reconciling the Protestants by means less vio-
lent, and considered the convocation of a coun-
cil as no improper expedient for that purpose;
but promised, if gentler aits failed of success,
that then he would exert himself with rigour to
reduce those stubborn enemies of the Catholick
faith. 6)

The Emperor prefeut at the Diet of Augfbhrgh, March. 22. 15So.

Such were the sentiments with which the

Emperor set out for Germany, having already
appointed a diet of the Empire to be held at
Augfburgh. In his journey towards that city ,
he had many opportunities of observing the dif-
position of the Germans with regard to the points
in controversy, and found their minds every
where so much irritated arid inflamed, as con-

o) F. Paul, xlvii. Seck. 1. ii. i42. Hiti. de la Confefl" d'Auxbourgh.

par D. Chrytreus, 4to. Antw. 157. p. 6.

vinced him, that nothing teiiding to severity or
rigour. ought to be attempted; until all other
imeafures ,proved ineffe&tual He made his pli-
blick entry into Augfbuirgh (June I g1330.)
Wvith extraordinary pomp; and found there such
a full assembly of the membres of the diet, as
was suitable. both .to the importance of the as-
fairs which were to come under their confider-
ation, and to the honour of an Emperor, whb,
After long . absence, returned- to them crowned
ivith reputation and success. His presence seems
to have communicated to all parties an unusual
spirit of moderation and desire of peace. The
Eletor of Saxony would not permiit Luther to
accompany him to the diet, left he should of-
fend the Emperor by bringing into his presence
a person excommunicated by the Pope, and the
author of* all those diffentions which it now
appeared so difficult to compose. At the Em-
peror's desire, all the Proteflant princes forbad
the divines who accompanied them, to preach
in publick during their residence at Augfburgh.
For the fame reason they employed Melan&hon
the man of the greatest learning, as wbll as of
the most pacifick and gentle spirit among the
Reformers, to draw up a confeffioh of their
faith, expressed in terms as little offenfive to
the Romanr Catholicks, as a regard for truth
would permit.

D 2

: =

_ _ . . .

The confeflion of Augfburgh.

Melanc&hon, who fqldom fuffered the ran-

tour of controversy to envenom his style, even
in writings purely polemical, executed a task
I'o agreeable to his natural disposition with great
moderation and success. The Creed which he
composed, known by the name of the Confef-
sion of Augsburg, from the place where it wac
presented, was read publicklyin the diet. Some
Popish divines were appointed to examine it;
they brought in their animadverfions; a dispute
ensued between them and Melan&hon, second-
ed by some of his brethren ; but though Me-
lan&hon softened some articles, made concef-
fions with regard to others, and put the least
exceptionable sense upon all; though the Em-
peror himself laboured with great earnefhnefs to
reconcile the contending parties; so many
marks of diftin&ion were now established, and
such insuperable barriers placed between the
two churches, that all hopes of bringing about
a coalition seemed utterly defparate. p)

From the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been ib unfuccefsful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find
them, how desirous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor, more dif-
posed than the former to renounce their opini-

p) Seckend. lib. ii. 159. &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales Evangelici

ap. Herm. Von der Hard. HisT. Liter. Reform. 1717. fol,

p. 159.

ons. At that time, zeal for religion took pas-
session of the minds of men, to a degree which
can scarcely be conceived by those who live in
an age when the pafions excited by the first
manifefration of truth, and the first recovery of
liberty, have in a great measure ceased to ope-
rate. This zeal was then of such strength as
to overcome attachment to their political in-
terest, which is commonly the predominant
motive among princes. The Eleftor of Saxony,
the Landgrave of Hesse, and other chiefs of the
Protestants, though solicited separately by the
Emperor, and allured by' the promise or profpe&
of those advantages which it was known they
were most solicitous to attain, refused, with a
fortitude highly worthy of imitation, to aban-
don what they deemed the cause of God, for
the fake of any earthly acquisition. q)

Severe decree againfr the Protestants.

Every scheme in order to gain or difinite

the Protestant party proving abortive, nothing
now remained for the Emperor but to take some
vigorous measures towards asserting the dotri-
nes and authority of the established church.
These , Campeggio, the papal nuncio , had
always recommended as the only proper and
effeftual course of dealing with such obstinate
hereticks. In compliance with his opinions and

q) Sleid. 132. Scultet. Annal. 15.

reinonftrances, the diet issued (Nov. I9.) a
degcrie, condemning most of the peculiar tenets
held by the Protegants; forbidding any person
to prote& or tolerate such as taught them; en-
joining a ftri& observance of the established rites;
and prohibiting any further innovation under
severe penalties, All orderis of men were re-
q ired ,to ~tfift with their persons and fortunes
in carrying this decree into execution; and fuchs
as refused to obey it, were declared incapable
0f afing as judges, or of appearing as parties
Itn the Imperial chamber, the supreme court of
judicature in the Empire. To all which was
fubjbined a promise, that an appellation should.
he made tO the Pgpe, requiring him to call a
general council within fix months, in order to'
terminate all controversies by its sovereign de-
cifions. r)

They enter into a league at Smalkalde.

The severity of this decree, which they

considered as a prelude to the most violent per-
fecution, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced
them that the Emperor was resolved on their
deftrution. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the
feeble spirit of Melan&hon ; and, as if the
cause had already been desperate, he gave up
himself to. melancholy and lamentation. But

;) Sleid. 739-

Luther, who during the meeting of the diet
had endeavoured to confirm and animate his
party by several treatises which he. addressed to
th,em., was not disconcerted or difrnayed

at* the

profpeft, of this new danger. He comforted
IMelan&thon and, his other defpanding disciples,
and exhorted, th.e princes not to abandon those
truths which they had lately asserted with fach
lagudale boldness. s) His exhortations, made the
deeper impression upon them, as they were
greatly. alarmed at that time by the account of
a cpmbination among the PopiCh princes of-the
trapire. for the. maintenance of the established
religio,, towhiph Charles himself had acceded, t)
This convinced therm that it was necefl:ary to
tandk on their,guard,; and.that their own safety,_
is wpil as the success of-their cause., depended
on union. Filled with this. dread, of the adverf.
)arty, and,with these fentimnents concerning the
conduat proper for themselves, they.arfembled
it Smalkalde. There they concluded. (Decem. 22.
S53 o,) a league of mutual.defence against all ag-
greffors, u). by which they formed the Protestant
states. of the, Empire into one regular.body, and
beginning already to confider themselves as
fach, they resolved to apply to the Kings of
France and England., and to implore them to
patronize and assist their new confederacy.

s) Seek. ii. ISo. Sleid, 149.
t) Seck. ii. 2oo. iii. I1,
u) Sleid. Hilt. 142.

The Emperor proposes to have his brother ele.ed king of the

Romans.

An affair not conne&ed with religion far-

nifhed them with a pretence for courting the
aid of foreign princes. Charles, whose ambi-
tious views enlarged in proportion to the in-
crease of his power and grandeur, had formed
a scheme of continuing the Imperial crown in
his family, by procuring his brother Ferdinand
to be ele&ed King of the Romans. The pre-
sent jun&ure was favourable for the execution
of that design. The Emperor's arms had beei
every where viftorious; he had given law tb
all Europe at the late peace ; no rival nov
remained in a condition to balance or to con-
troul him; and the Ele&ors, dazzled with th
splendour of his success, or overawed by the
greatness of his power, durst scarcely dispute
the will of a prince, whose folicitations carriel
with them the authority of commands, Nor dir
he want plausible reasons to enforce the measure
The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said obligee
him to be often absent from Germany ; the
growing disorders occasioned by the controver-
fies about religion, as well as the formidable
neighbourhood of the Turks, who continually
threatened to break in with their desolating armies
into the heart of the Empire , required the
constant pretence of a prince endowed with
prudence capable of composing the former, and
with power as well as valour fufficient to repel

the latter. His brother Ferdinand poffeffed these
qualities in an eminent degree; by residing long
in Germany, he had acquired a thorough know-
ledge of their constitution and manners; having
been present almost from the first rife of their
religious dissensions, he knew what remedies
were most proper, what they could bear, and
how to apply them; as his own dominions lay
on the Turkish frontier, he was the natural
defender of Germany against the invaflons of
the Infidels, being prompted by interest no less
than he would be bound in duty to oppose them.

The Protefltants averse to it.

These arguments made little impression on

the Protestants. Experience taught them, that
nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progres of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness of the reins of govern-
ment which these occasioned ; after deriving such
advantages from a state of anarchy, they were
extremely unwilling to give themselves a new
and a fixed master. They perceived clearly the
extent of Charles's ambition. that he aimed at ren-
dering the Imperial crown hereditary in his fa-
mily, and would of course establish in the Empire
an abfolnte dominion, to which eleftive princes
could not have aspired with equal facility. They
determined therefore to oppose Ferdinand's elec-
tion with the utmost vigour, and to rouse their

countrymen, by their example and exhortations,
to withstand this encroachment on their liberties.
The Ele&or of. Saxony, accordingly, not only
refused to be present at the eleforal college,
wbiBc the Emperor.fummoned.to meet (January

. I53x-) at Cologne, bat inftruaed biseldeft
son to appear there, and. to. proteit again ft the
elehion as informal, illegal, contrary to the
articles of the. golden bull, and subversive of the
liberties of the Empire.

lie is cholen.

But the other Ele&ors, whom Charles had

been at great pains to gain, without regarding
either'his absence or protest chose Ferdinand King
of .the Romans; who a few days after was crowri-
ed at Aix- la- Chapelle x.)

Negociations of the Protestants which France.

When the Protestants, who were assembled

a second time at Smalkalde, received an account
of-this tranfa&ion, and heard, at the fame time,
that prosecutions were commenced, in the Impe-
rial chambei, against some of their number, on
account of their religious principles , they thought
it necessary , not only to renew their former
confederacy, but immediately to dispatch their am-
baffadors (Feb. 29. 153 .) into France and Eng-

x) Sleid. 14z. Seek. iii. I. P. Heater. Rer. Auftr. lib. x.

c. 6. p. '24o.

land. Francis had observed, with all the jea-
lousy of a rival, the reputation which the Em-
peror had acquired by his seeming disinterested-
ness and moderation in fettling the affairs of
Italy; and beheld with great concern the fuc-
cefsftrl step which he had taken towards per-
petuating and extending his authority in Ger-
many by the eleEtion ofa King of the Romans.
Nothing, however, would have been more im-
politick than to precipitate his kingdom into a
new War when exhausted by extiaordinary es-
forts, and 'difcouraged by ill success, befpre it
had got time to recruit its strength, or tq forget
past misfortunes. As no provocation had, been
given and hardly a pretext had been afforded
him, he could not violate a treaty of peace which
he himself had so lately solicited, without for-
feiting the esteem of all Europe, and being de-
tested as a prince void of probity and honour.
He observed, with great joy, powerful faftions
beginning to form in the Empite; he listened with
the utmost eagerness to the complaints of the
Protestant princes; and without seeming to coun-
terience their religious opinions, determinectfe-
cretly to cherish those sparks of political discord
which might be afterwards kindled into a flame.
For' this purpose, he sent William de Bellay,
one of the ablest negociators in France, into Ger-
many, who visiting the courts of the malcontent
princes, and heightening their ill humour by
various arts, concluded an alliance between

them and his matler y) which though concealed
at that time, and produ&ive of no. immediate es-
fecs, laid the foundation of an union fatal on"
many occasions to Charles's ambitious projeAs ;
and fhewed the discontented princes of Germany,
where, for the futu.re, they might find a pro-
te&or no less. able than willing to undertakq
their defence against the encroachments. of the
Emperor.

With Enrgla nd.

The King of England, highly incenfecdagainfT

Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope
had long retarded, and now openly oppoCed his
divorce, was no less disposed than Francis to
firengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite
projet of the divorce led him into fach a laby-
rinth of schemes and negociations , and he was,
at the fame time, so intent on abolishing the
papal jurifdi&ion in England, that he had no
leisure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to
reft satisfied with giving general promises, toge-
ther with a small supply in money to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde. z)

Charles courts the Protestants.

Meanwhile, many circumstances convinced

Charles that this was not a junfture when the,

y) Bellay, ea , a 130. b. Sec. iii. 14.
z) Herbert, 152. 154.

extirpation of heresy bwas to be attempted by vio-
letice and rigour; that, in compliance with the
Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
with inprudent precipitation; and that, it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into one
united and vigorous body, than to devide and
enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants, al-
ready confidbrable as well by their numbei's as
by their zeal, had acquired additional weight and
importance by their joining in that confederacy
into which the rash fieps taken at Augfburgh had.
forced them. Having now discovered their own
ftrergth, they despised the deciflons of the Iinpe-
rial chamber; and being secure of foreign pro-
te&Cion, were ready to set the head of the Emipire
at defiance. At the fame time the peace with
France was precarious, the frieindfhip of an irre-
solute and interested pontiff was not to be relied
on; and Solyman, in order to repair the infamy
and loss which his arins had sustained in the for-
mer campaign, was preparing to enter Austria
with more numerous forces. On all these ac-
counts, especially the last, a speedy accommoda-
tion with the malcontent princes became necet-
fary, not only for the accomplishment of his fu-
ture schemes , but for ascertaining his present
safety.

Grands them favourable terms.

Negociations were, accordingly, carried

on by his dire&ion with the Ele.tor of Saxony

by tieir jealousy of the Emperor; and of each
other, after Intiumerable difficulties ari-ing from
the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which
cahnot admit of being altered, modified, or re-
linquifhed iii the fame manner as pbints of poli-
tical interest, terms of pacification were agreed
(Jly 23.- 53i:) upon atNuremberg, afd ratifi-
ed solemnly (August 3.) in the Diet at Ratiiboni.

In this treaty it. was stipulated: That ini-

versal peace be efftabliChed in Germany, until
the meeting of a general council, the convoca-
tion of vhich within fix months fthe Emperor
shall endeavour to procure; That no person be
molested bn account of religion ; That a flop be
put to all processes begun by the Imperial chim-
ber against proteihants, and the sentence aliready
passed to their detriment be declared void. On
their part, the Protestants engaged to assist the
Emperor with all their forces in resisting the
invasion of the Turks. a) Thus by their firm-
ness in adhering to their prihciples, by the una-
nimity with which they urged all their claims,
and by their dexterity in availing themselves of
the Emperor's situation, the Protestants obtained
terms which amounted almost to a toleration of
their religion; all the concessions were inade
by Charles, none by them; even the favourite
point of their approving his brother's ele&ion
was not mentioned; and the Protestants of Ger-

a) Dumont Corps Diplomatiqne, tom. iv. part ii. 87. gp.

many, who had hitherto been viewed only as
a religiops se&t, came henceforth to be confidere4
as a political body of no fminall consequence. b)

Campaign in Hungary.

The intellingence which Charles received

of Solyman's having entered Hungary at the
h1ead of three hundred thousand men, cut short
the deliberations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the
contingent both of troops and money, which
each prince was to furnish towards the defence
of the Empire, having been already fettled.
The Protestants, as a testimony of their gra-
titude to the Emperor, exerted themselves
which extraordinary zeal, and brought into the
field with forces which exceeded in number the
quota imposed on them; the Catholicks imitat-
ing their example, one of the greatest and
best appointed armies that had ever been levied
in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Being
joined by a body of Spanish and Italian vete-
rans under the marquis del Guafto; by some
heavy-armed cavalry from the Low Countries,
and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised
in Bohemia, Austria, and his other territories;
it amounted in all to ninety thousand disciplined
foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a
prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast
army, worthy the first prince in Christendom,
the Emperor took the command in person; and

b) Sleid. 149, &c. Seck. i ir.

mankind waited in fafpence the iffae of a dec-
five battle between the two greatest monarchs
in the world. But each of them dreading the
other's power and good fortune, they both
condu&ed their operations with such exceflive
caution, that a campaign, for - which such im-
mense preparations had been made , ended
without any memohable event. Soly man, htiding
it impossible to gain ground upon an enemy always
attentive and on his guard, marched back to
Constantinople towards the end of autumn.
(Septemb. and Oftob.) c) It is rerharkable, that
in such a martial age, when every gentleman was
a soldier, and every prince a general, this was the
first time that Charles, who had already carried on
such extensive wars , and gained so many
vi.tories, appeared at the head of his troops,
In this first essay of his arms, to have opposed
such a leader as Solyman, was no small ho-
nour; to have obliged him to retreat i merited
very considerable praise.

About the beginning of this campaign, (Aug.

16. 1532. ) the Ele&tors of Saxony died, aud was
succeeded bv his son John Frederick. The Refor-
mation rather gained than loft by that event; the
new Eletor, no less attached than his predecef-
fors to the opinions of Luther, occupied the flation
which they had held at the head of the Protef-

tant

e) Jovii Hill. lib. xxx. p. Ioo, &c. Barre H-lift, de I'Empire ,

i. 8. 347.

tant party, and defended, vith the boldness
and zeal of youth, that cause which ' they had
fostered and reared with the caution of old age.

The Emperor's interview with the Pope in his w'ay to Spain.

Immedia/tely after the retreat of the Turks,

Charles, imn atient to revisit Spain, set out on
his way thitper, for Italy. As he was extre-
mely desirous of an interview with the Popie,
they met a second time at Bologna, with the
fame external demonstrations .of refpe&t and.
friendship, but with little of that confidence
which had fabfifted between them during their
late negociations there. Clement was much
diffatisfied with (he Emperor's proceedings at
Augfburgh; his-conceffions with regard to the
speedy convocation of a council, having more
than cancelled all the merit of the severe decree
against the do&rines of the Reformers. The
toleration granted to the Protestants at Ratisbon,
and the more explicit promise concerning a
council, with which it was accompanied, had
irritated him still ifarther.

Negociations concerning a general council;

Charles, however, partly from convi&ion,

that the meeting of a council would be attended
with salutary effefts, and partly from his desire to
please the Germans, having solicited him by his
ambassadors to call that assembly without delay,
and now urging the fame thing in person, Cement

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. E

was greatly embarrassed what reply he should
mIake to a request, which it was indecent to refuse,
and dangerous to grant. He endeavoured at
arit to divert Charles from the measure: but,
finding him inflexible he had recourse to ari
tifices which he knew would delay if not en-
tirely defeat, the calling of that assembly.
Under the plausible pretext of its being previ-
ouflv necessary to fettle, with all parties con-
cerned, the place of the council's meeting; the
manner of its proceedings; the right of the
persons who should be admitted to vote; and
the authority of their decisions; he dispatched
a nuncio accompanied by an ambassador from
the Emperor, to the Eletor of Saxony as head
of the Protestants. With regard to each of thefre
articles, inextricable difficulties and contests
arose. The Protestants demanded a council to
be held in Germany; the Pope iififted that it
should meet in Italy: They contended, that
all points in dispute should be determined by
the words of holy scripture alone; he confi-
dered not only the decrees of the church, but
the opinions of fathers and doitors, as of equal
authority: They required a free council, in
which the divines, commiflioned by different
churches, should be allowed a voice; he aimed
at modelling the council in such a inanner as
would render it entirely dependant on his plea-
lure. Above all, the Protestants thought it
unreaf.iable, that they should bind themselves

to submit to the decrees of a council, before
they knew on what principles these decrees
were to be founded, by what persons they
were to be pronounced, and what forms of
proceeding they would observe. The Pope
maintained it to be altogether unnecessary to
call a council, if these who demanded it did
hot previonfly declare their resolution to ac-
quiefce in its decrees. In order to adjust such
a variety of points, many expedierits were pro-
posed, and the negociations spun out to such
a length, as effe&ually arifwered Clement's
purpose of putting off the meeting of a council,
without drawing on himself the whole infamy
of obstruCting a measure, which all Europe
deemend so essential to the good of the church. d)

and for preserving the tranquillity of Italy.

Together with this negociation about call-

ing a council , the Emperor carried on another,
which he had still more at heart, for securing
the peace established in Italy, As Francis had
renounced his pretensions in that country with
great relu&ance, Charles made no doubt but
that he would lay hold on the firfl pretext as-
forded him, or embrace the first opportunity
which presented itself, of recovering what he
had loft. It became necessary, on this account.

Secked.

d) F. Paul, Hiss. 91. Seckend. iii. 73.

to take measures for assembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a
long war, could not supply the sums requisite
for keeping such a body constantly on foot, he
attempted to throw that burden on his allies,
and to provide for the safety of his own do-
minions at their expence, by proposing that
the Italian states fhoulA enter into a league of
defence against all invaders; that, on the first
appearance of danger, an army should be raised
and maintained at the common charge; and that
Antonio de Leyva should be appointed the ge-
neraliffimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, though for a reason very differenti
from that which induced the Emperor to mnake
it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver
Italy from the German and Spanish veterans,
which had so long filled alt the powers in that
country with terror, and still kept them in sub-
jeftion to the Imperial yoke. A league was
accordingly concluded; (Feb. 24. 1533.) all
the Italiai states, the Venetians excepted, ac-
ceded to it; the frum which each of the con-
trafting parties should lfurnifh towards main-
taining the army was fixed ; the Emperor agreed
to withdraw the troops which gave so much
umbrage to his allies, and which he was un-
able any longer to support. Having disbanded
part of them, and removed the reft to Sicily
and Spain, he embarked on board Doria's gal-

Lies, and arrived (April z2. x533.) at Barce-
lona. e)

Defings and negociatiotns of the French King against the

Emperor.

Notwithstanding all his precautions for fe-

curing the peace of Germany, and maintaining
that system which he had established in Italy,
the Emperor became every day more and more
apprehenf~ve that both would be soon disturbed
by the intrigues or arms of the French King.
His apprehensions were well founded, as no-
thing but the desperate situation of his affairs
could have brought Francis to give his consent
to a treaty so difbonourable and difadvan-
tageous as that of Cambray: He, at the very
time of ratifying it, had formed a resolution
to observe it no longer than necessity compelled
him, and took a solemn protest, though with
the moit profound secrecy, against several arti-
cles in the treaty, particularly that whereby
he renounced all pretensions to the dutchy of
Milan, as unjust, injurious to his heirs, and
invalid. One of the crown lawyers , by his
command, entered a protest to the fame pur-
pose, and with the like secrecy, when the rati-
fication of the treaty was regiffered in the par-
liament of Paris. f) Francis seems to have

e) Guic. 1. xx. 551. Ferreras, ix. 149.

f) Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part. p. p. 5L.

thought that, by employing an artifice unwor-
thy of a King, deftrudtive of publick faith, and
of the mutual confidence on which all tranfaati-
ons between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the most fa-
cred engagements. From the moment he con-
cluded the peace of Cambray, he wished and
watched for an opportunity of violating it with
safety. He endeavoured for that reason to
1trengthen his alliance with the King of Eng-
land, whose friendship he cultivated with the
greatest assiduity. He put the military force
of his own kingdom on a better and more re-
fpe&able footing than ever. He artfully'fo-
mented the jealousy and discontent of the Ger-
man princes.

particularly with the Pope.

But above all, Francis laboured to break the

Itrit confederacy which subsisted between Char-
les and Clement; and he had soon the fatisfa&ion
to observe appearances of disgust and alienation
arising in the mind of that suspicious and interefti
ed Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their uni-
on would not be lasting. As the Emperor's de-
cifion in favour of the duke of Ferrara had great-
ly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the in-
juffice of that proceeding, and flattered Clement
that the papal fee would find in him a more im-
partial and no less powerful prote&or. As the im-

portunity with which Charles demanded a council
was extremely offenfive to the Pope, Francis art-
fully created obstacles to prevent it, and attempt-
ed to divert the German princes, his allies, from
insisting so obifinately on that point. g) As the
Emperor had gained such an ascendant over Cle-
rent by contributing to aggrandize his family,
Francis endeavoured to allure him by thte fame
irresistible bait, proposing a marriage between his
second son, Henry duke of Orleans, and Ca.tha-
rine, the daughter of the pope's cousin Laurence
di Medici. On0 the first overtures of this match,
the Emperor could not persuade himself thatS rance
really intended to debase the royal blood of Francis
by an alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors
had1 been so lately privat citizens and merchants in
Florence, and believed that he meapt onvly to flatter
or amuse the ambitious Pontiff, He thought it ne-
ceilary, however, to etTace the impression which
f'uch a dazzling offer might have made. by promif-
ing to break off the marriage which had been
agreed on betw.een his own niece the King of Den-
mnark's daughter, and the Duke of Milan, a-d to
substitute Catharine inherolace. But the French
ambaflhdor's producing unexpeEccdly full powers
to conclude the marriage treaty with the duke
of Orleans this expedient had no cfile&. Clement
was so highly plea'fed with an honour which add&
ed such lustre and dignity to the houife of MR-
dici, tlhat he offered to grant Catlharine the invel-

g) iel'iay, I41, &c. Seek. ,ii. 4 . -aul, 63.

titure of considerable territories in Italy by way
of portion, he seemed ready to support Francis in
prosecuting his ancient claims in that country, and
consented to a personal interview with that Mo-
narch. h)

Interview between the Pope and Francis.

Charles was at the utmost pains to prevent

a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass
but what would be of detriment to him; nor
could' he bear, after he had twice condefcended
to viilt the Pope in his own territories, that Cle-
ment should bestow such a mark of diftin&tion
on his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea,
at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court
to Francis in the French dominions. But the
Pope's eagerness to accomplish the'match over-
came all scruples of pride, or fear, or jealqufy,
which must have influenced him on other occa-
sion. The interview, notwithstanding several
artifices of the Emperor to prevent it, took
place at Marseilles (O&ob. x533.) with extraor-
dinary pomp, and demonstrations of confidence
on both sides; and the marriage, which the am-
bition and abilities of Catharine rendered in the
sequel as fatal to France, as it wag then thought
difhonotrable, was consummated. But whate-
ver schemes may have been secretly concerted
by the Pope and Francis in favour of the duke of
Orleans, to whom his father proposed to make

h) Guic. i. 55'. 553. Bellay, I38,

over all his rights in Italy, so careful were
they to avoid giving any cause of offence to the
Emperor, that no treaty was concluded between
them; hh) and even in the marriage- articles,
Catharine renounced all claims and pretensions
in Italy, except to the dutchy of Urbino. i)

Pope's condua with regard to the King of England's

divorce.

But at the very time when he was carrying

on these negociations, and forming this con-
neEtion with Francis, which gave so great um-
brage to the Emperor , such was the artifice
and duplicity of Clement's chara&er , that he
fuffered the latter to dire&t all his proceedings
with regard to the King of England , and was
no less attentive to gratify him in that particu-
lar, than if the most cordial union had still sub-
iifted between them. Henry's suit for a di-
vorce had now continued near fix years; during
all which period the pope negociated, promised,
retrac&ed, and concluded nothing. After bear-
ing repeated delays and disappointments, longer
than could have been expeEted from a prince
of such a cholerick and impetuous temper, his
patience was at last so much exhaufred, that he
applied to another tribunal for that decree which
he had solicited in vain at Rome. Cranmer,

hh) Guic. i. xx. 555.
i) Dui Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. ITl.

archbishop of Canterbury, by a sentence founded
on the authority of Universities, Do~ors, and
Rabbies, who had been consulted wi:th refpe&t
to the point, annulled the King's marriage with
Catharine; her daughter was declared illegiti-
mate ; and Anne Boleyne acknowledged as
Queen of England. At the fame time Henry
began not only to negleft and to threaten the
Pope whom he had hitherto courted, but to
msake innovations in the church,' of. w;hich he
had. formerly been such a zealous defender.
Clement, who had already seen so many pro-
"vinces and kingdoms revolt from the Holy See,
became apprehensive at last that England would
imitate their example, and partly from his foil-
citude_ to prevent that fatal blow , partly in
compliance with the French King's. folicitations,
determined to give Henry such fatisfataion as
miight fill retain 'him within 'the bosom of the
church. But the violence of the Cardina1ls, de-
voted to the Emperor, did not allow the Pope
leisure for executing this prudent refohution ,
and. hurried him, with a precipitation satai to
the Roman See, to issue (March. 23. I534- )
a bull refcinding Cranmerss sentence, confirming
Henry's marriage with Catharine, and declaring
him excommunicated, if, within a time fpeci-
feed, he did not abandon the wife, he had take.i ,
and return to her whom he had deserted.

Papal authority abolished in England.

Enraged at this unexpected decree, Henry

kept no longer any measures with the court of
Rome; his subjects seconded his resentment and
indignation; an a&t of Parliament was passed,
abolishing the papal power and jurisdiction in
England; by another, the King was declared
supreme head of the church, and all the autho-
rity of which the Popes were deprived was
veiled in him. That vast fabrick of ecclefiafti-
cal dominion which had been railfed with such
art, and whose foundations seemed to deep,
being no longer supported by the veneration of
the people, was overturned in a moment.
Henry himself, with the caprice peculiar to his
character, continued to defend the doCtrines of
the Romish church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurisdiction. He alternately persecuted the Pro-
tefiants for rejecting the former, and the Catho-
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his sub-
jeCts beiag once permitted to enter into, new
paths, dit not chufe to flop short at the precise
point prescribed by him. Having been encou-
raged by his example to break some of their
fetters , they were so impatient to shake off
what still remained, k) that in the following
reign, with the general applause of the nation,
a total separation was made from the church

k) Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform.

of Rome in articles of do&rine, as well as in
matters of discipline and jurifdition.

Death of Clement VII. Sept. 5. 1-534.

A short delay might have saved the See of

SRome from all'the unhappy consequences of Cle-
ment's rashness. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a languishing difternper,
which gradually wasting his constitution, put an
end to his Pontificate', the most unfortunate,
both during its continuance, and by its effeats,
that the church had known for ma~iy ages.

Eleaion of Paul II. OR. 13. 1534.

The very day on which the cardinals enter-

ed the conclave,, they raised to the papal throne
Alexander Farnese, dean of the, sacred college,
and the eldest member of that body, who as-
fumed the naimfe of Paul III. The account of
his promotion was received with extraordinary
acclamation of joy by the people of Rome ,
highly pleased, after an interval of more than
an hundred years, to fee the crown of St. Peter
.placed on the head of a Roman citizen. Persons
more capable of judging , formed a favourable
presage of his administration, from the experi-
ence which he had acquired under four Pon-
tificates,, as well as the chara&er of prudence
arid moderation ,which he. had uniformly main-
tained in a Rtation of great eminence, and during

an adive period that required both talenits and
addre fs. 1)

Europe, it is probable, owed the conti-

nuance of its peace to the death of Clement;
for although no traces remain in history of any
league concluded between him and Francis, it
is scarcely- to be 'doubted but that he would
have seconded the operations ofthe French arms
in Italy, that he migh, have gratified his ambi-
tion by feing one of his family poffeffed of the
supreme power in Florence , and another in
IMilan. But open the ele&ion of Paul III. who
had hitherto adhered uniformly to the Imperial
interest, Francis found it necessary to suspend
his operations for some time, and to put off
the commencement of hostilities against the Em-
peror, on which he was fully determined.

Infurre&ion of the Anabaptifls in Germany,

While Francis waited for an opportunity

to renew a war which had hitherto proved so
fatal to himself and his fubje&s, a tranfafion
of a very singular nature was carried on in
Germany. Among many beneficial and salutary
effe&s of which the Reformation was the im-
mediate cause, it was attended, as must be
the cafe, in all actions and events wherein men
are concerned, with some consequences /of an
opposite nature. When the human mind is

1) Guic. 1. xx. 556.' F. Paul, 64, i

rouzed by grand objeAs , and agitated bS
fihtng paflions, its operations acquire such
force, that they are apt to become irregular and
extravagant. TUpon any great revolution in re-
ligion, fach irregularities abound mist, at that
particular period, when men, having thrown
off the authority of their ancient principles, do
no yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the
obligation of those new tenets which they have
embraced. The mind, in that fituatiori, pushing
forward with, the boldness which prompted it to
reje& established opinions,' and not guided by
a clear knowledge of the fyfiem fabftituted in
their place, disdains all restraint, and runs into
wild notions, which often lead to fcandaloiis
or immoral condu&t. Thus, in the firfl ages
of the Chrifiian church, many of the new con-
verts, having renounced their ancient Creeds,
and being but imperfetly acquainted with the
do&rines and precepts of Christianity, broathed
the most extravagant opinions, equally fubver-
five of piety and virtue, ia1 which errors difap-
peared or were exploded when the knowledge
of religion increased, and came to be more
generally diffifed. In like manner, soon after
Luther's appearance; the rashness or ignorance
of some of his disciples led them to publish te-
nets no less absurd than pernicious, which
being proposed to men extremely illiterate, but
fond of novelty, and at a time when their minds
were turned wholly towards religious fpecula-

t ons, gained too easy credit and authority
among th'em. To these causes muff be imputed
the extravagances of Muncer, in th6 year one
thousand five hundred and t\venty- five, as
well as the rapid progress wvhich they made
among the peasants; but though the infurrec-
tion excited by that Fanatic was soon suppress-
ed, feveril of his followei lurked in different
places, and endeavoured privately tb propagate
his opinions.

Origin and tenets of that fe&.

In those provinces of Upper Germany;

which had already been so cruelly wasted by
their enthufiaftick rage, the ma'giftrates watch-
ed their motions with such severe attention

r

that marly of them found it necessary to retire
iinto other countries, some were punished,
others driven into exile, and their errors were
entirely rooted out. But in the Netherlands
and Westphalia, where the pernicious tendency
6f their opinions was more unknown, and
guarded against. with less care, they got ad-
mtittance into several towns, and spread the
infe&ion of their principles. The most remark-
able of their religious tenets related to the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contend-
ed, ought to be administered only to persons
growttiup to years of understanding, and should
be performed not by sprinkling them with wa-
ter, but by dipping them in it: For this reason

they condemned the baptism of infants, and
rebaptizing all whom they admitted into their
society, the se&t came to be distinguished by
the name of Anabaptists. To this peculiar no-
tion concerning baptism, which has the appear-
ance of being founded on the praftice of the
church in the apoftolick age, and contains no-
thing inconfiitent with the peace and order of
human society, they added other principles of
a most enthufiaftick, as well as dangerous na-
ture. They maintained that, among Christians
who had the precepts of the gospel to dire&t,
and the spirit of God to guide them, the office
of magistracy was not only unnecessary, but an
unlawful encroachment on their spiritual liber-
ty; that the diftin&ions occasioned by birth,
or rank, or wealth, being contrary to thd
spirit of the gospel, which considers all men as
equal, should be intirely abolished; that all
Christians, throwing their pofleffions into one
common stock, should live together in that state
of equality which becomes members of the
fame family; that as neither the laws of na-
ture, nor the precepts of the New Testament
had placed any restraints upon men with regard
to the number of wives which they might mar-
ry, should use that liberty which God himself
had granted to the patriarchs.

Settle

Settle in Munster.

Such opinions, propagated and maintained

with enthufiaftick zeal and boldness, were not
long of producing the violent effe&s natural to
them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Mat-
thias, a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold,
or Beiikels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden,
pofleffed with the rage of making profelytes,
fixed their residence at Munster, an Imperial
city in Westphalia, of the first rank, under
the sovereignty of its bishop, but governed by
its own senate and consuls. As neither of these
Fanaticks wanted the talents requiilte in def-
perate enterprizes, great resolution, the appear-
ance of fantity, bold pretensions to infpira-
tion, and a confident and plausible manner of
discoursing, they soon gained many converts.
Among these were Rothman, who had first
preached the Protestant do&trine in Munster, and
Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good birth , and
considerable eminence. Emboldened by the
countenace of such disciples , they openly
taught their opinions; and not satisfied with
that liberty, they made several attempts,
though without faccefs , to seize the town,
in order to get their tenets established by pub-
lick authority.

Become masters of that city. February. 1534.

At last, having secretly called in ,their as-

fbciates from the neighbouring country, they

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. UL. F

i'uddenly took poffefliolt of the arsenal and fe-
nate-houfe in the night-time; and running
through the streets with drawn fiords, and
horrible howlings, cried out alternately, ,, Re-
pent, and be baptised, " and i Depart ye un-
godly." The senators the canons, the no-
bility, together with the more sober citizens
whether Papifts or Protestants a terrified at
their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frail-
tick multitude, consisting chiefly of flrangers.

Eflablifh a new form of government.

Nothing iow remaining to overawe or con-

troul thetm, they set about modelling the go-
vernment according to their own wild ideas;
and though at first they showed to much rever-
ence for the ancient constitution, as to ele&t
senators of their own feet, and to appoint Cnip-
perdoling and another proselyte consuls, this
was nothing more than form; for all their pro-
ceedings were directed by Matthias, who in
the ityle, and with the authority of a prophet,
uttered his commands, which it was instant
death to disobey. Having begun with encou-
raging the multitude to pillage the churches
and deface their ornaments; he enjoined them
to destroy all books excepf the Bible, as use-
less or impious; he appointed the estates of
such as fled, to be confiscated, and fold to the
inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered

every man to bring forth his gold, silver, and
precious effe&s , and to lay them at his feet;
the wealth amassed by these means, he depe-
sited in a publick treasury, and natned deacons
to dispense it for the common use of all. The
Inembers of this commonwealth being thus
brought to a perse& equality, he commanded
all of them to eat at tables prepared in publick,
arnd even prescribed the dishes which were to
be served up each day. Having finished his
plan of reformation, his next care was to pro-
vide for the defence of the city; and he took
measures for that purpose vith a prudence which
favoured nothing of fanaticism. He colleted
vast magazines of every kind; he repaired and
extended the fortifications, obliging every per-
son without diftinftion to work in his turn:
he formed such as were capable of bearing arms
into regular bodies, and endeavoured to- add
the vigour of discipline to the impetuosity of
enthusiasm. He sent emissaries to the Anabap-
tifts in the Low Countries, inviting them to
assemble at Munfier, which he dignified with
the name of Mount Sion, that from thence
they might set out to reduce all the nations of
the earth under their -dominion. He himself
was unwearied in attending to every thing ne-
ceffary for the security or increase of the se&t;
animating his disciples by his own example to
refuse no labour, as well as to repine at no
hardfiip; and their enthufiaffic passions being

F

kept from fabfiding by a perpetual succession of
exhortations, revelations, and prophecies, they
seemed ready to undertake or to fuffer any
thing in maintenance of their opinionisb

The bishop of MVlufter takes arins against themi.

While they were thus employed, the bi-

ihop of Munster having aflembled a coniderable
army, advanced to besiege the town. On his
approach, Matthias sallied out at the head of
some chosen troops, attacked one quarter of
his camp, forced it, and after great flaiughter
returned to the city loaded with glory and spoil.
Intoxicated with this success, he appeared next
day brandishing a spear, and declared; that,
in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth with
a handful of men and smite the hoit of the un-
godly. Thirty persons, whom he named, fol-
lowed him (May. I534.) without hesitation in
this wild enterprize, and, rushing on the
enemy with a frantic courage, were cut off to

a man.

John of Leyden acquires great authority among the Ana-

baptists.

The death of their prophet occasioned at

first great conRternation among his disciples;
but Boccold, by the fame gifts and pretensions
which had gained Matthias credit, soon revived
their spirits and hopes to such a degree, that
he succeeded him in the fame absolute dire&tioi

of all their affairs. As he did not possess that
enterprizing courage which -distinguished his
predecessor, he satisfied himself with carrying
on a defensive wa.r; and without attempting to
annoy the enemy by sallies, he waited for the
succours he expefted from the Low Countries,
the arrival of which was often foretold and pro-
mifed by their prophets. But though less dar-
ing in a&ion than Matthias, he was a wilder
enthusiast, and of more unbounded ambition,
Soon after the death of his predeceflbr, having,
by obscure visions and prophecies, prepared the
multitude for some extraordinary event, he
firipped himself naked, aqid mayching through.
the streets, prgclaimed with a loud voice,
,, That the. kingdom of Sion was at hand; that
whatever was highest on earth should be
brought low, and, whatever was lowest should
be exalted. " In order to fulfil this, he com-
)nanded the churches, as the most lofty build-
ings in the city , to be levelled with the
ground; *bhe degraded the sena,tors chosen by
Matthias, and depriving Cnipperdoling of the
confulKhip, the highest office in the common-
wealth, lie appointed him to execute the lowest
and most infamous, that of common hangman,
to which strange transition the other agreed,
not only without murmuring, but with the ut-
rmoft joy; and such was the defpotick rigour of
Boccold's administration, that he was called
almost every day to perform some duty or other

of his wretched funetion.- In place of the de-
posed fenatprs, he named twelve judges, ac-
cording to the number of tribes in Israel, to
preside in all affairs; retaining to himself the
fame authority, which Moses anciently poffefft.
ed as legislator of that people.

Ele&ed King. Jyitle 24. 1534.

Not satisfied , however, with power or

titles which were not supreme, a prophet,
whom he had gained and tutored, having called
the multitude together, declared it to be the
will of God, that John Boccold should be King
of Sion, and fit on the throne of David. John
kneeling down, accepted of the heavenly call,
which he solemnly protested had been revealed.
likewise to himself, and was immediately ack-
nowledged as Monarch by the deluded multi-
tude. From that moment he assumed all. the
htate and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown
of gold, and was clad in the richest and most
fumptuons garments. A Bible was~tarried on
his one hand, a naked sword on the other. A
great body of guards accompanied him when he
appeared in publick. He coined money fta mped
with his own image, and appointed the great
officers of his houfhold and kingdom, among
whom Cnipperdoling was nominated governor
of the city, as a reward for his former sub-
iniflion.

His licentious tenets and condu&.

Having now attained the height of power,

Boc.old began to discover passions, which he
had hitherto restrained or indulged only in fe-
cret. As the excesses of enthusiasm have been
obferved'in every age to lead to sensual gratifi-
cations, the fame conititution that is susceptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
latter; he itftru&ted the prophets and teachers
to harangue the people for several days con-
cerning the lawfulness, and even necessity of
takinfg more wives than one, which they as-
ferted to be one of the privileges granted by
God to the faints. When their ears were once
accuftorned, to this licentious do&trine, and their
passions. inflamed with the profpeft of such un-
bounded, in4ulgence, he himself set them an
example of using: what he called their Chritian
liberty, by marrying at once three.wives, among
which the widow of Matthias, a woman offin-
gular beauty, was one. As he was allured by
beauty, or the love of variety, he. gradually
added to. the number of bis wives, until they
amounted to fourteen, though the. widow of
Matthias was the only one dignified with the
title of Queen, or who hared with him the
splendor and ornaments of royalty. After the
example of their prophet, the multitude gave
themselves up to the most licentious and uncon-
trouled gratification, of their desires. No man
remained satisfied with a single wife. Not to

use their Christian liberty, was deemed a crime,
Persons were appointed to search the houses for
young women grown up to maturity, whom
they instantly compelled to marry. Together.
with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its infe-
parable attendan~t, was introduced, and became
a new source of corruption. Every excess was
committed, of which the paflions of men are
capable, when restrained neither by the autho-
rity of laws nor the sense of decency; m) and
by a monstrous and almost incredible conjunc-
tion, voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion,
and dissolute riot accompanied the aufterities of:
fanatical devotion.

A confederacy against the, Anabaptists.

Meanwhile the German princes were highly

offended at the infillt offered to their dignity
by Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal
honours; and the profligate manners of his fol-

m) Prophetse & concionatorum autoritate juxta & exemplo,

tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque foeminas dif-
curfum eft. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta homrinum
turba fere ulla reperta eft fipra annum decimum quartum
quas fluprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p. 303. Vulgo
viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus fenas, nonnullis fepte-
nas & o&onas. Puellas supra duodecimum setatis annum
ftatim amare. Id. 305. Nemo una contentus suit, neque
cuiquam extra effsetas & viris immaturas continenti effe li-
cuit. Id. 307-. Tacebo. hic, ut fit fius honor auribus,
quanta barbaria & malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis non-
dum aptis matrimonid , id quod mihi neque ex vaato, neque
ex vulgi fermonibus hauftum eft, fed ex ea vetula, cui
cura sic vitiatarum demandata suit, auditum. Joh. Corvi-
Bus, 316.

lowers, which were a reproach to the Chris-
tian name, filled men of all profeffions with
horror. Luther, who had tertified against this
fanatical spirit on its first appearance, now deeply
lamented its progress, and exposed the delusion
with great strength of argument, as well as
acrimony of ifyle , called loudly on all the
jtates of Germany to put a stop to a phrenzy
no less pernicious to society, than fatal to reli-
gion. The Emperor, occupied with other cares
and projets, had not leisure to attend to such
a distant obje&t; but the princes of the Empire,
assembled by the King of the Romans, voted a
Supply of men and money to the bishop of
Munster, who being unable to keep a fufficient
army on foot, had converted the siege of the
town into a blockade.

Besiege thetown. May 1535.

The forces raised in consequence of this

resolution, were put under the command of
an officer of experience who approaching the
town towards the end of Spring, in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-
five, pressed it more closely than formerly;
but found the fortifications so strong, and so
diligently guardced, that he durst not attempt
an assault. It was now above fifteen months
since the Anabapti~ts had established their domi-
nion in Munster; they had during that time

undergone prodigious fatigue in working on
the fortifications, and performing military duty.

Diftrels and fanaticism of the beieged.

Notwithtlanding' the prudent attention of

their King to provide for, their fubtifence, and
his frugal as, well as regular csconomy in their
pgblick meals, they began to feel the approacli
of famine. Several small bodies of their breth-
ren, who were advancing to their assistance
from the Low Countries, had been intercepted,
and cut to pieces; and, while' all Germany
was ready to combine against them, they had
no profpe& of succour, But such was the
afeendant which Boccold had acquired over the
mu1titude, and so powerful the fafcinationq of
enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine
as ever, and they hearkened with implicit cre-
dulity to the visions and preditions of their
prophets, who affured-them, that the Almighty
would speedily interpose, in order to deliver
the city. The faith, however, of some few,
shaken by the violence and length of their sus-
ferings, began to fail; but being fufipected of
an inclination to surrender to the enemy , they
were. punished with immediate death, as guilty
of impiety in diftrufting the power of God.
One of the King's wives, having uttered certain
words which implied some doubt concerning
his divine niff~on, he instantly called the whole
number together, and commanding the blafpe-

rner, as he called her, to kneel down, cut off
her head with his own hands; and to far were
the reft from exprefling any horror at this cruel
deed , that they joined him in dancing with a
frantick joy around the bleeding body of their
Companion.

The city taken. June I. 1535.

By this time, the besieged endured the ut-

most rigour of famine; but they chose rather to
fuffer hardships, the recital of which is shock-
ing to humanity, than to listen to the terms
of capitulation offered them by the bishop. At
last, a deserter, whom they had taken into
their service, being either less intoxicated with
the fumes of enthusiasm, or unable any longer
to bear such distress, made his escape to the
enemy. He informed their general of a weak
part in the fortifications which he had observed,
and assuring him that the besieged, exhausted
with hunger and fatigue , kept watch there
with little care, he offered to lead a party thi-
ther in the night. The proposal was accepted,
and a chosen body of, troops appointed for the
service; who, scaling the walls unperceived,
seized one of the gates , and admitted the
reft of the army. The Anabaptists, though
surprised , defended thermfelves in the market-
place with valour, heightened by despair; but
being overpowered by numbers, and far rounded

on every hand, most 9f them were slain, and
the remainder taken prisoners.

punishment of the King and his associates.

Among the last were the King and Cnip-

perdoling. The King , loaded with chains,
was carried from city to city as a fpeftacle to
gratify the curiosity of the people, and was
exposed to all theirinfuits. His spirit, however,
was not broken or humbled by this fad reverse
of his condition; and he adhered with unshaken
firmness to the distinguishing tenets, of his feet.
After this he. was brought back to Munster,
the fecene of his royalty and. crimes, and put to
death with the most exquisite as well as linger-
ing tortures, all which he bore with astonishing
fortitude. This extraordinary man, who had
been able to acquire such amazing dominion over
the minds of his followers, and to excite com-
motions. so dangerous to society, was only
twenty-fix years of age. n)

Chara&er of the fe& since that period.

Together with its Monarch, the kingdom

of the Anabaptists came to an end. Their prin-
ciples having taken deep root in the Low Coun-

n) Sleid.. 190, &c. Tumultuum Anabaptiftarum Liber unus.

Ant. Lamberto HIttenfio autore ap. Scardium , vol. ii. p.
298, &c. De Miferabili Monalterienfium ObfSdione., &dc.
libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 313. Annales Anabap-
tiftici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Bafileae, 1672. Cor.
Heerfbachius Hilt. Anab. Edit. 1637, p. 140.

tries, the party still fubfifls there, under the
name of Mennonites, but by a very singular re.
volution, this fe&, so mutinous and sanguinary
at its fjrft origin, hath become altogether inno-
cent and pacifick. Holding it unlawful to wage
war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to the duties of private
citizens, and by their industry and charity
endeavour to make reparation to human society
for the violence committed by their founders. o)
A small number of this set which is fettled in
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
tenthufiafm.

Proceedings and authority of the league of Smalkalde.

The mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it

drew general attention, did not so entirely en-
gross the princes of Germany, as not to allow
leisure for other tranfations. The alliance be-
tween the French King and the confederates at
Smalkald~e, began about this time to produce
great effe&s. Ulric, Duke of WVurtemberg,
having been expelled his dominions in the year
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on ac-
count of his violent and oppressive adminiftra-
tion, the house ofAuftria had got poffeflion of
his dutchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his conduft, which

b) iBale Di&ion. Art. Anabaptiftes.

were the effeRt rather of inexperience than of i
tyrannical difpofitioh, was becomie the objeA of
general compassion. The Landgrave of Hesse;
in particular, his near relation, Warmly efpouf-
ed his iptereft, and used many efforts to recover
foi him his ancient inheritance. But the King
of the Romans obstinately rbfufed to 'relinquifh
a valuable acquisition which his family had made
with so much ease. The Landgrave, uhable to
compel him, applied to the King of France his
new ally. Francis, eager to embrace any op-
portutiity of diftrefling the lioufe of Auffria,
and desirous of wresting from it a territory,
which gave it footing and influence in a part of
Germany at a distance from its other dominion@
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large furn of mo-
ney. This he employed to raise troops; and
marching with great expedition towards Wur-
temberg, attacked, defeated, and dispersed a
considerable body of Austrians, entrusted with
the defence of the country. All the Duke's
fubjec&s hastened, with emulation, to receive
their native Prince, and re-invested him with
that authority which is still enjoyed by his de-
fcendants. At the fame time the exercise of
the Protestant religion was established in his do=
minions. p)

p) Sleid. 172, Bellay, 159, 4c.

The King of the Romans courts them.

Ferdinand i how sensible soever of this lin*

ekpe&ted blow, not daring to attack a Prince
whom all the Protestant powers in Germany
were ready to support, judged it expedient to
conclude a treaty with him, by which, in the
most ample form, he recognized his title to
the dutchy. The success of the Landgrave's
operations, in behalf of the Duke of Wurtem-
berg, having convinced Ferdinand that a rup-
ture with a league, so formidable as that of
Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the utmost
care, he entered likewise into a negociation
with the Eletor of Saxony, the head of that
union, aind by some concessions in favour of
the Protestant religion, and others of advantage
to the Emperor himself, he prevailed on him

i

together with his confederates, to acknoivledge
his title as Kihg of thie Romans. At the
fane time, in order to prevent any such pre-
cipitate or irregular eleCtion in times to come,
it was agreed that no person should hereafter
be promoted to that dignity without the unani-
mous consent of the EleEtors; and the Emperor
fobn after confirmed this flipulation. q)

Paul III. calls a general council to meet at Mantua.

These a&ts of indulgence towards the Pro-

tefiants, and the close union into which the King

q) Sleid. 17g. Corps Diplom, tom. iv. p. 2. 119.

of the Romans seemed to be entering with the
Princes of that party, gave great offence at
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from
a refolutiori of his predecessor, neveki to consent
to the calling of a general council, and had pro-
mifed, in the first consistory held after hi. elec-
tioh, that he would eonvoke that assembly so
much desired by all Christendom; was no less
enraged than Clement at the innovations in Ger-
many, and no less averse to any fchenie for re-
forming either the doctrine of the church, or
the abates in the court of Rome: but having
been a .witness of the universal cenfute Which
Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with
regard to these points, he hoped to avoid the
fame reproach by the seeming alacrity Wkith
which he proposed a council; flattering him-
feti, however, that such difficulties would
arise concerning the time and place of meeting,
the persons who had a right to be present, and
the order of their proceedings, as would effec.
tually defeat the intentibn of those who de-
manded that assembly, without exposing him-
seif to any imputation for reftifing to call it.
With this view .he dispatched nuncios to the
several courts, in order to make known his in-
tention, and that he had fixed' on Mantuia as a
proper lace in which to hold.the council. Such
difficulties as thie Pope had foreseen, immedia-
tely presented themselves in great number. The

French

pFrenfch King did not approve of the place which
Paul had chosen, as the Papal and Imperial in-
fluenc'e would necessarily be too great in a towu
4tuated in that part of Italy. The King of
England not only concurred with Francis in
urging that obje&ion, but refused, besides, to
acknowledge any council called in the name
and the authority of the Pope. The German
Protestants having met together (Decemb. 12.
,2535.) at Smtakalde, insisted on their original
tiemand of a council to be held in Germany,
and pleading the Emperor's promise, as well as
the agreement at Ratisbon to that effe&t, de-
dlared that they would not confideif an assembly
held at Mantua as a legal or free representative
of the church. By this diversity of sentiments
and views, fach a field for intrigue and nego-
ciation opened, as made it easy for the Pope
to assume the merit of being eager to assemble
a council, while at the fame time lihe could put
off its meeting at pleasure. The Protestants,
on the other hand, fufpeaing his designs, and
ienfible of the importance which they derived
trom their union, reflewed for ten years the
league of Smalkalde, which now became strong-
er and more formidable by the accession of
several new members. r)

r) This league was concluded December, one thousand five

hundred and thirty five, but not extended or signed in
form till September in the following year. The Princes
who acceded to it were John Ele&or of Saxonv , Erneit

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. G

The emperor's exopeditign to Africa, and state of.that counu|ry.

During these trtanfa&tions in Germany, the

Emperor undertbok his famous entteprize agait"r
the piratical states in Africa. That part 6f the
African continent lying ailong the coast of the
Mediterranean fe'a, which anciently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Mlaffylia, together
with the sepublick of Carthage, and which is
now known by the general name Of Barbary,
had undergone many revolutions. Subdued by
the Romans, it became a province of their em-
pire. Conquered afterwards by the Vandals,
they erected a kingdom there. That being
overturned by Belisarius, the country continued
fubje& to the Greek Emperors, until it was
over-run towards the end of the seventh cen-
tury, by the rapine and irreliftible arms of the
Arabs. It remained for some time a part of
that vast empire which the Caliphs governed
with absolute authority. Its immense distance,
however, from the feat of government, encou-
raged the descendants of those leaders, who
had subdued the country, or the chiefs of the

Duke of Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of Hesse, Ulric Duke
of \Vurtemberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pomerania,
John George and Joachiim Princes of Auhalt, Gebhard
aiid Alber. Counlts of Mansfeld , William Count of Nniaau.
The cities, Strafburg, Ntreniburg, Conifance, Uhn , Mag-
deburg, Bremen, Reutiingen, Hailbron, Meiumingen,
Lindaw , Campen , I'na , Bibrac , Windfheim , Augsburg,
Frankfort g,, Brunfwvick, Goflar, Hanover, Got-
tingen, Eimbeck, Hamburg, Minden.

Moors, its ancient inhabifants, to throw off
the yoke, and to set up for independence. -The
Caliphs , who derived their authority from a
spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for making
conquests than for preserving them, were oblig-
ed to connive at acts of rebellion which they
could not prevent; and Barbary was divided into
several kingdoms , of which Marocco, Algiers,
and Tunis were the mofit considerable. The in-
habitants of there kingdoms were a mixed race,
Arabs, Negroes from the southern provinces,
and Moors, either natives of Africa, or who
had been expelled out of Spain; all zealous pro-
fefbors of the Mahometan religion, and inflamed
against Christianity with a bigoted hatred pro-
protional to their ignorance and barbarous
inanners.

Rife of the piratical states,

Among these people, no less daring, incon-

slant, and treacherous, than the ancient inha-
bitants of the fame country described by the
Rotnan historians, frequent feditions broke out,
and many changes in government took place.
These, as they affe&ted only the internal slate
of a country so barbarous, are but little known,
and deserve to be so: But about the beginning
of the fixtethth century a sudden revolution hap-
pened, which, by rendering the states of Bar-
bary formidable to the Europeans, hath made
their history worthy of more attention.

G 2

and of the Barbaroffas.

This revolution was brought about by per-

sons :born if a rank of life which entitled them
to aQ& no such illustrious part'. Horuc and Hay-
radin', the sons of a potter in the Isle of Lesbos,
prompted by a: r'eftlefs and enterprizing spirit ,
forsook their father's tra'de, ran to Lea, and
joined a crew of pirates. They soon diftin-
guifhed themselves by their valour and aftivity,
and becoming masters of a small brigantine, car-
ried on their infamous trade with fach condu&
and success, that they assembled a fleet of twelve
galleys, besides many vessels of smaller force.
Of this fleet Horuc, the elder brothe!, called
Barbarofia from the red colour of his beard 4
was admiral, and Hayradiri second in 'com-
mand, but with almost equal authority. ,They
called themselves the friends of the Lea, and
the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their
names Loon became terrible from the Straits of
the Dardanels to those of Gibraltar. Together
with their fame and power their ambitious
views extended, and while a&ting as Corfairs,
they adopted the ideas, and acquired the ta-
lents of conquerors; They often carried the
prizes which they took on the coasts of Spain
and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and en-
riching the inhabitants by the tale of their booty,
and the thoughtless prodigality of their crews,
were welcome guests in every place at Which
they touched. The convenient iituation of these

harbours, lying so near the greatest eommer-
cial states at that time in Christendom, made
the brothers wish for an effablifhment in that
country. An opportunity of accomplishing this
quickly 'prefented itself, which they did not
fuffer to pass unimproved. Eutemi, King of
Algiers, having attempted several, ti-mes, with-
otit success, to take a fort which the Spanish
governors of Oran had built not far from his
capital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid
to Barbarossa, whose valour the Africans con-
fidered as irresi-stible. The aEtive Corsair gladly
accepted of the invitation, and leaving his bro-
ther Hayradin with the fleet, marched at the
head of five thousand men (1516.) to Algiers
where he was received as their deliverer.

Horuc, the elder brother , becomes master of AlgierL.

Such a force gave him the command, of the

town; and as he perceived that the Moors nei-
ther fiifpe&ted him of any bad intention, nor
were capable with their light- armed troops of
opposing his disciplined veterans , he secretly
murdered the Monarch whom he had come to
assist, and caused- himself to be proclaimed King
of Algiers in his stead. The authority which
he had thus boldly usurped, he endeavoured
to establish by arts suited to the genius of the
people whom he had to govern; by liberality
without bounds to those who favoured his pro-
motion , and by cruelty no. less unbounded

; --.-

-~_ .

.t.waryds all whcan he had .any reason to diftruff,
..StNrfatisfied with the throne which he had ac-
quired, he attacked .the neighbouring King of
Tremecen , and having vanquished him in
battle, adde4 his dominions to those of Algiers.
At the fame time , he continued to infest the
eoafis of Spain and Italy with fleets which re-
fembled the aromamnents of a great Monarch ,
rather than the light squadrons of a Corsair,
The devastations which these committed, oblig-
ed Charles, about the beginning of his reign,
to furnish the marquis de Comares, governor of
Oran, with troops fufficient to attack him ( 158.)
-That officer, assisted by the dethroned King of
Tremecen, executed the commnifion with such
spirit, that Barbaroffa's troops being beat in fe-
veral encounters, he himself was shut up in
Tretmecen. After defending it to the last extre-
inity, he was overtaken in attempting to make
his escape, and slain while he fought with an
obifinate valour, worthy of hid former fame
and exploits.

The progress ps Hayradin , the second brother.

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by

he name of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of
Algiers with the fame ambition and abilities, but
with better fortune. His reign being undifturb-
ed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European

powers, he regulated with admirable prudence

the interior police of his kingdom, carried on
his naval operations with great vigour, and ex-
tended his conquests on the continent of Africa.

FuPts his dominions under the protecion of the Sultan.

But, perceiving that the Moors and Arabs

submitted to,his government with the utmost
relu&cance, and being afraid that his continual de-
predations would, one day, draw upon him the
arms of the Christians, he put his dominions
under the prote&ion of the Grand Seignior, and
received from him a body of Turkish soldiers
fufficient for his security against his domeftick
as well as his foreign enemies. At last,
the fame of his exploits daily increasing, So-
lyman offered. him the command of the Tur-
kish fleet, as the. only person whose valour
and skill in naval affairs entitled him to com-
mand against Andrew Doria, the greatest Lea-
officer of that age. Proud of this diftinEtion,
Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with
a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the
arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Cor-
fair, gained the entire confidence both of the
Sultan and his Vizier.. To them he communi-
cated a scheme which he had formed of making
himself master of Tunis, the most flourishing
kingdom, at that time, on the coast of Africa ;
and this being approved of by them, he obtained
whatever he demanded for carrying it into
execution.

His scheme for conquering Tunis.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were

founded on the-inteftine divisionS in the'kingdom
of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that coun-
try, having thirty - four sons by different wives,
nimed Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest
among them; his fucceffobr. That weak Prince,
who owed this preference not to his own merit,
but to the ascendant which his mother had ac-
quired over a Monarch doating with age, first
poisoned 'Mahmed his father in order. to prevent
him from altering his destination; and then, with
the barbarous policy which prevails wherever
polygamy is permitted, and the right of fuecef-
sion is not precisely fixed, he put to death all
his brothers whom he could get into his power.
Alrafchid, one of the ldeft, was so fortunate
as to escape his rage; and findiitg a retreat among
the wandering Arabs, made several attempts,
by the aliftance of some of their chiefs, to re-
cover the throne, which of right belonged to
him. But these proving unfuccefsful, and the
Arabs, from their' natural levity, being ready
to deliver him up to his merciless brother, he
fled to Algiers, the only place of refuge remain-
ing, and implored the prote&tion of Barbarossa,
who , discerning at once all the advantages which
might be gained by supporting his title, received
him with every p -ffible demonstration of friend-
ship and refpe&. Being ready', at that time,
to set failbfor Constantinople, he easily perfuad-

ed Alrafchid, whose eagerneSs to obtain a crown
4ifpofed him to believe or undertake any thing,
to accompany him thither, promising him es-
feAual assistance from Solyman, whom he re-
presented to be the most generous, as well as
most powerful Monarch in the world. But no
sooner were they arrived at Constantinople, than
the false Corsair, regardless of all his promises
to him, opened to the Sultan a plan for con-
quering Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish
empire, by making use of the name of this
exiled Prince., and by means of the party ready
to declare in his favour. Solyman approved,
with too much facility, of this perfidious propo-
fal, extremely suitable to the character of its au-
thor, but altogether unworthy of a great Prince.
A powerful fleet and numerous army were faon
atffembled; at the fight of which the credulous
Alrafchid flattered himself, that he- would soon
enter his capital in triumph.

Its success.

But just as this unhappy Prince was going

tQ embark, he was arrested by order of the
Sultan, shut up in the seraglio, and was never
heard of more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet
of two hundred and fifty vessels towards Africa,
After ravaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading
terror through every part of that country, he
appeared before Tunis; and landing his men,

gave out that ,he -came to asse:t the right of
Alrafhid, whomlie: pretended to have left sick
aboard the Admigal ,galley. The fort of Go-
letta, which commands the bay, soon fell into
his hands, partly by his own address, partly
by the treachery of its commander.;: and the
inhabitants of Tunis:, weary of Muley-Ha.fcen's
government, took arms, and declared for Al.
ranhid with such zeal and unanimity, -as' oblig-
ed the former to fly so precipitately, that he
left all his treasures behind him. The gates
were immediately set open to Barbarossa, as
the restorer of their lawful sovereign.. But
when Alrafchid himself did not appear, and
when instead of his name, that of Solyman
alone was heard among the acclamations of the
Turkish soldiers marching into the town, the
people of Tunis began to fufpeft the Corfair's
treachery. Their suspicions being soon convert-
ed into certainty, they ran to arms with the
utmost fury, and surrounded the citadel, into
which Barbarossa had led his troops. But hav-
ing foreseen such a revolution, he was not un-
prepared for it; he immediately turned against
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one
brisk discharge, dispersed the numerous but
undirefted assailants, and forced them to ac-
knowledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to
-Tnbmit to himself as his viceroy.

Barbaroffa's formidable power.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of

which he had thus got poiTeffion, in a proper
posture of defence. He strengthened the ci-
tadel which commands the town; and fortifying
the Goletta in a regular manner, at vast ex-
pence, made it the principal fration for his
fleet, and his great arsenal for military as well
as naval stores. Being now poffeffed of such
extensive territories, he carried on his depre-
dations against the Christian States to a great-
er extent, and with more deftruf&ive violence
than ever. Daily complaints of the outrages
committed by his cruizers were brought to the
Emperor by his fubjeets, both in Spain and
Italy. -All Christendom seemed to expec? from
him, as its greatest and most fortunate Prince,
that he would put an end to this new and
odious species of oppression.

The exiled King 6f Tunis implores the Emperor's affiifance.

April 21. 1535.

At the fame time Muley - Hafcen , the exil-

ed King of Tunis, finding none of the I1Maho-
metan Princes in Africa willing or able to assist
him in recovering his throne, applied to Char-
les as the only person who could assert his
rights in opposition to such a formidable u;uar-
per. The Emperor, equally desirous of deliver-
ing his dominions from the dangerous ncigh-

bourhood of Barbarossa; 9f appearing as the
-prote.tor of: an unfprtunate Prince; and of ac-
quiiigg the glory annexed in that age, to every
eqpedition again. tb MaNhometa.ns, readily con-
cluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen, and began
to prepare for invading Tunis. H.ving made
trial. of his own abilities for war iq the late
campaign in Hung.ary, he was now become so
fond of the military chara&er, that he dptermin.
4d to command on this qccaqfion in person.

His preparatiou for the expedition.

The united flrengtb Qs his. dominiQus. wass

Ciled out upon an enterprize in whioh the Em-
peror was about to hazard his glory, and which
drew the attention of all Europe. A Flemish
fLeet carried from the parts. of the Lo' Co.n.-
try a bady. of German inFfantry; s) the gallies
of Naples and Sicily took on bpard the veteran
bands of Italians and Spaniards, which had dif-
tinguithed themselves by so m.any vi&ories oyqr
the French ; the Emperor himself embarked
at Barcelona with the flower of the Spanish
nobility, and was joined by a considerable fqua-
drqn from P.ortugal, under the command of the
Infant Don Lewis , the Emprefs's brother;
Andrew Doria condut&ed his own gallies, the
best appointed at that time in 'Europe, and
commanded by the most skilful officers: The

s) Haraei Annales Brabant. i. 599.

Pope furnished all the assistance in his power
towards such a pious enterprize; and the order
of Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels,
equipped a squadron , which, though small,
was formidable by the valour of the knights
who served on board it. The port of Cagliari
in Sardinia was the general place of rendez-
vous. Doria was appointed High - dmiral of
the fleet; the command of the land-forces uin-
der the Emperor was given to the marquis de
Guafto.

Lands in Africa.

On the sixteenth of July , the fleet, cont

sifting of near five hundred vessels, having on
board above thirty thousand regular troops, set
fail from Cagliari, and after a prosperous na-
vigation landed within fight of Tunis. Bar-
baroffa having received early intelligence of
the Emperor's immense armaments and fufpe&t-
ing its destination, prepared with equal pru-
dence and vigour for the defence of his new
conquest. He called in all his corfairs from
their different ftatiotis; he drew from Algiers
what forces could be spared; he dispatched mef-
fengers to all the African Princes, Moors as
well as Arabs , and by representing Muley-Haf-
cen as an infamous apostate, prompted by am-
bition and revenge, not only to become the
vassal of a Christian Prince, but to conspire
with him to extirpate the Mahommedan faith,

he inflamed those ignorant and bigoted chief's
to such a degree, that they took arms as in a
common cause. Twenty thoufIatd horse, to-
'gether with a vast body of foot, foudn affembIed
at Tunis; and by a proper diftfibution of pre-
lfets among them from time to time, Burba-
roffa kept the ardour which had brought them
together fnom f'ubfiding.

SLa/ys flege to Goletta.

But as he was too well acquainted witfh

the enemy whom he had to oppose, to think
that these light troops could resist the heavy-
arrtied cavalry and' veteran infantry which com-
posed the Imperial army, his chief confidence
was in the strength of the Goletta, and in his
body of Turkish soldiers who were armed and
disciplined after the European fashion. Six
thousand of these, under the command of Si-
tan, a renegado Jew, the bravest and most ex-
perienced of all his corfairs, he threw into
that fort, which the Emperor immediately invest-
ed. As Charles had the command of the Lea,
his camp was so plentifully supplied not only
with the neceflaries but with all the luxuries
of life, that Muley - Hafcen , who had not
been accustomed to fee war carried on with
such order and magnificence, was filled with
admiration of the Emperor's power.. His troops,
animated by his presence, and considering it
as meritorious to shed their blood in such a

pious cause, contended with each other for the
ports of honour and danger. Three separate
attacks were concerted, and the Germans,
Spaniards, and Italians, having one of thefre
committed to each of them, p-ushed them for-
ward with the eager courage which national
emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and skill becoming the confidence which his
master had put in him; the garrison performed
the hard service on which they were ordered
with great fortitude.

Takes it by fiorm. July 25. 1535.

But though he interrupted the besiegers by

frequent falies, though the Moors and Arabs
alarmed the camp with their continual incur-
fions; the breaches soon became so considerable
towards the land, while the fleet battered those
parts of the fortifications which it could approach
with no less fury and success, that an ailhult
being given on all sides at once, the place was
taken by storm. Sinan, with the remains of his
garrison, ritired, after an obstinate resistance, over
a fallow part of the bay towards- the city. By
the reduction of the Goletta, the Emperor be-
came mailer of Barbaroffa's fleet, consisting of
eighty-feven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mostly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remarkable
proof of the strength of the fort; as well as of

tli greatness of the corfair's power. The Ehi-
peror, inarched into the Goletta through the
breach

; and. turning to Muley-Hafcen who at-

tended him, ,, Here,, " says he, ,, is a gate
open to you, by which you shall return to take
poffeffion of your dominions. '"

Barbarofla, though he felt the fll weight

of the blow which he had received, did not,
however, lose courage, or abandon the defence
of Tunis. But as the walls were of great ex-
tent, and extremely weak, as he could not
depend on the fidelity of the inhabitants., nor
hope that the Moois and Arabs would sustain
the hardships of a siege, he boldly determined
to advance with his army, wvhich amnounted to
fifty thousand men t) towards the Imperial
camp, and to decide the fate of his kingdom
by the iflue of a battle. This resolution he com-
municated to his principal officers, and repre-
fenting to them the fatal consequences which
might follow, if ten thousand Christian slaves,
whom he had shut up in the citadel, should at-
tempt to mutiny during the absence of the army,
he proposed as a necefiary precaution for the
publick security, to massacre them without
mercy before he began his march. They all
approved warmly of his intention to fight; but
inured as they were, in their piratical depreda-

tions,

tj Epiftres de Princes, par Raiftelli, p. 119, &c.

tions, to scenes of bloodfled and cruelty, the
barbarity of his proposal concerning the slaves,
filled them with horror; and Barbaroffl, rather
from the dread of irritating them, than fwatyed
by motives of humanity, contented to spare the
lives of the slaves.

Defeats Barbaroffa's army.

By this time the Emperor had begun to ad-

vance towards Tunis ; and though his troops
fuffered inconceivable hardships in their march,
over burning sands, destitute of water, and ex-
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they
Loon came up with the enemy. The Moors and
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in
number, immediately rushed on to the attack
with loud shouts, but their undisciplined courage
could not long stand the shock of regular batta-
lions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable
presence of mind, and by exposing his own
person to the greatest dangers, endeavoured to
rally them, the rout became so general , that
he himself was hurried along with them in their
flight back to the city. There he found every
thing in the utmofr confusion; some of the in-
habitants flying with their families and effefts;
others ready to set open tlheir gates to the con-
queror; the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat;
and the citadel , which in such circumstances
might have afforded him some refuge, already
in the poffeffion of thle Christian captives. There

Hist. of Charl. V. VoL. III. H

unhappy inen rendered desperate by their f11-
thation, had laid hold on the opportunity.which
Barbarbfia dreaded. As Loon as his army was
at foime distance ftron the towng they, gained
two of their keepers, by whole iffiftance,
knocking off their fett~is , and bursting open
their prisons , they overpowered the Turkiffi
gatrifon and turned the artillery of the fort
against their former maiters. BarbaiolTa, difap-
pointed and enraged , exclaiming sometimes
against the filfe coinpaffion of his offifers, and
fometinies condemnihg his own imprudent com-
pliance with their opinion fled precipitately to
Bona.

Tunis rlurrenders.

Meanvwhile Charles, fatisfifd wvith the eary

and almost bloodless vi&ory which he had gain-
ed, ard advaticing slowly v ith the precautibii
neceffl'ry in an enetny's country, did nbt yet
know the whole extent of his own good for-
tune. But at last, a meiffeiger dispatched by the
slaves acquainted him with the success of their
hoble effort, for the recovery of their liberty;
and at the fame time deputies arrived from the
tbwin n order to present him the keys of their
gates, and to implore his protetion from mili-
tary violeince. While he was deliberating con-
cerning the proper measures for this purpose,
the soldiers, fearing that they should be de-
priived of the booty which they had expeced,

rushed suddenly, and without -orders, ihto the
town, and began to kill :and plunder without
diftin&ion. It was then too late to retrain
their cruelty, their avatice, cor :licentiousness.
All the outrages of which soldiers are capable
in the fury of a storm., all the excefles of which
men can be guilty whe their pafitons are
heightened by the .contempt and hatred which.
difference ia manners anhd religion inspire, were
committed. Above thirty thoudand of the inno.
tcent inhabitants perished on that uihappy day,
and ten thousand were carried away as slaves.
VMuley-Hafcen took poffeffion of a thtrone fur-
rounded with carnage, abhorred by hi's fubje&s
on whom he had brought fach calamities, aand
p- itied even by those whose rashness had been
the occasion of them. The Emperor lamented
the fatal accident which had itained the lustre
of his vifory; and amidst such a scene of horror
there was but one fpetacle that afforded him
any fatisfa&ion. Ten thousand Christian slaves,
among whom were several persons of diftinftion,
met him as he entered the towin; and falling
on their knees , thanked and I]effed him as
their deliverer.

Reftords the exiled King to his throne.

At the fame time that Charles adcomplifhed

his promise to the Moorish King, of re-establishing
him in his dominions, he did not negleft what
was necessary for bridling the power of the Afri-

"H a

Scan corfairs ,'for the security of his own fubje&s,
and for the intereftbof the Spanish crown: In or-
Sder'to gain these ends, he concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcetn on the following conditions; that
he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of
*the crown of Spain, and do homage to the Em-
peror as his liege lord ; that all the Christian
slaves now within his dominions, of whatever na-
tion, should be set at liberty without ransom;
that no fubje&t of the Emperor's should for the
future be drained in servitude; that no Turkish
corsair should be admitted into the ports of his
dominions; that free trade, together with the
publick exercise of the Christian religion, should
be allowed to all the Emperor's fubje&s; that the
Emperor should not only retain the Goletta, but
that all the other sea-ports in the kingdom which
were fortified should be put into his hands: that
Muley-Hafcen should pay annullay twelve thou-
sand crowns for the fubfiftcnce of the Spanish gar-
rifon in the Goletta; thathe should enterinto no
alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies,
and should present to him every year, as an
acknowledgment of his vassalage, fix Moorish
horses, and as many hawks. u) Having thus
fettled the affairs of Africa; chaffifed the info-
lence of the corfairs; secured a safe retreat for
the ships of his fubjefts, and a proper station to
his own fleets, on that coast from which he

u) Du Monts Corps Diplomat. ii. i28. Summonte Hist. di Na-

poli, iv. 89.

was most infefled by piratical depredations;
Charles embarked again (August 17. 1535-.)
for Europe, the tempestuous weather, and
sickness among his troops , not permitting him
to pursue Barbarossa. x)

The glory \which the Emperor acquired.

By this expedition, the merit of which seems

to have been estimated in that age, rather by
the apparent generosity of the undertaking, the
magnificence wherewith it was conduted, and
the success which crowned it, than by the im-
portance of the consequences that attended it,
the Emperor attained a greater height of glory
than at any other period of his reign. Twenty
thousand slaves whom he freed from bondage,
either by his arms , or by his treaty with
Muley-Hafcen y), each of whom he clothed
and furnished with the means of returning to
their refpe6tive countries, spread all over Eu-
rope the fame of their benefactor's munificence,
extolling his power and abilities with the exag-
geration flowing from gratitude and admiration.
In comparison with him, the other Monarchs
of Europe made an inconsiderable iigurc. They

x) Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetanze ap. Scard. v.

ii. p. 320, &c. Jovii Hiltor. lib. xxxiv. 153. &c. Sandov.
ii. 154, &c. Vertot. Hist. de Cheval. de Malthe. Epiftres
des Princes, par Rulcelli, traduites par Belleforet-,, p. 119.
120, &c. Anton. Pontii Confentini ilift. Belli adv. Barbar.
ap. Matthaei Anale2ta.

y) Sumrnonte Hist. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103-

feeed' to- be foticitons about nothing but their
private and particular interests; while Charles,
with ati elevation of fentimenet which became'
the chief Prinee in Christendom, appeared to be
concerned for the honour of the Christian name,
and attentive to the publick security and"
welfare ,

t*

# BOOK VI. The causes of a new war between the Emperor and Francis.

THE

f I T O R Y

OF TH H

R E I

5

N

OF THE

EMPEROR C I ARLES V.

BOOK VL

The catufes of a new war between the Emperor and Francis.

Unfortunately for the reputation of Fran-
cis I, among hig coatemporaries, his condut,
at this junEture, appeared a perfe&t contrast to
that of his rival, as he laid hold on the oppor-
tunity affoided him, by the Emperor's having
turned his whole force against the common ene-
my, to revive his pretensions in Italy, and to
plunge Europe into a new war. The treaty of
Cambray, as has been observed, did not remove
the causes of enmity between the twvo con-
tending Princes; it covered up, but did not ex-
tinguifh the flames of discord. Francis, in par-
ticular, who waited with impatience for a pro-
per occasion of recovering the reputation as well
as territories which he had loft, continued to
carry on his negociatious in ditfferent courts

againif ,the Emperor, taking the utmost pains
to heighten the .jealousy which many. Princes
entertained of his power or designs, and to in-
pire theareft with the fame fufpicion.and fear:
Among others, he applied to Francis Sforza,
who, though indebted to Charles for the pof-
session of the dutchy of nilan, had received
it on such hard conditions, as rendered him not
only a vassal of the Empire, but a tributary de-
pendant upon the Emperor. The honour of
having married the Emperor's niece , did not
reconcile him to his ignominious slate of sub-
jection, which became so intolerable even to
Sforza, a weak and poor-fpirited Prince, that
he listened with eagerness to the first proposals
Francis. made of rescuing .him from de yoke.
These proposals were conveyed to him by Ma-
raviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by the
French historians, a Milanese gentleman residing
at Paris; and soon after, in order to carry on
the negociation with greater advantage, Mer-
veille was tent to Milan, on pretence of visit-
ing his relations , but with secret credentials
from Francis as his envoy. In this chara&er
he was received by Sforza. ,But notwithftand-
ing his care to keep that circumstance conceal-
ed, Charles fiufpeaing, or having received in-
formation of it,, remoniRrated and threatened in
such an high tone, that the Duke and, his mi-
nifters , equally intimidated, gave the world
immediately a most infamons proof of their ser-

vile fear of offending the Emperor. As Mer-
veille had neither the prudence nor the temper
which the fun&tion wherein he was employed
required, they artfully decoyed him into a quar-
rel, in which he happened to kill his antago-
nift, one, of the Duke's domefticks, and having
instantly seized him, they ordered him to be tried
for that crime, and to be beheaded. (Decemb.
1533.), Francis, no less astonished at this viola-
tion of a chara&er held sacred among the most un-
civilized nations, than enraged at the dignity of
his crown,, threatened Sforza with the effects of
his indignation, and complained to the Fmperor,
whom he considered as the real author of that
unexempled outrage. But meeting with no fa-
tisfa&ion from either, he appealed to all the
Princes of Europe , and thought himself now
entitled to take vengeance for an injury, which
it would have been indecent and pusillanimous
to let pass with impunity.

Francis destitute of allies.

Being thus furniihed with a pretext for be-

,ginning a war, on which he had already resolved,
he multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by
unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the
honour of his house by the marriage of his soir
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle-
ment, the death of that Pontiffthad deprived him

of all the advantages which he expected to de-
rive from his friendship. Paul, his fucceflor,
though attached by inclination to the Imperial
interest, seemed determined to maintain the neu-
trality suitable to his chara&er as the common
father of the conteiiding Princes. The King
of England, occupied with domeftick cares and
proje&s, declined , for once, engaging in the
affairs of the cdritinent, and refuted to assist
Francis, unless he would imitate his example,
in throwing off the Papal supremacy.

His negociations with the German Protestants.

These disappointments led him to solicit, with

greater earnestness, the aid of the Protestant Prin-
ces associated by the league ofSmalkalde. That he
might the more easily acquire their confidence,
he endeavoured to accommodate himself to their
predominant pailion, zeal for their religious te-
nets. He affefted a wonderful moderation with
regard to the points in dispute; he permitted
Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain his
sentiments concerning some of the most impor-
tant articles', in terms not far different from those
nfed by the Protestants ; a) he even conde-
fcended to invite Melan&hon, wvhofe gentle
manners, and pacifick spirit distinguished him
among the Reformers, to visit Paris, that by his
assistance he migth concert the most proper mea-

a) Freheri Script. Per. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid. Hist.

7?8. 183. Seckend. lib. iii. 103.

lures for reconciling the contending fe&s, which
so unhappily divided the chureh. b) These con-
ceflions must be considered rather as arts of po-
licy, than the result of covit1iorr; for whatever
impreflion the new opinions in reigion had made
on his fifterk, the Queen ofNavarre and Dutchess
of Ferrara, the gaiety of Francis's own temper,
and his love of pleasure, allowed him little lei-
sure to examine theological controversies.

Irritates them,

Buat soon after he loft all the fruits of this

disingenuous artifice, by a step very inconsistent
with his declarations to the German Princes.
This step, however, the prejudices of the age,
and the religious fentimnents of his o1wn fubje&s,
rendered it necessary for him to take. His close
union with the King of England , an excommu-
nicated heretick; his firequent negociations with
the German Protestants ; But above all,, his giv-
ing publick audience to an envoy from Sultan
Solyman, had' excited violent suspicions concern-
ing the sincerity of his attachment to religion,
To have attacked the Emperor, who, on alloc-
cafions, macfe high pretensions to zeal in de-
fence of the Catholick faith, and 'at the very
juncture when he was. preparing for his expedi-
tion against Barbarossa, which was then confider-
ed as a pious enterprize, could not have fail-

b) Cammerarii Vita-Ph. Melan&honis, Is. Hag. 1655. p. 12.

ed .to confirm such unfavourable sentiments with
regard- to Francis:,, and called on. him to vindicate
himself by some extraordinary demonstration
of his reverence,for. the established dotrines of
the church. The indiscreet zeal. of some of his
fubjets, who.. had.imbibed the Protestant opi-
nions , furnirhedhiw with such. an occasion as
he desired. They had affixed to the gates of
the Louvre, and other publick places, papers
containing indecent refle&ions on the doftrines
and rites of the 'Popifh church. Six of the per-
Ions concerned in this rash aftion were discover-
ed and seized. The King, in order to avert
the judgments which it was supposed their blaf-
phemies migth draw down upon the nation, ap-
pointed a solemn procefiion. The holy sacrament
was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a
torch in his hand ; the princes of the blood sup-
ported the canopyover it; the nobles marched
in order behind. In the presence of this nu-
merous assembly, the King, accustomed to express
himself on every fubje&t in firong and animated
language , declared that if one of his hands
were infested with heresy, he would cut it off
with the other, and would not spare even his
own children, if found guilty of that crime,
As a dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the
fix unhappy persons were publickly burnt before
the procession was finished, with circumstances

of the most shocking barbarity attending their
execution, c) ' -

They refuse to jpin hi4.

The Princes of the league of Smalkalde,

filled with resentment and indignation at the
cruelty with which their brethren were treated,
could not conceive Franc to be sincere, when
he offered to protest in Germany those very
tenets, which he persecuted with such rigour
in hlis own dominions; so that all Bellay's art
and eloquence in vindicating his master, or
apologizing for his condu&t, made but little
impression upon them. They considered like-
wife, that the Emperor, who hitherto had
never employed violence- against the dotrines
of the Reformers, nor even given them much
molestation in their progress. was now bound
by the agreement at Ratisbon, not to disturb
such as had embraced the new opinions; and
the Protestants wifely regarded this as a more
certain and immediate security, than the preca-
rious and difftant hopes with which Francis en-
deavoured to allure them. Besides, the manner
in which he had behaved to his allies at the
peace of Cambray, was too recent to be for-
gotten, and did not encourage others to rely
much on his friendship or generosity. Upon
all these accounts, the Protestants Princes refused

c) Belcarii Comment Rer. Gallic, 646. Sieid. Hit,. 75, &c,

t9 iff. the Frenh King in any hoftjie attempt
against the Empri'or. The Eletoi, of Saxony,
the imloft zealous among themi in order to
avoid giving ahiy itnbrage to Charles, would
notpermit1l elanhopn to visit the court of France,
althbugh that Reformer, flattered perhaps by
the invitation .of so. great a .Monarch, or hoping
that his presence there might be of signal advan-
tage to the Protestant cause

i discovered a strong

jiclinatiop to undertake the journey. d)

Thd Freirch army advances toWards italy.

But though none of the many Princes who

envied or dreaded the power of Charles, would
second Francis's; efforts in order to reduce and
circumscribe it, !he, nevertheless, commanded
his army- to advance towards the frontiers of
Italy. As his sole pretext for taking arms
was that he might chastise the Duke of Milan
for his insolent and cruel breach of the law of
nations, it might have been expe&ed that the
whole weight of his vengeance was to have
fallen on his territories. But on a sudden, and
at their very commencement, the operations
of war took another dire&ion. Charles Duke
of Savoy, one of the least a&ive and able Prin-
ces. of the line from which he descended, had
married Beatrix of Portugal, the Emprefs's sifter.
By her great talents she soon acquired an ab-

d) Catmmerarii Vita Meian. J4, > tEc. 415. Seckend. lib. iii. to?.

solute afcendanht over iher husband: and. proud
b,s her affinity to the Emperor, or allured by
the magnificent promises with which he flattered
Iber ambitiop, she formed an union between
th-e Duke and the Imperial court, extremely
inconsistent which that neutrality, which wife
policy .as well as the fituatioh of his dominions
had hitherto induced him to observe in all the
quarrels between the contending Monarchs.
Francis was, abundantly fetnible of the distress
to which he might be exposed, if, when he
entered Italy, he should leave behind him the
tetritories of a Prince, devoted so obsequiously
to the Emperor, that he had sent hIis eldest
ton to be educated in the court of Spain, as a
kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement the
Seventh i who had represented this danger in a
afrong light during his interview with Francis
at Marseilles, suggested to him, at the fame
time, the proper method of guarding against
it, having advised him to begin his operations
againfit the Milanese , by taking pofleflion of
Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way
of securing a communication with his own do.
Ininions.

Takes poIfeflion of the Duke of Savoy's dominions.

Francis, highly irritated at the Duke on

many accounts, particularly fbr having supplied
the Constable Bourbon with the money that en-
abled him to levy the body of troops which ruin-

dtlitle French artmiy in the fatal battle' of Pavia,
was not inwilinIi: to l1t him nowt feel 'both how
lde-pTy he refet*e'Md: and how'fevertly' ie could
ipuniifh'hefe inijui's.i Nor did he ianht several
iretexts whlich gave fotrie co'liur 6f equity to
the"viildnce that 'hiie initended. The territories
f-fiiance and Savoy lying contig uous to .each
other, andifritermnirgll d in many places, various
difptites ,* unavoidible in fucha- situa;tion, sub-
sifted concerning the limits of their refpetive
property; and besides, Francis, in right of his
hmother Louise of Savoy, had large claims upon
the Duke her brother, for her share in their
father's fucceffioti. Being unwilling, however,
to .begin hoftilit'ies 'without some cause of quar-
rel more specious than there pretensions ,
many of which were obsolete, and others du-
bious, he demanded permission to march through
Piedmont in his way to the Milanese, hoping
that the Duke', from an excess of attachment
to the Imperial interest, might refuse this re-
quest, and thus give a greater appearance of
justice to all his operations against him. But,
if we may believe the hiftoriaris of Savoy, who
appear to be better informed with regard to this
particular than those of France, the Duke rea-
dily, and with a good grace, granted what it
was not in his power to deny, promising free
passage to the French troops-as was 'defired; so
that Francis, as the only method now left of
justifying the measures which he -determined

to

to take, was obliged to insist for fall fatisfa&tion
with regard to every thing that either the crown
of France or his mother Louise could demand of
the house of Savoy. e) Such an evasive answer,
as might have been expe6ted, being made to
this requisition , the French army under the
;admiral Brion poured at once into the Duke's
territories at different places. The countries of
Breffe and Bugey, united at that time to Savoy,
were over-run in a moment. Most of the towns
in the dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at
the approach of the enemy; a few which at-
tempted to make resistance were easily forced;
and before the end of the campaign, the Duke
saw himself stripped of all his dominions, but
the province of Piedmont, in which there were
not many places in a condition to be defended.

The ci:y of Geneva recovers its liberty.

To complete the Duke's misfortunes, the

city of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he
claimed, and in some degree pofleffed threw
off his yoke, and its revolt drew along with it
the lois of the adjacent territories. Geneva was,
at that time, an Imperial city; and though
under the direst dominion of its own bishops ,
and the remote sovereignty of the Dukes of Sa-
voy, the form of its internal constitution was
purely republican, being governed by syndics

e) Hiftoire Genealogique de Savovye, par Guichenon, 2.

tom. fol. Lion. i660 , i. 639 , &c.

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. T

and a council chosen by the citizens. From the'e
diftin& and often clashing jurifdi&ions, two op-
pofite parties took their rife, and had long-fub-
Lifted in the state; the one composed of the ad-
vocates for the privileges of the community,
assumed the name of Eignotz, or confederates
in defence of liberty; and branded the other;
which supported the episcopal or ducal preroga-
tives, with the name of Mammelukes or slaves.
At length, (I532.) the Protestant opinions be-
ginning to spread among the citizens, inspired
fach as embraced them with that bold enterpriz.
ing spirit which always accompanied or was na-
turally produced by them in their first opera-
tions. As both the Duke and Bishop were from
interest, from prejudice, and from political cori-
fiderations, violent enemies of the Reformation,
all the new converts joined with warmth the
party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,
mingling with the love of liberty, added strength
to that generous paflion. The rage and animo-
fity of two fations, shut up within the fame
walls, occasioned frequent infurreaions, which
terminating mostly to the advantage of the
friends of liberty, they daily gained ground.

The Duke and Bishop, forgetting their an-

cient contests about jnrifdi&tion, had united
against their common enemies, and each attack-
ed them with his proper weapons. The Bi-
thop excommunicated the people of Geneva as
guilty of a double crime; of impiety, in apof-

tatizing from the established religion; and of
sacrilege, in invading the rights of his fee. The
Duke attacked them as rebels against their lawful
Prince, and attempted (i534.) to render himself
master of the city, first by furprize, and then
by open force. The citizens, despising the
thunder of the Bifhop's censures, bold'y assert-
ed their independence againift the Duke; and
partly by their own valour, partly by the
powerful assistance which they received from
their allies, the canton of Berne, together with
some small supplies both of men and money,
secretly furnished by the King of France, they
defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied with
having repulsed him, or with remaining always
upon the defensive themselves, they now took
advantage of the Duke's inability to resist them,
while overwhelmed by the armies of France,
and seized several castles and places of strength
which he poffeffed in the neighbourhood of
Geneva; thus delivering the city from those
odious monuments of its former fubje&ion, and
rendering the publick liberty more secure for
the future. At the fame time the canton of
Berne invaded and conquered the Pays de Vaud,
to which it had some pretensions. The canton
of Friburgh, though zealouily attached to the
Catholick religion, and having no fubjet of con-
teit with the Duke, laid hold on part of the
spoils of that unfortunate Prince. A great por-
tion of these conquests or ufurpations being 1ftll

S12

retained by the two cantons, add considerably
to their power., and have become the most va-
luable part of their territories, Geneva, not-
withstanding many schemes and enterprizes of
the Dukes of Savoy to re-establish their domi-
nion there, still keeps pofleffion of its indepen-
dence; and in consequence of that blefling, has
attained a degree of consideration, wealth and
elegance, which it could not otherwise have
reached, f)

The Emperor unable to afflift the Duke of Savoy.

Amidst such a succession of disastrous events,

the Duke of Savoy had no other resource but
the Emperor's proteEtion, which , upon his
return from Tunis, he demanded with the most
earnest importunity ; and as his misfortunes
were occasioned chiefly by his attachment to
the Imperial interest, he had a just title to im-
mnediate afliftance. Charles, however, was not
in a condition to support him with that vigour
and dispatch which the exigency of his affairs
called for. Molt of the troops employed in the
African expedition, having been raised for that
service alone, were disbanded as soon as it was
finished; the veteran forces under Antonio de
Leyva were hardly fufficient for the defence of

f) Hist., de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. 12. Utr. 1685,

p. 99. Hilt. de la Reformation de Suisse, par Rouchat.
Gen. 1728, tom. iv. p. 294, &c. tom. v. p. 216, &c.
Mem. de Bellay, Irx.

the Milanese ; and the Etnperor's treasury was
entirely drained-by his vast efforts against the
Infidels.

Death of Sforza Duke of Milan. Oft. 24. 1535.

But the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned,

according to some historians, by the terror of
a French invasion, which had twice been fatal
to his family, afforded the Emperor full leifuire
to prepare for aftion. By this unexpe&ed
event, the nature of the war, and the causes
of discord, were totally changed. Francis's
first pretext for taking arms, in order to chaf-
tife Sforza for the insult offered to the dignity
of his croxwnr, was at once cut off; but as that
Prince died without issue, all Francis's rights
to the dutchy of Milan, which he had yielded
only to Sforza and his posterity, returned back
to him in full force. As the recovry of the
Mlilanefe was the favourite obje&t of that Mo-
na:rch , he instantly renewed his claim to it;
and, if he had supported his pretensions by
ordering the powerful army quartered in Savoy
to advance without losing a moment towards
VMilan, he could hardly have failed to secure
the important point of poffeffion.

Francis's pretenGons to that Idutchy.

But Francis, who became daily less enter-

prifing as he advanced in years, and who was
overawed at some times into an excess of cau-

tion by the remembrance of his past misfortunes,
endeavoured to establish his rights by negocia-
tion, not by arms; and from a timid modera-
tion, fatal in all great affairs, neglefted to im-
prove the favourable opportunity which pre-
fented itself. Charles was more decisive in his
operations, and in quality of sovereign, took
lpoffeflion of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the
Empire. While Francis endeavoured to explain
and assert his title to it, by arguments and ,me-
morials, or employed various arts in order to
reconcile the Italian powers to the thoughts of
his regaining footing in Italy , his rival was
silently taking effe6tual steps to prevent it. The
Emperor, however , was very careful not to
discover too early any intention of this kind;
but seeming -to admit the equity of Francis's
claim, he appeared solicitous only about giving
him poffeffion in such a manner as might not
disturb the peace of Europe , or overturn the
balance of power in Italy, which the politi-
cians of that country were so fond of preserving.
By this artifice he deceived Francis, and gained
so much confidence with the reft of Europe,
that, almost without incurring any suspicion,
he involved the affair in new difficulties, and
protrafted the negociations at pleasure. Some-
times he proposed to grant the investiture of
Milan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's second
son, sometimes to the Duke of Angouleme, his
third son; as the views and inclinations of the

French court varied, he transferred his choice
alternately from the one to the other, with such
profound and wcll-conduted dissimulation, that
neither Francis nor his ministers seem to have
penetrated his real intention; and all military
operations were entirely suspended, as if no-
thing had remained but to enter quietly into
poffeflion of what they demanded.

Charles's preparations for war.

During the interval gained in this manner,

Charles, on his return from Tunis, assembled
the states both of Sicily and Naples, and as they
thought themselves greatly honoured by the
presence of their sovereign, and were no less
pleased with the apparent disinterestedness of
his expedition into Africa, than dazzled by the
success which had attended his arms, prevailed
on them to vote him such liberal subsidies as
were seldom granted in that age. This enabled
him to recruit his veteran troops, to levy a
body of Germans, and to take every other pro-
per precaution for executing or supporting the
measures on which he had determined. Bel-
lay, the French envoy in Germany, having
discovered the, intention of raising troops in that
country, notwithstanding all the pretexts em-
ployed in order to conceal it, first alarmed his
master with this evident proof of the Emperor's
insincerity. g) But Francis was so poffefled at

g) Mem. de Bellay, 193.

that time with the rage of negociation, in all
the artifices and refinements of which his rival
far surpassed him, that instead of beginning his
military operations , and pushing them with
vigour, or seizing the Milanese before the Im-
perial army was assembled, he satisfied himself
with making new offers to the Emperor , irn
order to procure the investiture by his voluntary
dreed. His offers were, indeed, so liberal and
advantageous, that if ever Charles had intended
to grant his demand, he could not have reje&ted
them with decency. He dexterously eluded
them by declaring that, until he consulted the
Pope in person, he could not take his final re-
solution with regard to a point which so nearly
concerned the peace of Italy. By this evasion
he gained some farther time for ripening the
schemes which he had in view.

The Emperor enters Rome. April 6. 1536.

The Emperor at last advanced towards Rome,

and made his pttbliek entry into that city with
extraordinary pomp; but it being found necefi
fary to remove the ruins of a'n ancient temple
of Peace, in order to widen one of the streets,
through which the cAvalcade had to pass, all
the historians takh n'otice of this trivial circum-
flahne, which they are fond to interpret as an
oem'n of the blbody Whr that followed. Charles,
it is certain , had by this time 'banifhed alt
thoughts of peace; and at last threw off the

mask, with which he had so long covered his
designs from the court of France, by a decla-
ration of his sentiments no less singular than
explicit.

His publick inve&ive against Francis.

The French ambassadors having in their

mafter's name demanded a definitive reply to
his propositions concerning the investiture of
MVlilan, Charles promised to give it next day in
presence of the Pope and Cardinals assembled in
full consistory. These being accordingly met,
and all the foreign ambassadors invited to attend,
the Emperor fltood up, and addressing himself
to the Pope, expatiated for some time on the
sincerity of his own wishes for the peace of
Christendom, as well as his abhorrence of war,
the miseries of which he enumerated at great
length, with studied and elaborate oratory; he
complained that all his endeavours to preserve
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de-
seated by the restless and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during' his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hofftile inten-
tions of that Monarch; that afterwards, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Impe-
rial crown which belonged to him by a title no
less just than natural; that he had next invaded
his kingdom of Navarre; that not satisfied with
this, he had attacked his territories as well as
those of his allies both in Italy and the Low

Countries; that when the valour of the Impe-
rial troops , rendered irresistible by the pro-
tetion of the Almighty, had checked his pro-
grefs, ruined his armies, and seized his person,
he continued to purfeic by deceit what he had
undertaken with injustice; that he had violated
.every article in the treaty of Madrid to which
he owed his liberty, and as soon as he returned
to his dominions took measures for rekindling
the war which that pacification had happily ex-
tinguif'hed; that when new misfortunes compell-
ed him to sue again for peace at Cambray, he
concluded and observed it with equal insincerity;
that. soon thereafter he had formed dangerous
connexions with the heretical Princes in Ger-
many, and incited them to disturb the tranquil-
lity of the Empire ; that now he had driven
the Duke of Savoy, his brother-in-law and
ally, out of the greater part of his territories;
that after injuries so often repeated, and amidst
so many sources of discord, all hope of amity
or concord became desperate ; and though he
was still willing to grant the investiture of Mi-
lan to one of the Princes of France, there was
little probability of that event's taking place,
as Francis, on the one hand, would not con-
tent to what he judged necessary for securing
the tranquillity of Europe,, nor, on the other.,
could he think it reasonable or safe to give a
.rival the unconditional poffeffion of all that he
demanded.

Challenges him to single combat.

Let us not, however, added he, continue

wantonly to shed the blood of our innocent fab-
jests; let us decide the quarrel man to man,
with what arms he pleases to chufe, in our
shirts, on an island, a bridge, or aboard a gal-
ley moored in a river; let the dutchy of Bur-
gundy be put in deposit on his part, and that
of Milan on mine; these shall be the prize of
the conqueror; and after that, let the united
forces of Germany, Spain, and France, be em-
ployed to humble the power of the Turk, and
to extirpate heresy out of Christendom. But if
he, by declining this method of terminating
our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing
shall divert me from prosecuting it to such ex-
tremity, as shall reduce one of us to be the
poorest gentleman in his own dominions. Nor
do I fear that it will be on me this misfortune
shall fall; I enter upon a&tion with the fairest
profpeet of faccefs; the justice of my cause,
the union of my faibjefts, the number and va-
lour of my troops, the experience and fidelity
of my generals, all combine to ensure it. Of
all these advantages, the King of France is def-
titute; and -were my resources no more certain,
and my hopes of viCtory no better founded than
his, I would instantly throw myself at his feet,
and with folded hands, and a rope about my
neck, implore his mercy. h)

h) Bellay 199. Sandor. Hilotar. del Emper. ii. 22o.

This long harangue the Emperor delivered

with an elevated voice, a hangty tone, and
the greatest vehemence of expression and gef-
ture. The French ambassadors, who did not
fully comprehend his meaning, as he spoke in
the Spanish tongue, were totally disconcerted,
and at a loss how they should answer such an
unexpefed invehtive; when one of them began
to vindicate his'mafter's condut, ChaHles inter-
posed abruptly, and would not permit him to
proceed. The Pope, without entering into
any particular detail, satisfied himself with a
short but pathetic recommendation of peace,
together with an offer of employing his sincere
endeavours in order to procure that blessing to
Christendom; and the assembly broke up in the
greatest astonishment at the extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited.

The motives of this rash measure.

In no part of his condut, indeed, did

Charles ever deviate so widely from his general
chara&ter. Instead of that prudent recolletion,
that 'compofed and regular deportment so ftri.t-
ly attentive to decorum, and to admirably
adepted to conceal his own passions, for which
he was at all other times conspicuous, he ap-
pears on this occasion before the most august
assembly in Europe, boaffing of his own power
and exploits with insolence; inveigh]ing against
his enemy with indecency; and challenging

him to combat with an ostentatious valour, more
becoming a champion in romance, than the first
Monarch in Christendom. But the well-known
and powerful operation of continued prosperity,
as well as of exaggerated praise, even upon
the firmest minds, fufficiently account for this
seeming inconsistency. After having compelled
Solyman to retreat, and having stripped Bar-
baroffa of a kingdom, Charles began to confider
his arms as invincible. He had been enter-
tained, ever since his return from Africa, with
repeated scenes of triumphs and public re-
joicings; the orators and poets of Italy, the
most elegant at that time in Europe, had ex-
haufted their genius in panegyrick, to which
the astrologers added magnificent promises of
a more splendid fortune still in store. Intoxi-
cated with all these, he forgot his usual reserve
and moderation, and was unable to restrain this
extravagant fully of vanity, which became the
more remarkable, by being both so uncommon
and so publick.

He himself seems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour,
and when the French ambassadors demanded
next day a more clear explanation of what he
had said concerning the combat, he told them
that they were not to confider his proposal as
a formal challenge to their master, but as an
expedient for preventing bloodshed ; he endea-
voured to soften other expressions in his dif-

course; and spoke in terms full of refpedt to-
wards Francis. But though this flight apology
was' far from being fufficient to remove the
offence which had been given, Francis, by an
unaccountable infatuation, continihed to nego-
ciate, as if it had ftillbeen possible to bring their
differences to a period by an amicable compofi-
tion. Charles, finding him so eager to run
into the snare, favoured the deception, and, by
seeming to listen to his proposals, gained time to
prepare for the execution of his own designs, i)

Charles invades France.

At last, the Imperial army aflembled on

the frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of
forty thousand1 foot and ten thousand horse,
while that of France encamped near Vercelli in
Piedmont, being greatly inferior in number,
and weakened by the departure of a body of
Swiss, whom Charles artfully persuaded the
popish cantons to recal, that they might not
serve against the Duke of Savoy,, their ancient
ally. The French general, not daring to rifque
a battle, retired as son as the Imperialists ad-
vanced. The Emperor put himself (May 6.
1536.) at the head of his forces, which the
Marquis del Guaffto, the Duke of Alva and Ser-
dinand de Gonzaga commanded under him,
though the supreme diretion of the whole was
committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose abili-

i) Mem, de Bellay , ~05, &c.

ties and experience justly entitled him to that
diftin&ion. Charles soon discovered his inten-
tion not to confine his operations to the reco-
very of Piedmont and Savoy, but to push for-
ward and invade the southern provinces of
France. This scheme he had long meditated,
and had long been taking measures for execut-
ing it with fiich vigour as might ensure success.
He had remitted large sums to his sifter, the
governess of the Low Countries, and to his
brother, the King of the Romans, inftru&ing
them to levy all the forces in their power, in
order to form two separate bodies, the one to
enter France on the fide of Picardy, the other on
the fide of Champagne; while he, with the main
army, fell upon the opposite frontier of the
kingdom. Trusting to these vast preparations,
he thought it impossible that Francis could resist
so many unexpedted attacks, on such different
quarters; and began his enterprize with fich
confidence of its happy iflue, that he desired
Jovius the historian, to make a large provision
of paper fufficient to record the vi&ories which
he was going to acquire.

His miniiters and generals , infread of en-

tertaining the fame sanguine hopes, repreiented
to him in the strongest terms the danger of
leading his troops so far from his own territo-
ries, to such a distance from his magazines,
and into provinces which did not yield fuffi-
cient fubfiflence for their own inhabitants. They

entreated him to confider the inexhaustible re-
sources of France in maintaining a defensive war,
and the a&ive zeal with which a gallant nobi-
lity would firve a Prince whom they loved, in
repelling the enemies of their country; they
recalled to his remembrance the fatal mifcar-
riage of Bourbon and Pescara, when they ven-
tured upon the fame enterprize under circum-
flances which seemed as certain to promise
success; the Marquis del Guafto , in particular,
fell on his knees, and conjured him to abandon
the undertaking as desperate. But many cir-
cumftances combined in leading Ch~arles to dif-
regard all their remonftrances. He could fel-
dom be brought, on any occasion, to depart
from a resolution which he had once taken;
he was too apt to under-rate and defpiLe the
talents of his rival the King of France, because
they differed so widely from his own; he was
blinded by the prefamption which accompanies
prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in some de-
gree, on the prophecies which predicted the
increase of his own grandeur. He not only
adhered obstinately to his own plan, but de-
termined to advance towards France without
waiting for the reduation of any part of Pied-
mont, except such towns as were absolutely
necessary for preserving his communication with
the IMVlan efe.

Re covers

Recovers part of the Duke of Savoy's dominions,.

The Marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis

had entrusted the command of a small body of
troops left for the defence of Piedmont, ren-
dered this more easy than Charles ha'd any
i'eafon to expe&t. That nobleman, educated
in the court of France, distinguished by con-
tinual nmarks of the King's favour, and honour-
ed to lately with a charge of such importance,
suddenly, and without any provocation or pre-
text of disgust, revolted from his benefa&or.
His motives so this treacherous ation, were
as childish as the deed itself was base. Being
strongly pofikfl'ed with a superstitious faith in di-
vination and astrology, he believed with full as-
furance, that the fatal period of the French na-
ti6n was at hand; that on its ruins the Emperor
would establish an universal monarchy ; that
therefore he ought td follow the di&ates of pru-
dence, in attaching himself to his rising fortune;
and could incur no blame for deserting a Prince
whom Heaven had devoted to deftruftion. k)
His treason became still more odious, by his
employing that very authority with which
Francis had invested him, in order to open the
kingdom to his enemies. Whatever was pro-
posed or undertaken by his officers under his
command for the defence of their conqUests,
he rejeced or defeated. Whatever properly

k) Bellt , 222, f. 246', b.
H-ist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. K

belonged to himself, as commander in chief,
to provide or perform for that purpose, he to-
tally negle&ted. In this manner, he rendered
towns even of the greatest consequence unten-
able, by leaving them destitute either of pro-
visions, or ammunition, or artillery, or a sus-
ficient garrison; and the Imperialists must have
reduced Piedmont in as short a time as was ne-
ceffary to march through it, if Montpezat, the
governor of Foffano, had not, by an extraor-
dinary effort of courage and military condut,
detained them almost a month, before that in-
considerable place.

Francis's plan for the defence of his kingdom.

By this meritorious and seasonable service,

he gained his master fufficient time for affem-
bling his forces, and for concerting a system, of
defence against a danger which he now saw to
be inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only
proper and effe&tual plan for defeating the in-
vafion of a powerful enemy; and his prudence
in chufing this plan, as well as his perseverance
in executing it, deserve the greater praise, as it
was equally contrary to his own natural temper,
and to the genius of the French nation. He de-
termined to remain altogether upon the defen-
fiv'e; never to hazard a battle, or even a great
skirmish, without certainty of success ; to forti-
fy his camps in a regular manner; to throw
garrisons only into towns of great strength; to

deprive the enemy of subsistence, by laying
waffe the country before them; and to save the
whole kingdom, by sacrificing one of its pro-
vinces.

Entrusts Montmorency with the execution of it.

The execution of this plan he committed en-

tirely to the marechal Montmorency, who was
the author of it; a man wonderfully fitted by
nature for such a trust. Haughty, severe,
confident in his own abilities, and despising
those of other men; incapable of being diverted
from any resolution by remonftrances or entrea-
ties; and, in profecuding any scheme, regard-
less alike of love and of pity.

He encamps at Avignon.

Montmorency made choice of a strong camp

under the walls of Avignon, at the confluence
of the Rhone and Durance, one of which plen-
tifully supplied his troops with all neceflaries
from the inland provinces, and the other co-
vered his camp on that fide, were it was most
probable the enemy would approach. He la-
boured with unwearied indaftry to render the
fortifications of this camp impregnable, and
aftembled there a considerable army, though
greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while
the King with another body of troops encamped
at Valence, higher up the Rhone. Marseilles

and Aries were the only towns he thought it
neceflary to defend; the former, in order to
retain the command of the sea; the latter, as
the barrier of the province of Languedoc; and
each of these he furnished with numerous gar-
rifons of his best troops, commanded by officers
on whose fidelity and valour he could rely.
The inhabitants of the other towns, as well
as of the open country, were compelled to
abandon their houses, and were conduted to
the mountains, to tree camp at Avignon, or to
the inland provinces. 'the fortifications of such
places as might have afforded shelter or defence
to the enemy , were thrown down. Corn,
forage and provisions of every kind, carried
away or destroyed; all the mills and ovens were
ruined, and the wells filled up or rendered
useless. The devastation extended from the
Alps to Marseilles, and from the sea to the
confines of Dauphin6d; nor does history afford
any instance among civilized nations, in which
this cruel expedient for the publick safety was
employed with the fame rigour.

Charles enters Provence.

Mleanwhile, the Emperor arrived with the

van of his army on the frontiers of Provence,
and was still so poffeffed with confidence of fuc-
cess, that during a few days, when he was ob-
liged to halt until the reft of his troops came
up, he began to divide his future conquests

among his officers; and as a new incitement to
serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises
of offices, lands, and honours in France. 1)
The face of desolation, however, which pre-
fented itself to him, when he entered the coun-
try , began to damp his hopes, and convinced
him that a Monarch, who, in order to distress
an enemy, had voluntarily ruined one of his rich-
eft provinces, would defence the reft with ob-
flinate despair. Nor was it long before he be-
came sensible that Francis's plan of defence was
as prudent as it appeared to be extraordinary.
lHis fleet, on which Charles chiefly depended
for subsistence, was prevented for some time by
contrary winds, and other accidents to which
naval operations are subjeCt , from approaching
the French coast ; even after its arrival, it afford-
ed at best a precarious and- fcantv supply to
such a numerous body of troops; m) nothing was
to be found in the country itself for their sup-
pcrc ; nor could they draw any considerable aid
from .the dominions of the Duke of Savoy,
exhausted already by maintaining two great ar-
mies. The Emperor was no less embaraffed ho.w
to employ, than how to subsist his forces; for
though he was now in pofieffion of almost an
entire province, he could not be said to have
the command of it, while he held only defen-

1) Bellay, 266, a.

in) Sandov. ii. 23I.

celefs towns; and while the French, besides
their camp at Avignon, continued masters of
Niarfeilles and Aries. At first he thought of
attacking the camp, and of terminating the war
by one decisive blow; but skilful officers, who
7were appointed to view it, declared the attempt
to be utterly impraticable.

Befieges Marifeilles.

He then gave orders to invest Marseilles

and Aries, hoping that the French would quit
their advantageous post in order to relieve them;
but Montmorency adhering firmly to his plan,
remained immoveable at Avignon, and the Im-
perialifts met with such a warm reception from
the garrisons of both towns, that they relin-
quifhed their enterprizes with loss and disgrace.
As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once
more towards Avignon, though with an army
harassed by the perpetual incursions of small
parties of the French light- troops, weakened
by diseases, and dispirited by disasters, which
seemed more intolerable, because they were
unexpe&ed.

VMontmorency's fcrtitude in adhering to his plan of defence.

During these operations Montmorency found

himself exposed to greater danger from his own
troops than from the enemy; and their inconfi-
derate valour went near to have precipitated
the kingdom into those calamities, which he

with such industry and caution had endeavoured
to avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy
ravaging their country almost without controul;
impatient of such long ina&ion, unacquainted
with the flow and remote , but certain effe&s
ofMontmorency's system of defence; the French
wished for a battle with no less ardour than the
Imperialists. They considered the condu& of
their general as a disgrace to their country. His
caution they imputed to timidity; his circum-
fpeftion to want of spirit; and the constancy
with which he pursued his plan , to obstinacy
or pride. There refle&ions , whispered at first
among the soldiers and fabalterns, were adopt-
ed, by degrees, by officers of higher rank; and
as many of them envied Montmorencv's favour
with the King, and more were diffatisfied with
his harsh disgusting manner, the discontent soon
became great in his camp , which was filled
with general murmurings, and almost open com-
plaints against his meafures.' Montmorency, on
whom the sentiments of his own troops made
as little impreflion as the insults of the enemy,
adhered steadily to his system; though, in order
to reconcile the army to his maxims, no less
contrary to the genius of the nation, than to
the ideas of war among undisciplined troops,
he assumed an unusual affability in his deport-
ment, and often explained, with great con-
descension, the motives of his condu&t, the ad-
vantages which had already resulted from it,

and the certain success with which it would be
attended. At last Francis joined his army at
Avignon, which having received several reinfor-
cements, he now considered as of strength sus-
ficient to fa.ce the enemy. As he had put no
small confitraint upon himself, in copfenting that
his troops should remain so long upon the de-
fenfive, it can hardly be doubted but that his
fondness for what was daring and splendid,
added to the impatience both of officers and fol-
diers, would at last have overruled Montmo-
rency's salutary paution. n)

The retreat and wretched condition of the.Imperial Army.

Happily the retreat of the enemy delivered

the kingdom from the danger which any rash
resolution might have occasioned. The Em-
peror, after spending two inglorious months in
Provence, without having performed any thing
suitable to his vast preparations, or that could
jpftify the confidence with which he had boasted
of his own power, found, that, besides Antonio
de Leyva, and other officers of difiin&ion, he
had loft one half of his troops by diseases, or
by famine; and that the reft were in no con-
dition to firuggle any longer with calamities,
by which so many of their companions had
perished. Necessity, therefore, extorted from
him orders to retire; and though he was some

n) Mem. de Bellay, 269, &c. 31Z, &c.

time in motion before the French fufpefted his
intention, a body of light troops, assisted by
crowds of peasants, eager to be revenged on
those who had brought such desolation on their
country, hung upon the rear of the Imperialists,
and by seizing every favourable opportunity of
attacking them, threw them often into confu-
sion. The road by which they fled, for they
pursued their march with such disorder and pre-
cipitation, that it scarcely deserves the name of
a retreat, was fitrewed with arms or baggage,
which in their hurry and trepidation they had
abandoned , and covered with the sick , the
wounded, and the dead; insomuch that Martin
Bellay, an eyewitness of their calamities, en-
deavours to give his readers some idea of it, by
comparing their miseries to those which the
Jews fuffered from the vi~torious and destructive
arms of the Romans. o) If Montmorency , at
this critical moment, hiad advanced with all his
forces , nothing could have saved the whole
Imperial army from utter ruin. But the general,
by standing so long and so obstinately on the
defensive, had become cautious to excess; his
mind tenacious of any bent it had once taken,
could not assume a contrary one as suddenly as
the change of circumstances required; and he
still continued to repeat his favourite maxims,
that it was more prudent to allow the lion to

o) Mem. de Bellay, 316. Sandov. Hilft. del Emper. ii. 232.

escape, than to drive him to despair, and that
a bridge of gold should be made for a retreat-
ing enemy.

The Emperor having conducted the fhatrer-

ed remains of his troops to the frontiers of
Milan, and appointed the marquis del Guafto to
succeed Leyva in the government of the dutchy,
set out for Genoa. As he could not bear to
expose himself to the scorn of the Italians, after
such a fad reverse of fortune; and did not choose,
under his present circumstances, to revisit those
cities through which he'had so lately passed in
triumph for one conquest , and in certain ex-
peftation of another; he embarked (November
1536.) dire&ly for Spain. p)

Operations in Picardy.

Nor was the progress of his arms on the

opposite frontier of France such as to alleviate,
in any degree, the losses which he had sustain-
ed in Provence. Bellay, by his address and
intrigues, had prevailed on so many of the
German Princes to withdraw the contingent of
troops which they had furnished to the King of
the Romans, that he was obliged to lay aside
all thoughts of his intended irruption into Cham-
pagne. Though a powerful army levied in the
Low Countries entered Picardy , which they
found but feebly guarded, while the strength

p) Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxv. p. 174, &c,

of the kingdom was drawn towards the south;
yet the nobility taking arms with their usual
alacrity, supplied by their spirit the defe&s of
the King's preparations, and defended Peronne,
and other towns which were attacked, with
such vigour, as obliged the enemy to retire,
without making any conquest of importance, q)

Thus Francis, by the prudence of his own

measures, and by the union and valour of his
fubjefts, rendered abortive those vast efforts in
which his rival had almost exhausted his whole
force. As this humbled the Emperor's arro-
gance no less than it checked his power, he
was mortified more sensibly on this occasion
than on any other, during the course of the
long contests between him and the French
Monarch.

Death of the Dauphin, imputed to poison.

One circumstance alone embittered the joy

with which the success of the campaign inspired
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his eldest son, a Prince of great hopes, and
extremely beloved by the people on account of
his resemblance to his father. This happening
suddenly, was imputed to poison, not only by
the vulgar, fond of ascribing the death ofilluft-
rious personages to extraordinary causes, but
by the King and his fninifters. The count de

q) Mem. de Bellay, 318, &c.

Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cup-bearer
to the Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and
put to the torture, openly charged the Imperial
generals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with having in-
fligated him to the commission of that crime :
he -even threw out some indire& and obscure
accusations againit the Emperor himself. At a
time when all France was animated with im-
placable hatred against Charles,. this uncertain
and extorted charge was considered as an incon-
tefiible proof of guilt; while the confidence
with which both he and his officers aflerted
their own innocence , together with the indi-
gnation, as well as horror, which they express-
ed on their being supposed capable of fiuch a de-
testable a&ion, were little attended to, and
less regarded. r) It is evident, however, that
the Emperor could have no inducement to per-
petrate such a crime, as Francis was still in the
vigour of life himself, and had two sons, beside
the Dauphin, grown up to a good age. That
single consideration, without mentioning the
Emperor's general charater, unblemished by
the imputation of any deed resembling this in
atrocity, is more than fufficient to counterba-
lance the weight of a dubious testimony uttered
during the anguish of torture. s) According to
the most unprejudiced historians, the Dauphin's

r) Mem. de Bellay, 289.

s) Sandov. Hist. del Emper. ii. 23I.

death was occasioned by his having drunk too
freely of cold water after over heating himself
at tennis; and this account, as it is the most
simple, is likewise the most credible. But if
his days were cut short by poison, it is not im-
probable that the Emperor conjeft-ured rightly ,
when he affirmed that it had been administered
by the direction of Catharine of Medici, in
order to secure the crown to the Duke of Or-
leans, her husband. t) The advantages result-
ing to her by the Dauphin's death, were ob-
vious as well as great; nor did her boundless
and daring ambition ever scruple at any aEtion
necessary towards attaining the obje&s which
she had in view.

Decree of the parliament of Paris against the Emperor,

Next year opened with a tranfaftion very

uncommon, but so incapable of producing any
effet, that it would not deserve to be men-
tioned, if it were not a striking proof of the
personal animosity which mingled itself in all
the hostilities between Charles and Francis, and
which often betrayed them into such indecen-
cies towards each other, as lessened the di-
gnity of both. Francis, accompanied by the peers
and princes of the blood, having taken his feat
in the parliament of Paris with the usual folem-
nities, the advocate general appeared: and

t) Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75.

after accusing Charles of Aufiria (for so he as-
fe&ed to call the Emperor), of having violated
the treaty of Cambray, by which he was ab-
solved from the homage due to the crown of
France for the counties of Artois and Slanders;
insisted that this treaty being now void, he
was still to be considered as a vassal of the
crown, and by consequence, had been guilty
of rebellion in taking arms against his sovereign;
and therefore he demanded that Charles should
be summoned to appear in person, or by his
counsel, before the parliament of Paris, his
legal judges, to answer for his crime. The
request was granted; a herald repaired to the
frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him with
the accustomed formalities to appear against a
day prefixed. That term being expired, and
no person appearing in his name, the parliament
gave judgment, ,, That Charles of Austria had
forfeited by rebellion and contumacy those fiefs;
declared Flnders and Artois to be re-united to
the crown of France; " and ordered their de-
cree for this purpose to be published by found
of trumpet on the frontiers of these provin-
ces. u)

Campaign opens in the Low Countries.

Soon after this vain display of his resent-

ment, rather than of his power, Francis march-

u)} Lettres & Memoires d'Etat, par Ribier, 2. tom. Blois, 1666.

tom. i. p. I.

ed (March. 1535.) towards the Low Countries,
as if he had intended to execute the sentence
which his parliament had pronounced, and to
seize those territories which it had awarded to
him. As the Queen of Hungary, to whom her
brother the Emperor had committed the govern-
ment of that part of his dominions, was not
prepared for so early a campaign, he at first
made some progress, and took several towns of
importance. But being obliged soon to leave
his army, in order to superintend the other
operations of war, the Flemings having affem-
bled a numerous army, not only recovered most
of the places which they had loft, but began
to make conquests in their turn. At last they
invested Terouenne, and the Duke of Orleans,
now Dauphin, by the death of his brother, and
Montmorency, whom Francis had honoured
with the conftable's sword, as the reward of
his great services during the former campaign,
determined to hazard a battle in order to re-
lieve it.

A fLlfpenfion of arms there;

While they were advancing for this pur-

pore, and within a few miles of the enemy, they
were ftopt short by the arrival of an herald from
the Queen of Hungary, acquainting him that a
fafpenfion of arms was now agreed upon.

This unexpe&ted event was owing to the

zealous endeavours of the two sisters, Queens

of France and of Hungary, who had long la-
boured to reconcile the contending Monarchs.
'The war in the Netherlands had laid wafle the
frontier provinces of both countries,. without
any real advantage to either. The French and
Flemings equally regretted the interruption of
their commerce, which was beneficial to both.
Charles as well as Francis , who had each Ilrain-
ed to the utmost, in order to fapport the vast
operations of the former campaign, found that
they could not now keep armies on foot in this
quarter, without weakening their operations
in Piedmont, where both wished to push the
war with the greatest vigour. All these cir-
cumifances facilitated the negociations of the
two Queens; a truce was concluded, (July 30.
x537.) to continue in force for ten months, but
it extended no farther than the Low Coun-
tries. x)

arhd in Piedmont.

In Piedmont the war was still prosecuted

with great animosity; and though neither Char-
les nor Francis could make the powerful efforts
to which this animosity prompted them, they
continued to exert themselves like combattants,
wvhofe rancour remains after their strength is
exhausted. Towns were alternately loft and
retaken; skirmishes were fought every day ;

x) Memoires de Ribietr 5E-

and

and much blood was shed, without any decisive
a&tion, that gave the superiority to either fide.
At last the two Queens, determining not to
leave unfinished the good work which they had
begun, prevailed, by their importunate folici-
tations, the one on her brother, the other on
her husband, to consent also to a truce in Pied-
mont for three months. The conditions of it
were, that each should keep pofieflion of what
was in his hands, and after leaving garrisons
in the towns, should withdraw his army out
of the province; and that plenipotentiaries fhoud
be appointed to adjust all matters in dispute by
a final treaty. y)

Motives of it.

The powerful motives which inclined both

Princes to this accommodation, have been often
mentioned. The expences of the war had far
exceeded the fulms which their revenues were
capable of fapplying, nor durst they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established, as fubje&s were not yet taught to
bear with patience the immense burdens to
which they have become accufiomed in modern
times. The Emperor, in particular, though
he had contrasted debts which in that age ap-
peared prodigious, z) had it not in his power
to pay the large arrears long due to his army.

y) Me:noires de Ribier, 62.
z) Ribier. i. 294.

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. L

At the fame time he had no prpfpej of deriving
any aid in 4'oney or men either from the Pope
or Venetians, though he had employed promi-
fest and threats, alternately, in older to pro-
cure it. - But he found the former not only fixed
in his resolution of adhering steadily to the neu-
rality which he had always declared to be fuit'
able to his charafter, but passionately desirous
of bringing about a peace.. He perceived that
the latter were still intent on their ancient ob-
je& of holding the balance even between the
rivals, and solicitous not to throw too great a
weight into either scale.

Of which, Francis's alliance with the Turkish Emperor

the most considerable.

What made a deeper impression on Charles

than all these , was the dread of the Turkish
arms, which, by his league with Solyman,
Francis had drawn upon him. Though Francis,
without the assistance of a single ally, had a war
to maintain against an enemy greatly superior
in power to himself, yet so great was the hor-
ror of Christians, in that age, at any union with
Infidels, which they considered not only as dif-
honourable but profane, that it was long be-
fore he could be brought to avail himself of the
obvious advantages resulting from such a confe-
deracy. Necessity at last surmounted his deli-
cacy and scruples. Towards the close of the
preceding year, La Forest, a secret agent at

the Ottoman Porte, had concluded a treaty with
the Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to in-
vade the kingdom of Naples, during the next
campaign, and to attack the King of the Ro-
mans in Hungary with a powerful army, while
Francis undertook to enter the Milanese at the
fame time with a proper force. Solyman had
punatually performed what was incumbent on
him. Barbarossa with a great fleet appeared on
the coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from
which all the troops had been drawn towards
Piedmont, with consternation, landed without
reifilance near Taranto, obliged Cafcro, a place
of some strength , to surrender, plundered the
adjacent country, and was taking measures for
securing and extending his conquests , when
the unexpe&ed arrival of Doria, together with
the Pope's gallies, and a squadron of the Ve-
netian fleet, made it prudent for him to retire.
In Hungary the progress of the Turks was more
formidable. Mahmet, their general, after gain-
ing several small. advantages, defeated the Ger-
mans in a great battle at Effek on the Drave. a)
Happily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exaicnefs what he
had stipulated; nor could he assemble at this
juncture an army ftroun enough cto penetrate
into the Milanese. By this lie failed in recover-
ing poffeflion of that dutchy ; and Italy was not

1 -

a) lilanheff. II'f. ' L ung. li[. -::. 13P.

only saved from the calainities of a new war,
but from feeling the desolating rage of the Tur-
kish arms, as an addition to all that it had sus-
fered. b) As the Emperor knew that he could
not long resist the efforts of two such powerful
confederates, nor coald 'expeft that the fame
fortunate accidents would concur a second time
to deliver Naples, and to preserve the Milanese:
As he foresaw that the Italian states would not
only tax him loudly with insatiable ambition,
but might even turn their arms aganift him, if
he thould be so regardless of their danger as
obstinately to protrat the war, he thought it
necessary, both for his safety and reputation,
to give his consent to a truce. Nor was Francis
willing to sustain all the blame of obfirudting
the re - establishment of peace, or to expose
himself on that account to the danger of being
deserted by the Swiss and other foreigners in
his service. He even began to apprehend that
his own fubjefs would serve him coldly, if by
contributing to aggrandize the power of the In-
fidels, which it was his duty, and had been
the ambition of his ancestors to depress, he con-
tinued to aEt in dire&t opposition to all the prin-
ciples which ought to influence a Monarch dif-
tinguifhed by the title of Most Christian King.
He chose, for all these reasons, rather to run
the risk of difobliging his new ally the Sultan,

b) Jovii Hirfor, lib, xxxvy. p, 183.

than, by an unseasonable adherence to the
treaty with him, to forfeit what was of greater
consequence.

Negociations of a peace between Charles and Francis.

But though both parties consented to a

truce, the plenipotentiaries found insuperable
difficulties in fettling the articles of a definitive
treaty. Each of the Monarchs, with the arro-
gance of a conqueror, aimed at giving law to
the other; and neither would so far acknow-
ledge his inferiority, as to sacrifice any point
of honour, or to relinquish any matter of right;
so that the plenipotentiaries spent the time in
long and fruitless negotiations, and separated
after agreeing to prolong the truce for a few
months.

The Pope conduas these in person.

The Pope, however, did not despair of

accomplishing a point in which the plenipoten-
tiaries had failed, and took upon himself the
sole burden of negociating a peace. To form
a confederacy capable of defending Christendom
from the formidable inroads of the Turkish arms
and to concert effe&tual meafaures for the extir-
pation of the Lutheran heresy, were two great
objefts which Paul had much at heart, and he
considered the union of the Emperor with the
King of France as an essential preliminary to
both. To be the instrument of reconciling these

contending Monarchs, whom his predecessors
by their interested and indecent intrigues had
so often embroiled, was a circumstance which
could not fail of throwing distinguished lustre
on his chara&ter and administration. Nor was
he without hopes that, while he pirfued this
laudable end, he might secure advantages to
his own family, the aggrandizing of which he
did not negleft, though he aimed at it with a
]efs audacious ambition than was common among
the Popes of that century. Influenced by these
considerations, he proposed an interview be-
tween the two Monarchs at Nice, and offered
to repair thither in person, that he might aft
as mediator in compoling all their differences.
'iWhen a Pontiff of a venerable charat&er, and
of a very advanced age, was willing, from his
zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues of such
a distant journey, neither Charles nor Francis
could with decency decline the interview. But.
though both came to the place of rendez-vous,
so great was the difficulty of adjusting the cere-
monial, or such the remains of distrust and
rancour on each fide, that they refused to fee
one another, and every thing was tranfaEted by
the intervention of the Pope, who visited them
2.lternately. With all his zeal and ingenuity
he could not find out a method of removing the
obstacles which prevented a final accommoda-
tion, particularly those arising from the pof-
fefion of the Milanese; nor was all the weight

bs his authority fufficient to overcome the ob-
ftinate perseverance of either Monarch in assert-
ing his own claims.

A truce for ten years concluded at Nice. June 18. 1538.

At last, that he might not seem to have

laboured altogether without effe&t, he prevail-
ed on them to sign a truce for ten years, upon
the fame condition with the former, that each
should retain what was now in his poffeffion,
and in the mean time should fend ambassadors
to Rome , to discuss their pretensions at
leisure. c)

Thus ended a war of no long continuance,

but very extensive in its operations, and in
which both parties exerted their utmost strength.
Though Francis failed in the obje&t that he had
principally in view, the recovery of the Mila-
nefe, he acquired, nevertheless, great repu-
tation by the wisdom of his measures as well
as the success of his arms in repulsing a for-
midable invasion; and by securing poffeffion of
one half of the Duke of Savoy's dominions, he
added no inconsiderable accession to his king-
dom. Whereas Charles, repulsed and baffled
after having boasted so arrogantly of viEtory,
purchased and inglorious truce, by sacrificing
an ally who had rashly confided too much in

c) Recueil des Traitez, ii. 2ro. Relatione del Nicolo Tiepolo

de l'.bo.amento di Nizza chez Du Mont Corps Diplo-
mat. l ar. ii, p. 174.

his friendship and power. The unfortunate
Duke murmured, complained, and remonftrat-
ed against a treaty so much to his disadvantage,
but in vain; he had no means of redress, and
was obliged to submit. Or all his dominions,
Nice, with its dependencies , was the only
corner of which he himself kept poffeffion. He
Law the reft divided between, a powerful in-
vader and the ally to whose prote&ion he had
trusted, while he remained a fad monument of
the imprudence of weak princes, who, by
taking part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours,
between whom they happen to be situated, are
crushed and overwhelmed in the shock.

Interview between Charles and Francis at Agues mortes.

A few days after signing the treaty of

truce, the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but
was driven by contrary winds to the island St.
Margaret on the coast of Provence. When-
Francis, who happened to be not far distant,
heard of this, he considered it as an office of
civility to invite him to take shelter in his do-
minions, and proposed a personal interview
with him at Aigues-mortes. The Emperor,
who would not be outdone by this rivalin com-
plaifance, instantly repaired thither. As soon
as he cast anchor in the road, Francis, without
waiting to fettle any point of ceremony, but
relying implicitly on the Emperor's honour for
his security, visited him on board his galley,

and was received and entertained with the
warmest demonstrations of esteem and affe&ion.
Next day the Emperor repaid the tonfidence
which the King had placed in him. He landed
at Aigues-mortes with as little precaution, and
met with a reception equally cordial. He re-
mained on shore during the night, and in both
visits they .vied with each other in expressions
of refpedt and friendship. d) After twenty years
of open hostilities, or of secret enmity; after
io many injuries reciprocally infliaed or endur-
ed; after having formally given the lie and
challenged one another to single combat; after
the Emperor had inveighed so publickly against
Francis as a Prince void of honour or integrity;
and Francis had accused him as acceflory to the
murder of his eldest son, such an interview ap-
pears altogether singular and even unnatural.
But the history of these Monarchs abounds with
such surprising transitions. From implacable
enmity they appeared to pass, in a moment,
to the most cordial reconcilement; from fufpi-
cion and diftrut to perfect confidence; and
from pra&ising all the dark arts of a deceitful
policy, they could afl'ume, of a sudden, the
liberal and open manners of two gallant
gentlemen.

d) Sandov. Hist. vol. ii. z38. Relation de V'entrevue de Charl.

V. & Fran. I. par de la Rivoire. Hilt. de Langued. par D,
D. De Vic & Vaifette. torn. v. Preuves. p. 93.

The Pope, besides the glory of having re-

taored peace to Europe, gained, according to
his expe&tation , a poiht of great consequence
to his family, by prevailing on the Emperor
To betroth Margaret of Austria, his natural
daughter, formerly the wife of Alexander tdi
Medici, to his grandson O&tavio Farnese, and in
consideration of this marriage, to bestow several
honours and territories upon his future son-
in-law.

The affafination of Alexander di Medici.

A very tragical event, which happened

about the beginning of the year one thousand
live hundred and thirty-feven , had deprived
Margaret of her first husband. That young prince,
whom the Emperor's partiality had raised
to the supreme power in Florence, upon the
ruins of the publick liberty, negleited entirely
the cares of government, and abandoned him-
seif to the most dissolute debauchery. Lorenzo
di Medici his nearest kinsman was not only the
companion but direftor of his pleasures, and
employing all the power of a cultivated and in-
ventive genius in this dishonourable ministry,
added such elegance as well as variety to vice,
as gained him an absolute ascendant over the
mind of Alexander. But while Lorenzo seem-
ed to be funk in luxury, and affected such an
appearance of indolence and effeminacy, that
he would not wear a sword, and trembled at

the fight of blood , he concealed under tbat dif-
guise, a dark, designing, audacious spirit.
Prompted either by the love of liberty, or al-
lured by the hope of attaining the supreme
power, he determined to affaflinate Alexander
his benefa&or and friend. Though he long
revolved this design in his mind, his reserved and
suspicious temper prevented him from communi-
cating it to any person whatever; and continu-
ing to live 'with Alexander in their usual fami-
liarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an assignation with a lady of
high rank whom he had often solicited, drew
that unwary Prince into a secret apartment of
his honfe, and there stabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch expe&ing the arrival of
the lady whose company he had been promised.
But no sooner was the deed done, than stand-
ing astonished, and struck with horror at its
atrocity, he forgot, in a moment, all the mo-
tives which had induced him to commit it. In-
stead of rouzing the people to recover their li-
berty by publishing the death of the tyrant,
instead of taking any step towards opening his
own way to the dignity now vacant, he locked
the door of the appartment, and, like a man
bereaved of reason and presence of mind , fled
with the utmofi precipitation out of the Floren-
tine territories. It was late next morning be-
fore the fate of the unfortunate Prince was
known, as his attendants, accustomed to his

irregularities, never entered his apartment
early.

Cofino di Medici placed at the head of the Florentine slate.

Immediately the chief persons in the slate

assembled. Being induced partly by the zeal
of cardinal Cibo for the house of Medici, to
which he was nearly related, partly by the
authority of Francis Guicciardini, who recalled
to their memory, and represented in firiking
colours .the caprice as well- as turbulence of
their ancient popular government, they agreed
to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eighteen
the only male heir of that illustrious house, at
the head of the government; though at the fame
time such was their love of liberty, that they
established several regulations in order to cir-
cumfcribe and moderate his power.

His government opposed by the Florentine exiles.

Meanwhile Lorenzo having reached a place

of safety, made known what he had done, to
Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who
had been driven into exile, or who had volun-
tarily retired, when the republican form of
government was abolished, in order to make
way for the dominion of the Medici. By them,
the deed was extolled with extravagantpraifes,
and the virtue of Lorenzo was compared with
that of the elder Brutus, who disregarded the
ties of blood, or with that of the younger,

who forgot the friendship and favours of the
tyrant, that they might preserve or recover the
liberty of their conntry. e) Nor did they reft
satisfied with empty panegyricks; they imme-
diately quitted their different places of retreat,
afiembled forces, animated their vassals and par-
tizans to take arms, and to seize this oppor-
tunity of re-establishing the publick liberty on
its ancient foundation. Being openly assisted
by the French ambassador at Rome, and secret-
ly encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good-
will to the house of Medici, they entered the
Florentine dominions with a considerable body
of men. But the persons who had ele&ed
Cosmo poffeffed not only the means of support-
ing his government, but abilities to employ
them in the most proper manner. They levied,
with the greatest expedition, a good number of
troops; they endeavoured by every art to gain
the citizens of greatest authority, and to render
the administration of the young Prince agree-
able to the people. Above all, they courted the
Emperor's prote&ion, as the only firm founda-
tion of Cofino's dignity and power. Charles,
knowing the propensity of the Florentines to
the friendship of Frantce, and how much all the
partisans of a republican government detested
him as the oppressor of their liberties, saw it
to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-

e) Lettere di principi, tom, iii, p, 5=,

establishment of the ancient constitution in Flo-
rence. For this reason, he not only acknow-
ledged Cofino as head of the Florentine fate,
and conferred on him all the titles of honour
with which Alexander had been .dignified, but
engaged to. defend him to the utmost; and as a
pledge of this,, ordered the commanders of such
of his troops as were stationed on the frontiers
of Tuscany, tb fiupport him against all aggref-
obrs. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy
vi&tory ovcr the exiles, whose troops he fur-
prifed in- the night time, and took most of the
chiefs prisoners; an event which broke all their
measures, and fully established his own autho-
tity. But though he was extremely desirous of
the additional honour of marrying the Em-
peror's daughter, the widow of his predecessor,
Charles, secure already of his attachment,
chose rather to gratify the Pope, by beftowing
her on his nephew. f)

The friendship between Francis and Henry VIII, begins to

abate.

During the war between the Emperor and

Francis, an event had happened which abated
in some degree the warmth and cordiality of
friendship which had long subsisted between the
latter and the King of England. James the

f) Jovii. Hist. c. xcv'iii p.

. IS. &c. Belcarii Comment. I.xxii.

p. 696. Iftona de fui te-mpi di Giov. Bat. Adriani. Ven.
1587, p. lo.

Fifth of Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince,
having heard of the Emperor's intention to in-
vade Provence, was to fond of fhewing that he
did not yield to any of his ancestors in the fin-
cerity of his attachment to the French crown,
and so eager to distinguish himself by some mi-
litary exploit, that he levied a body of troops
With an intention of leading them in person to
the affifftance of the King of France. Though
some unfortunate accidents prevented his car-
rying any troops into France, nothing could di-
vert him from going thither in person. Imme-
diately upon his landing, he hastened to Pro-
vence, but had been detained so long in his
voyage, that he came too late to have any
share in the military operations, and met the
King on his return after the retreat of the Im-
perialifts. But Francis was so greatly pleased
with his zeal, and no less with his manners
and conversation, that he could not refuse him.
his daughter Magdalen, whom he demanded
(Jan. i. 1537.) in marriage. It mortified Henry
extremely to fee a Prince of whom he was im-
moderately jealous, form an alliance, from
which he derived such an accessions of reputa-
tion as well as security. g) He could not,
however, with decency, oppose Francis's bes-
towing his daughter upon a Monarch descended
from a race of Princes, the most ancient and

g) Hist. of Scotland, vol, i, p. 77.

faithful allies of the French cfown. But when
James, upon. the sudden deaths oi MIagdalen,
demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise,
he warmly solicited Francis to deny his suit,
and in order to disappoint him, asked that lady
in marriage for' himself. When Francis prefer-
red the Scottish King's sincere courtship to his
artful and malevolent proposal, he discovered
much diffatisfa&ion. The pacification agreed
upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of the
two rivals at Aigues - mortes , filled Henry's
mnind with new suspicions, as if Francis had
altogether- renounced his friendship for the fake
of new conne&ions with the Emperor.

The Emperor courts Henry.

Charles, thoroughly acquainted with the

temper of the English King, and watchful to
observe all the fhiftings and caprices of his pas-
fions, thought this a favourable opportunity of
renewing his negociations with him, which had
been long broken off. By the death of Queen
Catharine, whose interest the Emperor could
not with decency have abandoned, the chief
cause of their discord was removed; so that
without touching upon the delicate question of
her divorce, he might now take-what measures
he thought most effetual for regaining Henry's
good-will. For this purpose, he began with
proposing several marriage - treaties to the King.
He offered his niece, a daughter of the King of

Denmark,

Denmark, to Henry himself; he demanded the
princess Mary for one of the Princes of Portugal,
and was even willing to receive her as the
King's illegitimate daughter. h) Though none
of these projeted alliances ever took place, or
perhaps were ever seriously intended, they oc-
cafioned such frequent intercourse between the
courts, and so many reciprocal profeffions of
civility and effeem, as considerably abated the
edge of Henry's rancour against the Emperor,
and paved the way for that union between them
iwhich afterwards proved so disadvantageous to
the French King.

Progress of the Reformation.

The ambitious schemes in which the Em-

peror had -been engaged , and the wars he had
been carrying on for forne years, proved, as
usual, extremely favourable to 'the progress of
the Reformation in Germany. While Charles
was absent upon his African expedition, or in-
tent on his vast projeEts against France, his chief
obje~t in Germany was to prevent the diffen-
fions about religion from disturbing the publick
tranquillity, by granting such indulgence to the
Proteftatit Princes as might induce them to
concur with his measures, or at least hinder
them from taking part with his rival. For this
reason, he was careful to secure to the Protef-

h) Mem. de Ribier, t. i. 496.

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. IIL. M

tants the por'efion of all the advantages which
they had gained by the articles of pacification
at 'Niremberg, in thd year one thousand five
.hundred and thirty-tWo; i) and except some
fight tirouble fotom the proceedings of the Im-
perial chamber, they met with nothing to
difturbi them in the exercise of their religion,
bt to interrupt the fuccefsful zeal with which
they propagated their opinions.

Negociations and intrigues with reffe&t to a general council.

Meanwhile the Pope continued his nego-

ciations for convoking a general, council; and
though the Protestants had expressed great dif-
fatisfacrion with his intention to fix upon Man-
tiua as the place of mieeting , he adhered obfti-
nately to his choice iflied a bull on the second
of June, one thousand five hundred and thirty-
fix, appointing it to assemble in that city on
the twenty-third of May the year following;
he nominated three cardinals to preside in his
niame; enjoined all Chriitian Princes to coun-
tenance it by their authority, and invited the
prelates of every nation to attend in person.
This eitation of a council, an assembly which
from its nature and intention demanded quiet
times, as well as pacifick difpoifitions, at the
very jun"tur, wheh the Emperor was on his
riiarch towards France, and ready to involve

i) Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part 3. p, 13S.

a;great part o,f Europe in the,confnifions of war,
appeared to every person extremely unseasonable.
It-was intimated, however, to all the different
'eourts. by nuncios dispatched of purpose. k)
With an intention to gratify the Germans, the
IEpaeror, during his residence in Rome had
.watmly solicite.d the Pope to call a council;
but being at the fame time willing to try every
art in order to pejfuade Paul to depart from the
.petrality which he preserved between him and
Francis, he sent Heldo his vice - chancellor into
Germany , along with a nuncio difpached
thither, inflrufting him to second all the nuncio's
reprefentatioLfs, and to enforce them with the
yl;ole weight of the Imperial authority. The
Protestants gave them audience ( Feb. 25. 1537.)
atmalkalde, where they had assembled in a
body, in order. to receive them. But after
,weighing all their arguments they unanimously
refused to acknowledge a council summoned in
the name and by. the authority of the Pope
alopne; in which he assumed the sole right of
presiding; which was to be held in a city not
only far diftant.from Germany, but fubjeft to
a Prince, a stranger to them, and closely con-
;neoed with the court of Rome; and to which
.their divines could not repair with safety, efpe-
cialiy afte! their doatrines had been stigmatized
in the very bull of convocation with the name

M.

-

k) Pallavic. Hist Cone. Trid. xxi.

of her'efy. There and mniny other bbje'&loni
against the council, which 'appeared to theni un-
anfwvrabt6, they enumeratdd in a large mani-
feffto which they published in vindication of
their condu&. 1)

Againft' this the court of Rom'e exclaimend

sa a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and 'pre-
fumption, and the Pope itill petfifted in hid
resolution to hold the council at the timt and
in the place appointed. But Ftme unexpeted
difficilties being started by the Duke ofMantuai
both abdut the right of jurifdi&ion over th&
persons who resorted to the council and tha
security of his capital aknidft sauch a concourse
of strangers, the Pope, after fruitless endea-
vours to adjust there, first prorogued ( Otob. 8-
1538.) the council for foihe months and after=
warids transfering the place of meeting to Vi-
eenza in the Venetian territories, appointed it
to assemble on the first of May in the following
yea'. As neither the Emperor not French King,
who had not thn comne to any accommodation,
would permit their fabje&s to repair thither,
not a single prelate appeared on the day pre-
fixed, and the Pope, that his authority might
not b'ecome altogether contemptible by so many
ineffe&uai intimations, put off the meeting by
an indefinite prorogation. m)

1) Sieidan, I. xii. 123, &c. Sdckend. Conl. lib. iii, p. 143, &E.

mn) F. Paul, xx7. Pallavic. xi7.

A partial reformnation of abuses by the Pope.

But, that he might not seem to have

turned his whole attention towards a reformas
tion which he was not able to accomplish.,
while he neglefted that which was in his own
power, he deputed a certain number of car-
4inal4 and bishops,, with full authority to in-
quire into the abuses and coruptions. of the
Roman court,. and to propose the morc effe&tual
method of removing them. The fcrnutiny, unB-
dertaken with relu&tance, was carried on slowly
and with remissness. All defe&s were touched
with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep,
or of discovering too much. But even by this
partial examination, many irregularities were
dete&ed , and many e~normities exposed to
light, While the remedies which they suggested
as most. proper, were either inadequate, or
were never applied. The report and refoln-
tion of th.ese deputies, though intended to be
kept secret, were transmitted by some accident
into Germany, and being immediately made
publick, afforded imple matter for refletion
and triumph to the Protestants. n) On the one
hand they demonstrated the necefflty of. a re-
formation in the head as well as the members
of the church, and even pointed out many of
the coruptions against which Luther anid h.is
followers haci rempnftrated \with the greate.t

n) Sleidan, 233-

vehemence. They Thewed , on the other
hand, that it was vain tq expe&t this reforma-
tion from ecclefiafticks themselves, who, -s
JLuther Afronly expreffpd it, piddled *at purring
Wvarts, while they overlooked or confirmed
alcers. o) .

,

A league forried int opposition to that at Smalkalde.

.. The earnestness with which the Erperor

seemed , -at firi:t , to press ,their acquiefcig., in
the Pope's scheme of holding a council in Italy,
ficarmed the Protestant Princes so much, that
,threy thought it. prudent to strengthen their,rpon-
feaeracy, .by admitting several new members
Fwho solicited that privilege, particularly the
King of Denmark. Heldo , ,who., during his
residence in Germany, had observed 11 the ad-
vantages which they .derived from that union,
endeavoured to counterbalance its effefts by an
'alliance- among the. catholick powers of the
Empire. This league , distinguished by the
-iame of Holy, was merely defensive ; and
though concluded by Heldo in the Emperor's
name, was afterwards disowned by him, and
subscribed by very few Princes. -p)

Alarms the Proteltants.

The 'Proteftants soon got intelligence of this

association, notwithstanding all the endeavours

o) Seek. 1. iii. 164.
p) Seck. 1. iii. 171. Recueil de Traitez.

of the contraating parties to conceal it ; and
their zeal, always apt to fufpe&t and to dread,
even to exces , every thing that seemed to
threaten religion, instantly took the alarm as if
the Emperor had been just ready to enter upon
the execiution of some formidable plan for the
extirpation of their opinions. In order to difap-
point this , they held frequent consultations ,
they courted the Kings of France and England
with great assiduity, and even began to think
of rairing the respective contingents both in men
and money which they were obliged to furnish
by the treaty of Smalka!de. But it was not
long before they were c.onvinced that there ap-
prehenfions were without foundation, and that
the Emperor, to whom repose was absolutely
necessary after efforts so much beyond his
strength in the war with France , had no
thoughts of disturbing the tranquillity of Ger-
many. As a proof of this , at. an interview
with the Protestant Princes (April. 19. I539- )
in Francfort , his ambassadors agreed that all
concessions in their savoir , pa:rticularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg ,
should continue in force for fifteen months ;
that during this period all proceedings of the
Imperial chamber against thiem should be sus-
pended; that a conference should be held by a
few divines of each :party, in order to discuss
the points in controverfi, and to propose arti-
cles of accommodation which should be laid be-

ft

fore the next diet. Though the Emperor, that
he might not irritate the Pope, who remon-
ltrated against the first part of this agreement
as impolitick, and against the latter as an im-
pious encroachment upon his prerogative, never
formally ratified this convention, it was ob-
served with considerable exa&nefs, and greatly
strengthened the basis of that ecclesiastical li-
berty, for which the Protestants contended. q)

Reformation established in every part of Saxony.

A few days after the convention at Franc-

fort, George Duke of Saxony died, (April 24.
x539.) and his death was an event of great
advantage to the Reformation. That Prince,
the head of the Albertine, or younger branch
of the. Saxon family, poffeffed , as marquis of
Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dresden, Leipfick , and other
cities now the most considerable in the elefto-
rate. From the first dawn of the Reformation,
he. had been its enemy as avowedly as the
eletoral Princes were its prote&ors, and had
carried on his opposition not only with all the
zeal flowing from religious prejudices, but with
a virulence inspired by personal antipathy to
Luther and imbittered by the domeftick ani-
mnofity subsisting between him and the other
branch of his family. By his death without

q) F. Paul, 82s, Sleid. 247. Seck. J. iii. 3oo.

issue, his succession fell to his brother Henry,
wvhofe attachment to the Protestant religion
surpassed, if poflible, that of his predecessor to
popery. Henry no sooner took poffeffion of his
new dominions, than, disregarding a clause in
George's will, di&ated by his bigotry, whereby
he bequeathed all his territories to the Emperor
and King of the Romans, if his brother thould
attempt to make any innovation in religion, he
invited rome Protestant divines , and among
them Luther himself, to Leipfick. By their
advice and assistance, he overturned in a few
weeks the whole system of ancient rites, efta-
blithing the full exercise of the reformed reli-
gion, with the universal applause of his fubje&s,
who had long wished for this change, which
the authority of their Duke alone had hitherto
prevented. r) This revolution delivered the
Protestants from the danger to which they were
exposed by having an inveterate enemy situated
in the middle of their territories; and their
dominions now extended in one great and almost
unbroken line from the shore of the Baltick to
the banks of the Rhine.

A mutiny of the Imperial troops.

Soon after the conclusion of the truce at

Nice, an event happened, which satisfied all
Europe that Charles had prosecuted the war to

r) Sleidan, 249.

,the utmost tex-tremity that the Iftate of his affairs
would permit. Valt arrears were, due to his
troops, whom he had long atnufed with vain
.hopes and promises. As they now foresaw what
5ttle attenti'on would be paid to their demands,
wheen by the ne-eftablifhment of peace their
-services becam.e of less importance, they loft all
patience, broke out into an open mutiny, and
declared th at they thought themselves entitled
'to seize by violence what was detained from
them eontrary to all justice.. Nor was this
spirit of sedition confined to one part of the
Emperor's dominions ; the mutiny was almost
-as general as the grievance which gave rife to
it. T-he soldiers in the Milanese plundered th.e
open country without controul, and filled the
*capital itself with consternation. Those in gar-
rifon at Goletta ,threatened to give up that im-
portant fortress to Barbarossa. In Sicily the
troops proceeded to still greater excesses; having
chaced away their officers, they ele&ed others
in their fread, -defeated a body of men whom
the viceroy sent against them,, too.k and pillaged
several cities , condu&ing themselves all the
while in such a manner, that their operations
resembled rather the regular proceedings of a
concerted rebellion, than the rashness and vio-
ilence of a~nilitajry mutiny. But by the address
:and prudence of the generals, who partly by
borrowing money in their own name, or in
that of their master, partly by extorting large

sums from the cities in their refpe&tive provin-
ces, raised what was fufficient to .discharge the
a.rears of the soldiers, these infurretions were
quelled. . The greater part of the troops .were
disbanded, such a number only being kept in
pay as -was necessary for garrisoning the prin-
cipal towns, and protecting the sea-coasts from
the infulits of:the Turks. .s) . .

Cortes of Castile held at Toledo.

It was happy for the Emperor that the abi-

lities of his generals extricated him out of these
difficulties, which it exceeded his own power
to have removed. He had depended, as his
chief resource for discharging the arrears due to
his soldiers, upon the subsidies which he ex-
peded from his Castilian fubjefts. For this pur-
pose, he assembled the Cortes of Castile at To-
ledo, and having represented to them the great
expence of his military operations , together
with the vaft'debts in which these had neceffa-
rilyinvolved -him,, he proposed to levy such sup-
plies as the present exigency of his affairs de-
mnanded, rby a general excise on commodities.

The complaints and diffatisfa&tion of that assembly.

But th'e Spaniards already felt themselves

oppressed with a load of taxes unknown to
their .ancestors. They had often complained

s) Jovii Hiftor. 1, xxxvii. o03. c. Sandov. Ferreras, ix. :o9.

that their country was drained not only of its
wealth but of its inhabitants , in ordrer to pro-
feeute quarrels in which it was not interested,
and to fight battles from which it could reap no
benefit, and they determined not to add volun-
tarily to their own burdens, or to-furnifh the
Emperor with the means of engaging in new
enterprizes no less ruinous to the kingdom than
snoft of those which he had hitherto carried on.
The nobles, in particular, inveighed with great
vehemence against the imposition pro:pofeAd, as
an encroachment upo the valuable and diftia-
guifhing privilege of their order., that of being
exempted from the payment of any tax. They
demanded a conference with the representatives
of- the cities concerning the state of the nation,
They contended that if1 Charles wo~uld imitate
the example of his predecessors, who had re,-
sided constantly in Spain, and would avoid e--
tangling himself in a multiplicity of tranfations
foreign to the concerns of his Spanish dominions,
the stated revenues of the. crown wo.lrd be. fully
fufficient to defray the necessary expences ps
government. They represented to. him , that
it would, be unjust to lay new burdens upon the
people, while this prudent and effe&ual method
of re-establishing publick credit, and securing
national opulence, was totally negle&ed, t)
Charles, after employing arguments., entreati5es,

t) Sandov. HiRft. vol ii. ,69.

and promises, but without success, in order to
overcome their obstinacy, difniffed the assembly
with great indignation.

Thi 'ancien't constitution 6f the Cbrtes subverted.

From that period neither the nobles ibr

the prelates have been called to these assemblies,
on pretence that such as pay no part of the
publick taxes, should not claim any vote in
laying them on. None have been admitted to
the Cortes but the procurators or representatives
of eighteen cities. These, to the number of
thirty fiik, being two from each community,
form an assembly which bears no resemblance
either in power or dignity or independence to
the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at the
devotion of the court in all their determina-
tions. u) Thus the imprudent zeal with which
the Castilian nobles had supported the regal pre-
rogative, in opposition to the claims of the
commons during the commotions in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-one, proved
at last fatal to their own body. By enabling
Charles to depress one of the orders in the slate,
they destroyed that balance to which the con-
Ltitution owed its security, and put it in his
power, or in that of his successors, to humble
the other, and to strip it of its most valuable
privileges.

a) Sandov. ibid. La science du Gouvernement, pai ]. do

Roeal, tomr.

. p. Io.

S--r Lie -Spanish grandes fRill poffeffed high. BiviLeges.

At that time, howeve'r the Spaiih'li;gran-

dees .$011poffeffed extr oqgdin ry ppw0er as well
as privileges, which they ekercifed and defend-
dwith 'an 'haughtin'eiF peculiar to6 themselves.
Of thi 'the Emperor himself had 'a: moriotifying
p~6of di~-ihg the nieedting of the Cott.s at To-
ledo'.' 'As he was returning one: day from a
toinirrfeit aconotpianied by inoft of- the nobi-
ity, 6'oe of thl frjeatits of the .i.ort,- out of
officiouis zeal to dteaf t-hf way for the~ Emperor
ftftick 'he Duke of Thfantado's' horfe' with his
battoini,' Which fiiat:a~itghty girande resenting,
di-ex~r sword, beat anad Wounded the officer.
C1aries, provoked 'ait T'ch anh insolent deed in
lii.ip-reenie , immediately .ordered Ronquillo
th"d jidge bs the c6urt to arrest the Duke; Ron-
quillo idva nced to edecute his charge", when
the conItable of Castile interposing , checked
him, claimed the .igtff of jurifdi;&ion over a
grandee as a privilege of his office, and con-
.dited 'Inmfantado to his own apartment, All
-the inbbles present were so pleased wivth the
blatdnefe of the conitable in asserting thd rights
of their order , that , deserting the tEmperor,
they. attended him to :his house -rith .infinite
itplaiifes, and Oharles returned to. hoe palace
without any person along with him but the car-
4i~al CJaY.exf1. Thp p4Eperor, h9preyer, fen-
fible of the affront, saw the .danger .oaf.iritatnmg

a jealous and high-fpirited order of men, whom
the slightest appearance of offence- might drive
to the most unwarrantable extremes., For that
reason , instead of straining at any ill-timed
exertion of his prerogative, he prudently con-
hived at the arrogance of a body too potent for
him to controul, and sent next morning to the
Duke of Infantado, offering to inflift what pu-
nifhment he pleased on the person who had
affronted himb The Duke considering this as
a full reparation to his honour, instantly forgave
the officer; beftowing on him, besides, a con-
fiderable present as a compensation for his
wound. Thus the affair was: entirely for-
gotten; x) nor would it have deserved to be
mentioned, if it were not a striking example of
the haughty and independent spirit of the Spa.
nifh nobles in that age, as well as an instance
of the Emperor's dexterity in accommodating
his condu& to the circumstances in which he
was placed.

Infurre&tion at Ghent.

Charles was far from discovering any such

condescension or lenity towards the citizens of
Ghent, who not long after broke out into open
rebellion against his -government. An event
iwhich happened in the year one tboufand five
ibundred and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this

x) Sandov. ii. 274. Ferreras, ix. 21i. Miniana , Ir

rAsh infurre&ion-fo fatal to that flotirifhing city.
At that time the Queen dowager of Hungary ,
governess of the Netherlands, having received
orders from her brother to invade France with
all the forces which she could raise, she aflfem-
abled the 'States of the. United Provinces, and
obtained from thern a subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins, to defiray the expenee of that
undertaking. Of this fum, the county of Flan-i
ders was. obliged to pay a third part as its
proportion6.

.retentions of the citizehs.

But the citizens of Ghent, the mnoft cdrifi

dbrable city in that country, averse to a wat
with France, 'ith which' they carried on an
extensive and gainful commerce

, refitfed to pay

their quota, and contended, that in consequence
of stipulations between them and the ancef-
tors of their present fovereigli the Eripetor, no
tax could be levied upon them, unless they had
given their express consent to the imposition of
it. The governess, on the other hand, main-
tained, that as the subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins had been granted by the States
of Slanders, of which their representatives were
members, they were bound, of course, to con-
form to what was ena&ed by them, as it is
the first principle in society, on which the-
tranquillity and order of government depend, that

the

the inclinations of the minority must be over-
ruled by the judgment and decision of the fu-
perior number.

Proceedings against them.

The citizens of Ghent, however, Were

hot willing to relinqnifh a privilege offuch high
importance as that which they claimed. Hav-
ing been accustomed, under the government of
the hotife of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive im-
munities , and to be treated with much indu!-
gence, they difdained to sacrifice to the de-
legated power of a regent, those rights and
liberties which they had often and fuccefsfully
asserted against their greatest Princes. The
Queen, though the endeavoured at firfr to sooth
them, and to reconcile them to their duty by
various concessions, was at lafti o bmuch irritat-
ed by the obfrinacy with which they adhered
to their claim, that the ordered all the citizens
of Ghent, on whom she could lay hold in any
part of the Netherlauds, to be arrefied. Buc:
this rath aftion made an impression very dif-
ferent from what she expected. on men, whose
minds were agitated with all the violent pas-
fions which indignation at oppression and zeal
for liberty inspire. Lets affefted with the danger
of their friends and companions, than irritated
at the governess, they openly despised her au-
thority, and sent deputies to the other towns
of Slanders, conjuring them not to abandon their

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. N

country at such a juntiure, but to concur with
them in vindicating its rights against the en-
croachments of a woman, lwho

. either did not

know or did not regard their immunities. All
but a few inconsidera,ble towins declined enter-
ing into any confederacy against the goveltnefs:
they joined, hoWVever, in petitioning her to
put off the term sos payinent of the tax so long,
that they might have it in their power to fend
some of their number into Spain in order to
lay their title to exemption before their sovereign.
This the granted with fomie difficulty. But Char-
les received their commissioners with an haugh-
tinefs to which they Were not accustomed from
their ancient Princes, and enjoining them to
yield the fame refpe6tfiil obedience to his sifter;
which they owed to him in ii prfon, refmitted
the examination of their claim to the council of
Malines. This court, wvhich is properly a
standing committee of the parliament br stated
of the country, and wvhidh poffeffes the fupremr
jurifdi&tion in all matters civil as well as cri-
minal, y) pronounced the claim of the citizens
of Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed them
forthwith to pay their proportion of the tax.

'They take arms, and offer to submit to France.

Enraged at this decision, which they con-

fidered as notoriously unjust, and rendered def-

y) Defcrittione di tutti paefi bassi di Lud. Guicciatdini. Ant.

1571. fol. p, 53.

parate on feeing their rights betrayed by tliat
very coart which was bound to protest them,
the people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumul-
tnary manner, drove fach of the nobility as re-
sided among them out of the city; secured
several of the Emperor's officers; put one of
them to the torture, whom they accused of
having stolen or destroyed the record, that con-
tained the privileges of exemption from taxes
which they pleaded; chose a council to which
they committed the direction of their affairs;
gave orders for repairing and adding to their
fortifications; and openly ere&ed the standard
of rebellion against their sovereign. z) Sen-
fible, however, of their inability to support what
their zeal had prompted them to undertake, and
desirous of securing a protector against the for-
midable forces by which they might expect soon
to be attacked, they sent some of their number
to Francis, offering not only to acknowledge
him as their sovereign, and to put him in im-
mediate poffeflion of Ghent, but to affif~ him
with all their forces in recovering those provin-
ces in the Netherlands, which had anciently
belonged to the crown of France, and had been
so lately re-united to it by the decree of the
parliament of Paris. This unexpe&ted propofi-

N

z) Memoires fur la revolte des Gantois en 1539 , par Jean

d'Hollander, ecrit en 1547. A la Haye 1747. P. Heuter.
Rer. Auftr. lib. xi. p. a62. Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. p. S84.

tion coming from peifons who had it in their
power to have performed instantly one part of
what they undertook, and who could contri-
bute to effefhually towards the execution of the
whole, opened vast as well as alluring profpe&s
to Francis's ambition. The counties of Slanders
ahd Artois were of greater value than the dut-
chy of Milan, which he had to long laboured
to acquire with passionate but fruitleft desire;
their situation with refpeft to France rendered
it more easy to conquer or to defend them; and
they might be formed into a separate principa-
lity for the Duke of Orleans, no less fliitable
to his dignity than, that which his father aimed
at obtaining. To this, the Flemings, who were
acquainted with the French manners and go-
vernment, would not have been averse b and his
own fubjeas, weary of their deftrufive expe-
ditions into Italy, would have turned their
arms towards this quarter with more good-will]
and with greater vigour.

Fran!cis declined theirolfer.

Several confideratiois , nevertheless , pre-

vented Francis from laving hold of this oppor-
tunity , the most favourable in appearance
which had ever presented itself, of extending
his dominions, or distressing the Emperor. From
the time of their interview at Aigues - mortes,
Charles had continued to court the King of
France which wonderful attention; and often

flattered him with hopes of gratifying at last
his wiThes concerning the Milanese, by grant-
ing the investiture of it either to him or to
one of his sons. But though these hopes and
promises were thrown out with no other inten-
tion than to detach him from his confederacy
with the Grand Seignior, or to raise suspicions
in Solyman's mind by the appearance of a
cordial and familiar intercourse subsisting be-
Aween the courts of Paris and Madrid, irancis
?was weak enough to catch at the, shad.ow by
which he had been to often deceived, and from
eagerness to seize it, relinquished what lmuit
have proved a more substantial acquifiticn. Be-
sides this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of
his brother, and unwilling that a Prince who
seemed to be of a reftrlefs and entCrprizx.ig, na-
ture filould obtain an establishment, which from
its fitunation might be considered almolt as a
domefiick one, made use of Montmorency,
who by a fingu'lar piece of good forttune, wa-s
at the fame time the favourite of the father
and of the son, to d efeat the application of the
Flemings, and to divert the King from espousin.g
their cause. 1V.ontmorency, accordingly, ,:e-
presented in strong terms , the reputation and
power which Francis would acquire by reco-
vering that footing which he had formerly in
Italy, and that nothing could be to ejicacious
to overcome the Emperor's aversion to thi^ ; as
his adhering sacredly to the truce, and refufi:g

on this occasion to countenance his rebellious
fubje&s. 'Francis, apt of himself to overrate
the value of the Milanese, because, he eftimat-
ed it from the length of time as well as from
the great efforts which he had employed in
order to re-conquer it, and fond of every a&ion
which had the appearance of generosity, assent-
ed without difficulty to sentiments so agreeable
to his own, reje&ed the propositions of the
citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their deputies
with an harsh answer. a)'

Communicates their intentions to the Emperor.

Not satisfied with this, by a farther re-

finement in generosity, he communicated to
the Emperor his whole negociation with the
malecontents, and all that he knew of their
schemes and intentions, b) This convincing
proof of Francis's disinterestedness relieved
Charles from the most disquieting apprehensions,
and opened a way to extricate himself out of
all his difficulties. He had already received
full information of all the tranfa&ions in the
Netherlands, and of the rage with which the
people of Ghent had taken arms against his
government. He was thoroughly acquainted
with the genius and qualities of his fubje&s in
that country; with their love of liberty; their

a) Mem. de Bellay. p. 263. P. Hewter. Rer. Auft. lib. xi. a63.

b) Sandov. Hiftor. tom, ii. 2.4.

attachment to their ancient privileges and cuf-
tomrs; as well as the invincible obstinacy with
which their minds, flow but firm and perse-
vering, adhered to any measure on which they
had leisure to fix. He easily saw what encou-
ragment and, ftupport they might have derived
from the assistance of France; and though now
free from any danger on that quarter., he was
still sensible that some immediate as well as vi-
gorous interposition was necessary, in order to
prevent the spirit of difaffeftion from spreading
in a country where the number of cities, the
mnultitude of people, together with the great
wealth diffufed among them by commerce,
rendered it peculiarly formidable, and would
supply it with inexhaustible resources.

Char]es's deliberations concerning his journey to the Netherlands.

No expedient, after long deliberation, ap-

peared to him so effetual as going in person to
the Netherlands; and the governess his sifter
being of the fame opinion, warnmly solicited
him to undertake the journey. There were
only two different routes which he could take;
one by land through Italy and Germany, the
other entirely by sea from some port in Spain
to one in the Low Countries. But the former
was more tedious than suited the present exi-
gency of his affairs; nor could he in confifcency
with his dignity , or even his safety, pass
through Germany without such a train both of

attendants and of troops, as would have added
greatly to the time that he must have consumed
in his journey; the latter was dangerous at this
season, and while he remained uncertain with
refpe& to the friendship of the King of Eng-
land, was not to be ventured upon, unless
under the convoy of a powerful fleet.

Proplofes to p.ass through France.

This perplexing situation, in which he was

under the necessity of chufing, and did not
know what 'to chufe, inspired him at last with
the singular and seemingly extravagant thought
of passing through France, as the most e.xpedi-
tious way of reaching the Netherlands. He
proposed in his council to demand Francis's per-
mission for that purpose. All his connfellors
joined with one voice in condemning the mea-
sure as no less rath thaan unprecedented, and
which nuft infallibly expose him to disgrace or
to danger; to disgrace , if the demand were
reje&ed in the manner that he had reason to
expet; to danger, if he put his person in the
power of an enemy whom he had often offend-
ed, who had ancient injuries to revenge, as
well as fubjets of present contest still r~emain-
ing undecided. But Charles., who had fiudied
the chara&er of his rival with greater care, and
more profound discernment than any of his mi-
nifters, persisted in his plan, and flattered him-
self- that it might be accomplished not only

without danger to his own person, but even
without the expence of any concession detri-
mental to his crown.

To which Francis cofnents.

With this view he communicated the matter

to the French ambassador at his court, and Lent
Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to
obtain from Francis permiflion to pass through
his dominions, and to promise that he would
soon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his
fatisfaEtion. But at the fame time he entreated
that Francis would not exaft any new promise,
or even insist on former engagements , at this
junfture, left whatever he should grant, under
his present circumfiances, might seem rather to
be extorted by necefity , than to flow from
friendship or the love of justice. Francis, instead
of attending to the snare which such a flight
artifice scarcely concealed, was so dazzled with
the splendour of overcoming an enemy by a&ts
of generosity, and so pleased with the air of
superiority which the rectitude and disinterest-
ednefs of his proceedings gave him on this oc-
cafion, that he at once afl'ented to all that was
demanded. Judging of the Emperos's heart by
his own, he imagined that the sentiments of
gratitude, arising from the remembrance of good
offices and liberal treatment, would determine
him more forcibly to fulfil what he had so often

promised, than the most precise stipulatio.ns that
could be inserted in any treaty.

His reception in that kingdom.

Upon this, Charles, tho whom every mo-

nment was precious , set out, notwithifanding
the fears and fuilfpicions of his Spanish ftubjects,
with a finall but splendid train of about an
hundred persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers
of France, he was received by the DaupIhin and
the Duke of Orleans, attended by the constable
Montmorency. The two Princes offered to go
into Spain, and to remain there as hostages for
'the Emperor's safety; but this he rejeaed , de-
claring, that he. relied with implicit confidence
on the King's honour, and had never demand-
ed, nor would accept of any other pledge for
his security. In all the towns through which
he passed, the greatest pofi.ble magnificence
was displayed ; the magistrates 'prefented him
the keys of the gates; th.e prison doors were
set open; and, by the royal honours paid to
him, he appeared more like the sovereign of
the country than a stranger. The King ad-
vanced as far as Chatelherault to meet him ;
their interview was distinguished by the warmest
expressions of friendship and regard. They pro-
ceeded together (154o.) towards Paris , and
presented to the inhabitants of that city, the
extraordinary fpe&acle of two rival Monarchs,
whose enmity had disturbed and laid waste Eu-

rope during twenty years, making their solemn
entry together with all the symptoms of a con-
fidential harmony, as if they had forgotten for
ever past injuries , and would never revive
hostilities for .the future. c)

The Emperor's solicitude,

Charles remained fix days at Paris ; but

amidst the perpetual caresses of the French court,
and the various entertainments contrived to
amuse or to do him honour, he discovered an
extreme impatience to continue his journey,
arising as much from an apprehension of danger
which conitantly opprefled him, as from the
necelfity of his presence in the Low Countries.
Conscious of the difingenuity of his own inten-
tions, he trembled when he reflefted that some
fatal accident might betray them to his rival,
or lead him to fufpeEt them; and though his
artifices to conceal these should be fuccefsful,
he could not help fearing that motives of interest
might at last triumph over the scruples of honour,
and tempt Francis to avail himself of the ad-
vantage now in his hands. Nor were there
wanting persons among the French mirifters,
who advised the King to turn his own arts
against the Emperor, and as the retribution due
for so many instances of fraud or falsehood, to

;) Thuan. Hist. lib. i. <, 14. Mem, de Bellay, a64.

fgie and detain his perfop until he granted him
ful fatisfaftion with regard to all the juif claims
of the French crown. But no consideration
!gpild induce Francis to violate the faith which
he had pledged, no. could any argun:ept con-
vince him that Charles, after all the promises
that he had given., and, all the favours which
he. had received, might t1ill be capable of de-
ceiving him. Full of this false confidence, he-
2acompanied him to St. Quintin.; and the two
Princes, who had met him on the borders of
Spain, did not take leave of him until he enter-
ed his dominions in the Low Countries.

and difingenuity.

"As soon as the Emperor reached his own

territories , the I~rench ambafladors demanded
(January 2.4. 1540.) the accompli'hment of what
he had- promised concerning the inveffiture of
Milan; but Charles, under the plausible pretext
that his whole attention was then engrossed by
the consultations necessary towards suppressing
the rebellion in Ghent , put off the. matter for
some time. But- in order to prevent Francis
from fuifpe&ting his -sincerity , he still continued
to talk of his resolutions with refpe&t io that
matter in the fame strain as when he entered
France, and-. even wrote to the King much to
the fame purpose, though in general terms, and
with equivocal expressions , which he might

afterwards explain away or interpret at plea.
fare. a)

Redu&ion of Ghent;

Meanwhile, the unfortunate citizehs of

Ghent, destitute of leaders capable either of
dire&ing their councils, or conduaing their
troops; abandoned by the French King and un-
supported by their cotiiatrjrnien; were unable to
refitl their Offended sovereign, who was ready
to advance against them with one body of troops
which he had raised in the Netherlands, with
another drawn out of Germany , and a third
which had at-tived from Spain by sea. The near
approach of danger made them, at last, so fen-
fible of their own folly, that they tent ambaf-
fadors to the Emperor, imploring his mercy,
and offering to f~t open their gates at his ap-
proach. Charles, without vouchsafing them any
other answer , than that he would appear
among them as tlhiir sovereign, with the sceptre
and the sword ini his hand, began his march
at the head of his troops.

and punifhrment of the citizens. April =o. 1540.

Thou~gh he chore to enter the city on the

twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, he
was touched with nothing of that tenderness or
indulgence which was natural towards the place

a) M'emoires de Ribier, i. o64.

of his nativity. Twenty-fix of the principal
citizens were put to death; a greater number
was sent into banifhmient; the city was de-
clared to have forfeited all its privileges and im-
munities; the revenues belonging to it were
confiscated; its ancient form of government
was aboiifhed; the nomination of its magiftra-
tes #as vefied for the future in the Emperor
and his fucceflbrs; -a new system of laws and
political admiiniftration was prefcrib'ed, b) and
in order to bridle the seditious spirit of the citi-
zens, orders .Weie given to erej& a strong cita-
del 1 for 2defraying the expence of which a fine
of an hundred and fifty thousand florins was im-
posed dn the inhabitants, together with ari an-
nual tax of fix thousand florins for the support
of the garrison. c) By these rigorous proceed-
Jngs; - dharles not only punished the citizens of
Ghent, but set an awful example of severity
before his other fubjefts in the Netherlands ,
whose immunities anid privileges; partly thd
effet, partly the cause of their extensive coma
merce, circumscribed the royal prerogative with-
in very narrow bounds, and often stood in
the way of measures which he wished to un-
dertake, or fettered and retarded him in his
operations.

b) Les coutumes & loix du Compte' de Flandre, par Alex. le

Grand, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p. 169.

e) Haraei Annales Brabantise, vol. i. 6x6.

Charles refuses to fulfil his engagements to Francis.

Charles having thus vindicated and re-efta-

blifhed his authority in the Low Countries, and
being now under no necessity of continuing the
fame scene of falsehood and diflimulation with
which he had long amnfed Francis, began gra-
dually to throw aside the veil under which he
had concealed his intentions with refpet to the
Milanese. At first, he eluded the demands of
the French ambassadors, when they again re-
minded him of his promises, then he prbpofed,
by way of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan,
to grant the Duke of Orleans the investiture of
Slanders, clogging the offer, however, with
imprafticable conditions, or fuich as he knew
would be reje&ed. d) At last, being driven
from all his evasions and subterfuges by their
infilfting for a categorical answer, he peremp-
torily refused to give up a territory of such va-
lie, or voluntarily to make such a liberal ad-
dition to the strength of an enemy by diminish-
ing his own power. e) He denied at the
fame time, that he had ever made any promise
whith could bind him to an a&ion so foolish,
and to contrary to his own interest. f)

Of all the tranfa&ions in the Ernpero.'s life.

this, without doubt, refle&s the greatest difo

d) Mem. de Ribier, i. 509. 514.

e) Ribier, i. 519.

f) Bellay, 365-6,

onour oni his reputation. g) Though C harles
was not extremely scrupulous at other times
about the means ihich he employed so r ac-
complifhing his endl, or always observant of
the ftrift piecepts of veracity and honour, he
had hitherto maintained some regard for the
maxims of that less precise and rigid morality
by which Monarchs think themselves entitled
to regulate their eoinduit; But; on this occa-
sion, the scheme that he formed of deceiving'a
generous and openhearted Prince; the illiberal
and mean artifices by ~-hich he carried it orn
the inferifibility with which he received all the
marks of his friehdfhip as well as the ingratitude
with which he' requited them ; are a11 equally
unbecoming the dignity of his chara&ter; and
ineotififtent with the grandeur of his .iewvs.

This trtnfaction exposed Francis to as muichi

scorn as it did the Emperor to cenflure. After
the experiencer of a long reign, after so many
opp'ortunities of difeovering the duplicity and ar-
tifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with
which he trusted him at this juinatre seemed to
merit no other ieturn that it aftually met with,
Francis, however, remonstrated and exclaim-
ed, as if this had been the first instance in
which the Emperor had deceived him. Feeling;
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his

under-

g) Jovii Hilt. lib: xxxix. p. 238, a.

understanding still more sensibly than the injury
done to his interest, he discovered such resent-
ment, as made it obvious that he would lay
hold on the first opportunity of being revenged,
and that a war, no less rancorous than that
which had so lately raged, would soon break
out anew in Europe.

The Pope authorizes the infiitution of the Order of Jesuits.

This year is rendered memorable by the

establishment of the Order of Jefaits; a body
whose influence on ecclefiafftical as well as civil
affairs hath been so considerable, that an ac-
count of the genius of its laws and government
juffly merits a place in history. When men take
a view of the rapid progress of this focic. y
towards wealth and power; when they con-
template the admirable prudence with which it
has been governed; when they attend to the
persevering and system .tick spirit with which its
schemes have been carried on; they are apt to
afctibe such a singular inffitution to the superior
wisdom of its founder, and to suppose that he
had formed and digested his plan with profound
policy. But the Jesuits , as well as the other
monaftick orders, are indebted for the existence
of their order not to the wicdom of their founder,
but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I
have already mentioned on occasion of the wound
which he received in defending Pampelana, h)

h) Vol. ii. Book. ii, p. 192.
Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. 0

was

a fanatick diftinguii'hed by extravagancies

in sentiment and coiidut, nb lef's incompatible
with the maxims of fbber reafoh , than repugn-
ant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary fchetnes, in which
his enthusiasm biigaged him, equal any thing
recorded in the legends of the Romish faints;
but are unworthy of notice in history.

Fanaticism of Loyola its foundei.

Prompted by this fanatical spirit, or incited

by the love of power and diftin&ion, from which
such pretenders to superior fahitity are not
exempt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order. The plan, which
he formed of its constitution and laws Was
fuggeftcd, as he gave out, and as his followers
still teach, by the immediate inspiration of
heaven. i) But notwithstanding this high pre-
tension, his design met at first with violent op-
position. The Pope, to whom Loyola had ap-
plied for the finceion of his authority to cons rm
the inftlitution, referred his petition to a com-
mittee of Cardinals. They represented the efta-
blifihment to be unneceflary as well as dan-
gerous, and Paul refused to grant his appro-
bation of it.

i) Compte hendu des Conf[i-tjtions des Jefiites , au Parle-

ment de Provence, par I1 de Monclar, p. 2Sr-

The Pope's motives fuor confirming the- Jrder.

At last, Loyola removed all his scruples by

an offer which it was impoflible for any Pope
to reiift. He proposed that besides the three
vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monaftick
obedience, which are common to all the orders
of regulars, the members of his society should
take a fourth vow of obedience to the Pope,
binding themselves to go Wirhitherfoever he should
command for the service of religion , and
without requiring any thing from the Holy See
for their support. At a time when the papal
authority had received such a shock by the
revolt of so many nations from the Romish
church ; at a time when every part of the po-
pish fyftemn was attacked with so much violence
and success , the acquiiition of a body of men.
thus peculiarly devoted to the See of Rome .
and whom it might set in opposition to all its
enemies, was an objeat of the higheRt conie-
quence. Paul, instantly perceiving this, con-
firmed (Sept. 27. 1540.) the institution of the
Jesuits by his bull; granted the most ample pri-
vileges to the members of the society; and ap-
pointed Loyola to be the first general of the or-
der. The event hath fully justified Paul's dif-
cernment, in expeUting such beneficial confe-
quences to the See of Rome from this infitu-
tion. In less than half a century, the society
obtained establishments in every country that
adhered to the Roman catholick church; its

02

power and wealth increased amazingly; the
number of its. members became great; their
chara&er as well as accomplifiments were still
greater, and the Jesuits were celebrated by the
friends, and dreaded by the enemies of the
Romish faith, as the most able and enterprizing
order in the church.

Its confiitution and genitts merit particular attention.

The constitution and laws of the society

were perfe&ted by Laynez and Aquaviva, the
two generals who succeeded Loyola, men far
superior to their master in abilities, and in the
science of government. They framed that sys-
tem of profound and artful policy which diftin-
guifhes the order. The large infusion of fana-
ticism, mingled with its regulations, should be
imputed to Loyola its founder. Many circum-
ftancesaconcurred in giving a peculiarity of cha-
ra&er to the order of Jesuits, and in forming
the members of it not only to take greater part
in the affairs of the world than any other body
of monks, but to acquire superior influence in
the conduEt of them.

The obje& of the order singular.

The primary obje& of almost all the mo-

naltick orders is to separate men from the world ,
and from any concern in its affairs. In the so-
litude and silence of the cloister, the monk is
called to work out his own salvation by extraor.

binary a&s of mortification and piety. He is
dead to the world, and ought not to mingle in
its tranfa&tions. He can be of no benefit to
minkind, but by his example and by his pray-
ers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are taught
to confider themselves as formed for a&tion.
They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert them-
selves continually in the service of God, and
of the Pope, his vcar on earth. Whatever
tends to inftru& the ignorant; whatever can be
of use to reclaim or to oppose the enemies of
the Holy See, is their proper obje&t. That
they may have full leisure for this afive ser-
vice, they are totally exempted from those
fundions , the performance of which is the
chief business of other monks. They appear
in no proceffions; they praftife no rigorous auf-
terities; they do not consume one half of their
time in the repetition of tedious offices. k) But
they are required to attend to all the tranfac-
tions of the world, on account of the influence
which these may have upon religion; they are
direfted to study the dispositions of persons in
high rank, land to cultivate their friend ship; 1)
and by the very constitution, as well as genius
of the otder, a spirit of a&ion and intrigue is
infused into all its members.

k) Compte Rendu, patr ?. de Monclar, p. xiii. 290. SUa

la deffrua. des Jeflites, par M. D'Alembert, p. 44

I) Compte par M. de Monclar, p. xii,

Peculiarities in the form of its policy , particularly with refle4

to the powve of the general.

As the objet of the society of Jesuits dif-

fered from that of the other monaftick orders,

/ the diversity was no less in the. form of its

government. The other orders are to be con-
fid'ered as voluntary affociatiocs , in which
whatever assets the whole body, is regulated
by the common fuffrage of all its members.
The executive power is veftpd in the persons
placed at the head of each convent, or of the
whole society; thie legislative authority resides
in the community. Affairs of moment, relating
to particular convents, are determined in con-
ventual, chapters, such as refpe& the whole
order are considered in general congregations.
But Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedi-
ence, which he had dierived from his military
profeflion, appointed that the government of
his order should be purely monarchical. A ge-
Tneral, chosen for life by deputies from the fe-
veral proyinces, poffeffed power that was fu-
preme and independent, extending to every
person, and to every cafe. He, by his sole
authority, nominated provincials, redtors, and
every other officer employed in the government
of the society, and could remove them at plea-
lure. In him was vested the sovereign admi-
niftration of the revenues and funds ps the
order. Every member belonging to it was at
his disposal; and by his uncontrolable mandate,

he could impose on them any task, or employ
them in what service soever he pleased. To
his commands they were required to yield not
only outward obedience, but to resign up to
him the inclinations of their own wills, and
the sentiments of their own understandings.
They were to listen to his injun&tions, as if
they had been uttered by Christ himself. Under
his dire&ion, they were to be mere pafilve
iniiruments, like clay in the hands of the pot-
ter, or like dead carcasses incapable of resist-
ance. m) Such a singular form of policy could
not fail to impress its charafter on all the mem-
bers of the order, and to give a peculiar force
to all its operations. There is not in the annals
of mankind any example of such a perse&
despotism, exercised not over monks shut up
in the cells of a convent, but over men difperf-
ed a'nong all the nations of the earth.

Circum.stances which enable him to exercise it with the great-

eit advantage.

As the constitutions of the order vest, in

the General, such absolute dominion over all
its members, they carefully provide for his
being perfeftly informed with refpe&t to the
charafter and abilities of his fubjefts. Every
novice who offers himself as a candid.ate for

m) Compte Rendu au Parlem. de Bretngne . par M. de CLa-

lotais, p. 41, &c. Comnpte par M. de Moic .ar , S3."IS5.
3.2.;.

entering into the order, is obliged to manifest
his con science to the superior, or to a person
appointed by him; and is required to confess
not only his fins and defe&s, but to discover
the inclinations, the pafftons, and the bent of
his foul.. This manifestation must be renewed
every fix months. n) The society, not fatis-
fied. with penetrating in this manner into the
innermost recesses of the heart, direas each
member to observe the words and a&ions of
the novices; they are constituted spies upon
their condu6&; and are bound to disclose every
thing of importance concerning them to the fu-
perior. In order that this scrutiny into their
chara&er may be as complete as possible, a
long noviciate must expire, during which they
pats through the several gradations of ranks in
the society, and they must have attained the
full age of thirty-three years before they can
be ad4anitted to take the final vows, by which
they become profeffed members. o) By these
various methods, the superiors, under whose
immediate infpeiUon the novices are placed,
acquire a thorough knowledge of their difpofi-
tions and talents. In order that the General,
who is the foul that animates and moves the
whole society, may have under his eye every
thing necessary to inform or direQt him, the

P) Compte pqr. M. de Monclar, p. 1i2 , &r.

' C.ompte par *M. de Moicl. 235, 243. Sur Ia defr. dqs

er. ji, M. lV'A.i: nb. p'. 39,

provincials and heads of the several houses are
obliged to transmit to him regular and frequent
reports concerning the members under their
infpetion. In these they descend into minute
details with refpeet to the character of each
person, his abilities natural or acquired, his
temper, his experience in affairs, and the par-
ticular department for w-hich he is best fitted. p)
There reports, when digested and arranged,
are entered into registers, kept of purpose that
the General may, at one comprehensive view,
survey the state of the society in every corner
of the earth; observe the qualifications and ta-

p) M. de Cholotais has made a calculation of the number of

these reports, which the General of the Jesuits muff annu-
ally receive according to the regulatious of the society.
These amount in all to 6584. If this rum be divided by
S? , the number of provinces in the order, it appears that
177 reports concerning the Hate of each province are
.ranfmitted to Rome annually. Compte, p,. 52. Befldes
this, there may be extraordinary lettres, or such as are
sent by the monitors or spies whom the General and Pro-
vincials entertain in each house. Compte par M. de Moncl.
p. 431. HiLt. des Jefuites , Amft. r761, torn. iv. p. 56.
The provincials and heads of houses not only report con-
cerning the members of the society, but are bound to
give the General an account of the civil affairs in the
country wherein they are fettled, as far as their know-
ledge of these may be of benefit to religion. This con-
dition may extend to every particular, so that the General
is furnished with full infornatiou concerniig tle t:anfa&ions
of every Prince and l-ate in the \vorld. Compte par M.
de Moncl. 443. Hist. des Jesuit. ibid. p. 5S. When the
affairs v ith refFeft to

\ hich the provincials or re&tors

write are of importance , they are dire&ed to use cy-
phers; and e<ch of them has a pcrticular cyp!er from the
bejnerl]: Conpite par M. Chalotais, F-. 54.

lents of its members; and thus chose, with
perse& information, the instruments, which
his absolute power can employ in any service
for which he thinks meet to destine them. q)

Progress of the power and influence of the order.

As it was the profeffed intention of the

oeder of Jesuits to labour with unwearied seal
in promoting the salvation of men, this etgag-
ed them, of course, in many af&ive fun&ions.
From their first institution, they considered the
education of youth as their peculiar province;
they aimed at being spiritual guides and confef-
.fors; they preached frequently in order to in-
ir-it& the people; they set out as miflionaries
to convert unbelieving nations. The novelty
of the institution, as well as the singularity of
its obje*s, procured the order many admirers
and patrons. The governors of the society had
the address to avail themselv-es of every circum-
stance in its favour, and in a short time, the
number as well as influence of its members in-
creased wonderfully. Before the expiration of
the sixteenth century, the Jefauits had obtained
the chief dire&ion of the education of youth
in every catholick country in Europe. They
had become the confeffors of almost all its mo-
narchs, a fun.rion of no small importance in
any reign, but under a weak Prince, superior

q) Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 2I5. 449. --- Compte par

M. de Chalotais, p. 52. 222.

even to that of minifier, They were the fpi-
ritual guides of almost every person eminent for
rank or power. They poffeffed the highest
degree of confidence and interest with the papal
court, as the most zealous and able champions
for its authority. The' advantages which an
adive and enterprising body of men might derive
from all these 'circumftances are obvious. They
'formed the minds of men in their youth. They
retained an ascendant over them in their ad-
vanced years. They poffeffed, at different periods,
the direction of the most considerable courts in
Europe. They mingled in all affairs. They
took part in every intrigue and revolution. The
General, by means of the extensive intelligence
which he received, could regulate the opera-
tions of the order with the most perfe&t discern-
ment , and by means of his absolute power
could carry them with the utmost vigour and
effeet. r)

r) When Loyola, in the year 154o , petitioned the Pope to

authorize the infttution of the order, he had only ten
ditciples. But in the year i6og , fixty-eight years after
their first inifitution, the number of Jesuits had increased
to ten thousand five hundred and eighty-one. In the year
ixlo, the order poffeffed twenty-four profeffed houses;
fifty-nine houses of probation; three hundred and forty
refidencies; fix hundred and twelve colleges; two hundred
mnifiions; one hundred and fifty seminaries and boarding-
schools; and consisted of I9,998 Jesuits Hilt. des Jefuites,
,om, i. p. 2o.

Progress of its wealth.

Together with the power .of the order, its

'wealth continued to increase. Various expedi-
ents were devised for eluding the obligation of
the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample
poffeffions in every catholick country; and by
the number as well as magnificence of its pu-
blick buildings, together with the value of its
property, moveable or real, it vied with the
imoft opulent of the monaftick fraternities. Be-
sides the sources of wealth common to all the
regular clergy, the Jesuits poffeffed one which
was peculiar to themselves. Under pretext of
promoting the success of their missions, and of
facilitating the support of their miflionaries, they
obtained a special licence from the court of
Rome, to trade with the nations which they
laboured to convert. In consequence of this,
they engaged in an extensive and lucrative com-
merce, both in the East and Weft Indies. They
opened warehouses in different parts of Europe,
in which they vended their commodities. Not
satisfied with trade alone, they imitated the
example of other commercial societies, and
aimed at obtaining settlements. They acquired
poffelfion accordingly of a large and fertile pro-
vince in the southern continent of America, and
reigned as sovereigns over some hundred'thou-
sand fubjeEts. s)

s) Hizt. des Jef. iv. 168 --796 , &e.

Pernicious effets of these on civil focietv.

Unhappily for mankind, the vast influence

which the order of Jesuits acquired by all these
different means, -has been often exerted with
the most pernicious effeA. Such was the ten-
dency of that discipline observed by the society
in forming its members, and such the funda-
mental maxims in its constitution, that every
Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the
order as the capital objet, to which every con-
fideration was to be sacrificed. This spirit of
attachment to their order, the most ardent, per-
haps, that ever influenced any body of men, t)
is the chara&eriftick principle of the Jesuits,
and serves as a key to the genius of their policy,
as well as to the peculiarities in their sentiments
and condu&.

As it was for the honour and advantage of

the society , that its members should poiTefs an
ascendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a dire&ion of their conduA , with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a fyvftem
of relaxed and pliant morality, which- accom-
modates iti'elf to the passions of men , which
justifies their vices, which tolerates their imper-
fe&ions, which authorizes almost every a&tion
that the most audacious or crafty politician.
would with to perpetrate.

t) ICrmp-y . 'ar MT dte Monc!, p 28

As the prosperity of the order was intima-

tely conne&ed with the preservation of the papal
authority, the Jetuits; influeinced by the fame
principle of attachment tb the interests of their
society, have been the mioft eaibus patrons of
those do&rines, which tend to &xalt ecclefiafti-
cal power on the rains of civil government.
They have attributed to the court of Rome a
jurifdition as extensive and absolute as was
claimed by the most presumptuous pontifs in
the dark ages. They have contended for the
entire independence of ecclefiafticks on the civil
magistrate. They have published such tenets
concerning the duty of opposing Princes who
were enemnies of the catholick faith as coun-
tenanced the nolft atrocious crimes, and tended
to dissolve all the ties which conne&t fubjets
with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and

authority from the zeal with which it flood
forth in defence of the Romish church against
the attacks of the reformers, its members,
proud of this diftin&ion, have confide red it as
their peculiar fun&ion to combat the opinions,
and to check the progress of the Protestants.
They have made use of every art, and have
employed every weapon against them. They
have set themselves in opposition to every gentle
or tolerating measure in their favour. They have
incessantly stirred up against them all the rage
of ecclesiastical and civil persecution.

Monks of other denominations have, indeed

ventured to teach the fame pernicious do&rines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have
either delivered such opinions with greater re-
serve, or have propagated them with less fuc-
cess. Whoever recollecs the events which have
happened in Europe during two centuries, will
find that the Jesuits may jufily be considered as
responsible for most of the pernicious effets
arising from that corrupt and dangerous cafuif-
try , from those extravagant tenets concerning
ecclesiastical power, and from that intolerant
spirit, which have been the disgrace of the
church of Rome throughout that period, and
which have brought to many calamities upon
civil society. u)

Some advantages resulting from the irfiitution of this order.

But amidst many bad consequences flowing

from the institution of this order, mankind, it
must be acknowledged, have derived from it
some considerable advantages. As the Jesuits
made the education of youth one of their ca-
pital objefts; and as their first attempts to efta-
blifh colleges for the reception of fludents were
violently opposed by the universities in different
countries, it became necessary for them, as the

u) Encyclopedie, Art. Jefuites. tom. viii, 51'.

most effe&ual method of acquiring the publick
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in-
duftry.

Particularly to literature.

This prompted them to cultivate the study of

ancient literature with extraordinary ardour.
This put them upon various methods for facili-
tating the inftru&ion of youth; and by the im-
provements which they made in it, they have
contributed so much towards the progress of po-
lite learning, that on this account they have
merited well of society. Nor has the order of
Jesuits been fuccefsful only in teaching the ele-
ments of literature, it has produced likewise
eminent masters in many branches of science,
and can alone boast of a greater number of in-
genious authors, than all the other religious
fraternities taken together. x)

More

,X-) M. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jesuits have

made extraordinary progress in erudition of every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who
have been eminent mathematicaus , antiquaries , and cri-.
tics; though they have even formed some orators of repu-
tation; yet the order has never produced one man, whose

. n;ind was so much enlightened with found knowledge , as

to merit the name of a philosopher. But it seems to be
the unavoidable effe& of monaftick education to contraf
and fetter the human mind. The partial attachment of a
monk to the interefr of his order , which is often inconim-
patible with that of other citizens ; the habit of iiiiplicic
obedience to the will of a Superior, together w\ith tlh;

f-ve-.

More efpecialiy from the fettlemerit of the Jesuits in Paraguay.

But it is in the new world that the Jesuits

have exhibited the most wonderful display of
their abilities, and have contributed most effec-
tually to the benefit of the human species. The
conquerors of that unfortunate quarter of the
globe had nothing in view, but to plunder, to
enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants.
The Jesuits alone have made humanity the ob-
je&t of their fettling there. About the be-
ginning of the last century they obtained admission
into the fertile province of Paraguay, which
stretches across the southern continent of Ame-
rica, from the bottom of the mountains of Po-
tofi, to the confines of the Spanish and Portu-
guefe settlements on the banks of the river de
la Plata. They found the inhabitants in a state
little different from that which takes place among
men when they first begin to unite together;
strangers to the arts; subsisting precariously by
hunting or fishing; and hardly acquainted with
the first principles of subordination and govern-

frequent return of the weariforhe and frivolous duties of
the cloister, debase his fuculties, and extiuguifh that ge-
nerofity of fentiinert and spirit, which qualifies men for
thinking or feeling justly with refpef to what is proper in
life and conduft. Father Paul of Venice is, perhaps , the
only person educated in a cloister, that ever was altoge-
ther superior to its prejudices, or who viewed the tranf-
a&ions of men, and reasoned concerning the interests of
society, with the enlarged sentiments of a philosopher,
with the discernment of a man conversant in affairs , and
With the liberality of a gentleman.

Hist. of Char1. V. Vol. III. P

ment. The Jesuits set thetnfelves to inftrul
and to civilize these savages. They taught them
to cultivate the ground, to rear tame animals,
and to build houles. They brought them to
live together in villages. They trained themn
to arts and manufa&tures. They made them taste
the sweets of society; and accustomed them to
the blessings of security and order. There
people became the subjects of their benefaftors;
who have governed them with a tender atten-
tion, resembling that with which a father di-
re&s his children. Refpeated and beloved almost
to adoration, a few Jesuits presided over some
hundred thousand Indians. They maintained A
perfeft equality among all the members of the
community. Each of them was obliged to la-
bour not for hirinfelf alone; buit for the publick.
The produce of their fields; together with the
fruits of their industry of every species, were de-
polited in common storehouses, from which
each individual received every thing necessary
for the supply of his wants. By this institution,
almost all the passions which disturb the peace
of society, and render the members of it un-
happy, were extingulfhed. A few magistrates,
chosen by the Indians themselves, watched over
the paiblick tranquillity arid secured obedience
to the laws. The fanguiriary punishments fre-
quent under other governments were unknown.
An admonition from a Jefnit; a flight mark of
infamy; or, on some singular occasion, a few

lathes with a whip, were fufficient to maintain
good order among these innocent and happy
people. y)

Even here the ambition and policy of the order discernible.

But even in this meritorious effort of the

Jesuits for the good of mankind, the genius
and spirit of their order have mingled and are
discernible. They plainly aimed at establishing
in Paraguay an independent empire, fubje&t to
the society alone, and which, by the superior
excellence of its constitution and police, could
scarcely have failed to extend its dominion -over
all the southern continent of America. With
this view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or
Portuguese in the adjacent settlements, from
acquiring any dangerous influence over the
people within the limits of the province fubje&t
to the society, the Jesuits endeavoured to in-
spire the Indians with hatred and contempt of
these nations. They cut off all intercourse be-
tween their fubjets and the Spanish or Portu-
guefe settlements. They prohibited any pri-
vate trader of their nation from entering their
territories. When they were obliged to admit
any person in a publick charaater from the neigh-
bouring governments, they did not permit him
to have any conversation with their fubjerts,
and no Indian was allowed even to enter the

P 2

y) Hi t. du Paraguay par le Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 42. &c,

Voyage au Peron par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de lUlloa
tom. :. 54c. c. Par 4to. l'5 .-

house where these strangers resided, unless in
the presence of aJefuit. In order to render any
communication between them as difficult as
possible, they industriously avoided giving the
Indians any knoiwlidge of the Spanish, or of
any otlheri Europeaii language; but encouraged
the different tribes, which they had civilized,
to acquire a certain dialeft of the Indian tongue,
and laboured td make that the universal lani
guage throtighout their dominions. As all these
precautions , without military force , would
have been infufficient to have rendered their
empire secure and permanent, they inftruited
their fubjeets in the European arts of war.
They formed thetn into bodies of cavalry and
infantry ; cotipletely armed and regularly difci-
plined. They provided a great train of artil-
lery, as well as magaziies ftoi-ed with all the
implements of war. Thus they established an
army to numerous and well-appointed, as to
be formidable in a country, where a few lick-
ly and ill- disciplined battalions composed all
the military force kept on foot by the Spaniards
or Portuguese. z)

Reafori for giving so full a vietw of the government and progress

of the order.

The Jesuits gained no confideiable degree

of power during the reign of Charles V. who ,

z) Voyage de Juan de Uiloa, tom. i. 549. Recueil de

toutes les Pieces qui out paru fur les Affaires des Jefuiits
en Portagal , ttitnl i. p. 7. &C1

with his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous
tendency of the institution, and checked its
progress. a) But as the order was founded in
the period of which I write the history, and
as the age to which I address this work hath
seen its fall, the view which I have exhibited
of the laws and genius of this formidable body
will not, I hope, be unacceptable to my read-
ers ; especially as one circumstance has en-
abled me to enter into this detail with particular
advantage. Europe had observed, for two cen-
turies, the ambition and power of the order.
But while it felt many fatal effefts of there, it
could not fully discern the causes to which they
were to he imputed. It was unacquainted
with many of the singular regulations in the
political constitution or government of the Je-
suits, which formed the enterprizing spirit of
intrigue that distinguished its members, and
elevated the body itself to such a height of
power. It was a fundamental maxim with the
Jesuits, from their first infritution, not toq pu-
blif: the rules of their order. There they kept
concealed as an impenetrable mystery. They
never communicated them to strangerS, nor
even to the greater part of their own members.
They refafed to produce them whe'r required
by courts of juftice;b) and by a strange sole-

a) Conipte par N. de Moncl. p. 312.
b) Hifi. des JIi' tom .iii. 236,, &c. Corxpte par M. de Ch_-

lot. p. 38.

cifm in policy, the civil power in different
countries authorized or connived at the efta-
blifhment of an order of men, whose conftitu-
tion and laws were concealed with a solicitude,
which alone'was a good reason for having ex-
cluded them. During the prosecutions lately
carried on against them in Portugal and France,
the Jesuits have been to inconsiderate as to
produce the mysterious volumes of their inftitate.
By the. aid of these authentick records, the
principles of their government may be delineat-
ed, and the sources of their power investigated
Swith a degree of certainty and precision, which,
previous to that event, it was impossible to at-
tain. c) But as I have pointed out the dangerous
tendency of the constitution and spirit of the
order with the freedom becoming an historian,
the candour and impartiality no less requisite in
that cHaraEter call on me to add one observation :
that no class of regular clergy in the Romish
church has been more eminent for decency, and
even purity of manners, than the major part

c) The greater part of my information concerning the go-

vernment and laws of the order of Jesuits. 1 have derived
from the reports of M. de Chalotais and Monclar. I reft
not my narrative, however, upon the authority even of
these refpe&able magistrates and elegant writers but upon
innumerable palfages which they have extracted from the
conititutions of the order, deposited in their hands. Hof-
pinian, a Protefrant Divine of Zurich, in his hiftoria Je-
fuitica, printed A. D. 1619, published a finall part of
the constitutions of the Jesuits, of which by foame accident
he had got a copy; p. 3 -- 54.

of the order of Jesuits. d) The maxims of an
intriguing, ambitious, interested policy, might
influence those who governed the society, and
might even corrupt the heart, and pervert the
conduct of some individuals, while the greater
number, engaged in literary pursuits, or em-
ployed in the fiuntions of religion, was left
to the guidance of those common principles
which restrain men from vice, and excite them
to what is becoming and laudable. The causes
which occasioned the ruin of this mighty body,
as well as the circumstances and effects with
which it has been attended in the different
countries of Europe , though objefts extremely
worthy the attention of every intelligent observer
of human affairs, do not fall within the period
of this history.

Affairs of Germany.

No sooner had Charles re-established order

in the Low Countries, than he was obliged to
turn his attention to the affairs of Germany.
The Protefrants pressed him earnefily to appoint
that conference between a fele&t number of
the divines of each party , which had been fti-
pulated in the convention at Francfort. The
Pope considered such an attempt to examine or
decide the points in dispute as derogatory to his
right of being the supreme judge in controversy;

d) Sur la deftru&. des Jef. par tN. D'Alembert, p. 55.

and being convinced that it would either be inef-
feaual by determining nothing, or prove dan-
gerous by determining too much, he employed
every art to prevent the meeting.

A conference betwveen the Popish and Proteeftnt divines ,

The Emperor, however, finding it more

for his interest to sooth the Germans than to
gratify Paul, paid little regard to his remon-
ftrances. In a died held at Haguenaw, (June
25. T540.) matters were ripened for the con-
ference. In another died assembled at Worms,
(Dec. 6. 1540.) the conference was begun,
VIelan&hon on the one fide and Eckius on the
other, sustaining the principal part in the dif-
pute; but after they had made some progress,
though without concluding any thing , it was
suspended by the Emperor's command, that it
might be renewed with greater solemnity in his
own presence in a diet summoned to meet at
Ratisbon (i541.) This assembly was opened
with great pomp, and with a general expe&a-
tion that its proceedings would be vigorous
and decisive. By the consent of both parties,
the Emperor was entrusted with the power of
nominating the persons, who should manage the
conference, which it was agreed should be con-
du&ed not in the form of a publick disputation,
but as a friendly scrutiny or examination into
the articles which had given rife to the present
eontroverfies, He appointed Eckius, Gropper

-and Pflug, on the part of the Catholicks; Me-
lan&thon, Bucer, and Piftorius, on that of the
"Proteftants; all men of distinguished reputation
among their own adherents, and, except Eckius,
all eminent for their moderation, as well as
desirous of peace. As they were about to begin
their coufultations, the Emperor put into their
hands a book, composed, as he said, by a
learned divine in the Low Countries, with such
extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as, in
his opinion, might go far to unite and com-
prehend the two contending parties. Gropper,
a canon of Cologne , whom he had named among
the managers of the conference, a man of ad-
dress as well as of erudition, was afterwards
fufpe&ed to be the author of this short treatise.
It contained poetitions with regard to twenty-two
of the chief articles in theology, which included
most of the questions then agitated in the con-
troverfy between the Lutherans and the church
of Rome. By ranging his sentiments in a na-
tural order, and expressing them with great
simplicity; by employing often the very words
of scripture, or of the primitive fathers; by
softening the rigour of some opinions, and ex-
plaining away what was absurd in others; by
conceflions, now on one fide, and now on the
other; and especially by banishing as much as
poilible fcholaftick phrases, those words and
terms of art in controversy, which serve as
badges of diftintipn to the different fe&s, and

for which theologians often contend more fier-
cely than for opinions themselves ; he framed
his work in such a manner, as promised fairer
than any thing that had hitherto been attempted,
to 6ompofe and to terminate religious diffen-
tiqns. e)

fruitless.

But the attention of the age was turned,

with such acute observation, towards theolo-
gical controversies, that it was not easy to im-
pose on it by any giofs, how artful or specious
fioever. The length and eagerness of the dif-
*pute. had separated the contending parties so
completely, aad had set their minds at such va-
riance, that they were not to be reconciled by
partial concessions. All the zealous Catholicks,
particularly the ecclefiafticks who had a feat in
the died, joined in condemning Gropper's trea-
tife as too favourable to the LuTheran opinion,
the poison of which berefy it conveyed, as they
pretended, with greater danger, because it was
in some degree disguised. The rigid Protestants,
especially Luther himself, and his patron the
Eleaor of Saxony, were for rejedting it as an
impious compound of error and truth, craftily
prepared that it might impose on the weak, the
timid, and the unthinking. But the divines,
to whom the examination of it was conmmitted,

e) Goldt. Conftit, Imper. ii. p. iZa.

entered upon that business with greater delibe-
ration and temper. As it was more easy in
'itfelf, as well- as more consistent with the di-
gnity of the church to make concefions, and
even alterations with regard to speculative opi-
nions, the discussion whereof is confined chiefly
*to schools, and which present nothing to the
people that either flrikes their imagination or
assets their senses, they caret to an accommo-
-dation about there without much labour, and
even defined the great article concerning juftifi-
cation to their mutual fatisfa&tion. But, when
they proceeded to points of jurifdiftion, where
the interest and authority of the Roman See
were concerned, or to the rites and forms of
external worship , where every change that
could be made must be publick, and draw the
observation of the people, there the Catho-
licks were altogether untra&able ; nor could
the church either with safety or with honour
abolish its ancient inflitutions. All the articles
relative to the power of the Pope, the authority
of councils, the administration of the sacra-
ments, the worship of faints, and many other
particulars, did not, in their nature, admit of
any temperament; so that after labouring long
to bring about an accommodation with refpe&t
to these, the Emperor found all his endeavours
ineffe aual.

Re.cers of the diet of Ratisbon in favour of a general

counucil. Jly 28. S41..

Being impatient , however, to close the

diet, he at last prevailed on a majority of the
members to approve of the following recess:
That the articles concerning which the divines
had agreed in the, conference, should be held as
points decided, and be observed inviolably hy
all; that the oter articles about which they
had differed, fhuld be deferred to the determi-
nation of a general council or if that could
not be obtained, to a national fyno4 of Ge;-
nany ; and if it should prove impra6ticable ,
likewise, to aflfemble a synod , that a general
.die.t of the Empire fhiould be called within
eighteen aionths, in order to give some final
judgment upon the whole contrQverfy; that thle
Emperor should use all his interest and autho-
rity with the Pope , to procure the meeting
either of a general council or synod; that, in
the mean time, no innovations fbould be at-
tempted, no endeavours should be employed
to gain profelytes; and neither the revenues of
the church, nor the rights of the pnonafterieq,
should be invaded. f)

Gives offence both to Papifts and Protestants.

All the proceedings of this diet , as well

as the recess in which they terminated, gave

f) Sleidan, 267, &c. Paltav, 1. iv. c. Ix. p. 136. F. Paul,

p. 86. Seckend. 1. iii. 256.

great offence to the Pope. The power Which
the Germans had assumed of appointing their
own divines to examine and determine matters
of controversy, he considered as a very dan-
gerous invasion on his rights; the renewing of
their ancient proposal concerning a national
synod, which had been so often reje&ted by him
and his predecessors, appeared extremely un-
dutiful; but the bare mention of allowing a diet,
composed chiefly of laymen, to pass judgment
with refpeac to articles of faith, was deemed
no less criminal and profane, than the worst of
those herefies which they seemed zealous to
suppress. On the other hand, the Protestants
were no less difiatisfied with a recess , that
considerably abridged the liberty which they
enjoyed at that time.

Charles courts the Proteftantsb

As they murmured loudly against it, Char-

les, unwilling to leave any feeds of discontent
in the Empire, granted theni a private decla-
ration, in the mofi ample terms , exempting
them from whatever they thought oppreflive or
injurious in the recess, and ascertaining to them
the full poffeflion of all the privileges Which they
had ever enjoyed. g)

g) Sleid. 283. Seckeni. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom. tv. p.

ii. p. 2Io.

Affairs of Hungary.

Extraordihat'y as these concessions may ap-

pear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at
this jUin&nre made it necessary for him to grant
them. He foresaw a rupture with France to
be not only unavoidable, but near at hand, and
durst not give any fach cause of disgust or fear
to the Protestants , as might force them , in
felf-defence, to court the prote&ion of the
French King , from whdm , at present, they
were much alienated, The rapid progress of
the Turks in Hungary, was a more powerful
and present cause of the moderation which
Charles diftovered. A great revolution had
happened in that kingdom; John Zapol Scaepus
having chosen * as has been related, rather to
poterfs a tributary kingdom, than to renounce
the royal dignity to which he had been accuf-
tomed , had , by the afliffance of his mighty
prote&tor Solyman, wrefited from Ferdinand a
great part of the country, and left hiti only the
precarious poffeffion of the reft. But being a
prince of pacifick qualities, the frequent attempts
of Ferdinand, or of his partisans among the
Hungarians , to recover what they had loft,
greatly difquieted him ; and the necessity onr
these occasions, of calling in the Turks, whom
he considered and felt to be his masters rather
than auxiliaries, was hardly less mortifying. In
order, therefore, to avoid these distresses, as
well as to secure quiet and leisure for enjoying

the arts and amusements in which he delighted,
he secretly came to an agreement (A. D. 1535).
with his competitor, on this condition : That
Ferdinand should acknowledge him as King bs
Hungary, and leave him, during life, the un-
molested poffeflion of that part of the kingdom
now in his powver; but that, upon his demise,
the sole right of the whole should devolve upon
Ferdinand. h) As John had never been marri-
ed, and was then far advanced in life , the
terms of the contract seemed very favourable to
Ferdinand. But, soon after, some of the Hun-
garian nobles , solicitous to prevent a foreigner
from ascending their throne, prevailed on John
to put an and to a long celibacy , by mariying
Isabella , the daughter of Sigifmond , King of
Poland.

Death of the K(ing of Hungary.

John had the fatisfaftion, before his death,

which happened within less than a year after
his marriage, to fee a son born to inherit his
kingdom. To him, without regarding his treaty
with Ferdinand, which he considered, no doubt,
as void, upon an event not foreseen when it
was concluded, he bequeathed his crown, ap-
pointing the Queen and George Martinuzzi,
bishop of Warafdin, guardians of his son, and
regents of the kingdom. The greater part of

h) Iftuanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xii. p. I35.

the Hungarians immediately acknowledged the
young Prince as King, to whom, in memory
of the founder of their monarchy, they gave
the name of Stephen, i)

Ferdinand's efforts td Obtairi the crown.

ferdinaihd, though extremely disconcerted

by this unexpe&ed event resolved not to aban-
don the kingdom which he had acquired by his
corhpa& with John. He sent ambafladors to
the Queen to claim poffeffion, and to offer the
province of 'iranfylvania as a settlement for
her son, preparing at the fame time to assert
his .right by force of arms. But John had com-
mitted the care of his ton to persons, who had
to much spirit to give up the crown tamely,
and who poffeffed abilities fufficient to defend
it. The Queen, to all the address peculiar
to her own sex, added a masculine courage,
ambition, and magnanimity.

Charafer and power of Martiuuzzi.

Martinuzzi, who had raised himself fidmt

the lowest rank in life to his present dignity,
was one of those extraordinary men, who, by
the extent as well as variety of their talents,
are fitted to a& a superior part in bustling and
farious times. In discharging the fun&ions of

his

i) Jovil HIl. lib. xxxix. p. 339. a. &c,

his etclefiaftical office, he put on the femblanice
of an humble and austere san&ity. In civil
tranfa&ions, he discovered industry, dexterity,
and boldness. During war he laid aside the
cassock, and appeared on horseback with his
. fcymitar and buckler, as a&ive, as oftenta-
tious, and as gallant as any of his countrymen.
Amidst all these different and contradi&ory
forms WVhich he could affizme, an insatiable
desire of dominion and authority was confpi-
cuous. From such persons it was obvious what
answer Ferdinand had to expe&. He soon per-
ceived that he must depend on arms alone for
recovering Hungary. Having levied fbr this
purpose a considerable body of Germans, whom
his partisans among the Hungarians joined with
their vassals, he ordered them to march into
that part of the kingdom which adhered to,
Stephen.

Calls in the Turks.

Martinuzzi, unable to make head against

such a powerful army in the field, satisfied
himself with holding out the towns; all of
which, especially Buda, the place of greatest
consequence, he provided with every thing
necessary for defence; and in the mean time
he sent ambassadors to Solyman, beseeching him
to extend towards the son, the fame Imperial pro-
teftion which has so long maintained the father
on his throne. The Sultan, though Ferdinand

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. IlL Q.

used his uttnoft hnrdeavours to thwart this ne-
gociatibhn, and even offered to accept of thi
Hungarian crown bn the fatne ignoininious
.cohditioh of paying tribute: to the Ottoman
Porte; by which John had held it, saw such
prcfpets of tdvaiitage from efpouftng the in-
terest of the young King, that he inifantly
prdtifed him his prdte&tion and commanding
oneirmy to advante forthwith tovwards Huhgary,
he himnfelf followed with anotherii Meanwhile
the Germans, hoping to terminate the wvar by
the reduftiori of a city in ihich the King and
his mother were shut up ) had formed the siege
of Budai Martinuzzi having drawn thither
the ftiength of the Hungarian nobility, defend-
bed the towi with such courage and skill, as
allowed the Turkish forces timne to cbme up to
its relief. -They instantly attacked the Germans,
weakened by fatigue, difeares; and desertion,
and defeated them with great slaughter. k)

Solvman's urigeneroits condu&.

Solyman foodn after joined his vitorioud

troops; and being weary of so many expensive
expeditions undertaken in defence of dominions
Which were not his own, or being unable t6
resist this alluring opportunity of seizing a king-
dom, while pofieffed by an infant, under the
-guardianship of a woman and a priefL. he al-

h) IfRuAnhailii Hist. Hung. lib. xiv. p. x5o.

iowed interested considerations to triumph with
too much facility over the principles of honour
and the sentiments of humanity. What he
planned ungenerously, he executed by fraud.
Having prevailed on the Queen to fend her fort,
whom he pretended to be desirous of feeing,
into his camp, and having, at the fame time,
invited the chief of the nobility to an entertain-
ment there, while they, fufpe&ing no trea-
Chery, gave themselves up to the mirth and
jollity of the feast, a fele& band of troops by
the Sultan's orders seized one of the gates of
Buda. Being thus master of the capital, of the
King's person, and of the leading men among
the nobles, he ordered the Queen, together
with her Con, to be conducted to Transylvania,
Which province he allotted to them, and, ap-
pointing a Bafha to preside in Buda with a large
body of soldiers, annexed Hungary to the Ot-
toman Empire. The tears and complaints of
the unhappy Queen had no influence to change
his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi either resist
his absolute and uncontroulable command, or
prevail on him to recall it. 1)

Ferdinand's overtures to Solymaxi.

Before the account of this violent ufurpa-

tion reached Ferdinand, he was Co unlucky as
to have dispatched new ambafTadors to Solyman

1) flltuanhaffii, lib. xiv. p. 56. Jovil hiftor. lib. xxxix, p,

2476, &c.

Q 2

with a fresh repreftntatioh 'of his right t'6 the
crown of Hungary,, as well as a renewal of his
former overture to hofd the kingdom bs the Ot-
tomiah Porte, and to pay ftr it an annual tri-
bute. This ill.-iied propbfal was reje&ed with
ferorn The Suitah belated with success, and
thihking that he imight preferibe what terms he
pleased to a Prince who voluntarily proffered
conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, def
dlared that he would not suspend the operationi
of: warl unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated
all the towns which he still held in Hungary
and consented to the imposition of a-tribute upon
Austria, in order to reimburse the sums which
his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had
obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence
of that kingdom, m)

In this slate were the affairs of Hungaty.

As the unfortunate events there had either hap-
pened before the dissolution of the diet at Ra-
tifbon, or were dreaded at that time, Charles
saw the danger of irritating and inflaming the
minds of the Germans, while a formidable
enemy was ready to break into the Empire; and
perceived that he could not expect any vigorous
assistance either towards the recotreiy of Hun-
gary , or the. defence of the Auflrian frontier,
unless he courted and satisfied the Protestants.
By the concessions which have been mentioned,

nt) Rituanhafii bist. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 158,

he gained this point, and such liberal supplies
both of men and money were voted for carrying
on the war against the Turks, as left him under
little anxiety about the security of Germany
during rext campaign. n)

The Emperor vitits Italy.

Immediately upon the conclusion of the died,

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he passed
through Lucca he had a short interview with
the Pope; but nothing colld be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of composing th.e re-
ligious disputes in Germany, between two
Princes, whore views and interest with regard
to that matter were at this jun&ure so opposite.
The Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of
discord between Charles and Francis, and to
extingaifh those mutual animofities which threa-
tened to break out suddenly into open hostility,
were not more fuccefsful.

His expedition agaiuft Algiers, and motives of it.

The Emperor's thoughts were bent to en-

tirely, at that time, on the great enterpri'ze
which he had concerte.d against Algiers, that
he listened. with little attention to the Pope's
schemes or overtures, and hastened to join his
army and fleet. o)

n) Sleid. 283.

3) Sandov. hiftor. tom,. ii. 29S

Algiers Itill continued in that itate of de-

pendence on the Turkish empire to which Bar-
barpffa had fubje&ed it. Ever since he, as cap-
tain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Al-
giers had been governed by Hafcen-Aga, a re-
negado eunuch, who, by pafling through every
flation in the Corfair's service, had acquired
such experience in war, that he was well fitted
for a station which required a man of tried and
daring courage. Hafcen, in order to shew how
well he deserved that dignity carried on his
piratical depredations against the Christian States
with amazing a&ivity, and outdid, if poflible,
Baybaroffa himself in boldness and cruelty. The
commerce of the Mediterranean was greatly in-
terrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent
alarms given to the coast of Spain, that there
was a neceflity of ere&ing watch-towers at
proper distances, and of keeping guards con-
Ifanly on foot, in order to descry the approach
of his squadrons, and to proteat the inhabitants
from their descents. p) Of this the Emperor's
fubjets had long complained, representing it as
an enterprise corresponding to his power, and
becoming his humanity, to reduce Algiers,
which, since the conquests of Tunis, was the
common receptacle of all the free - booters; and
to exterminate that lawless race, the implacable
enemies of the Christian name. Moved partly

p) Jovii hik. T. xl, p. 466.

by their entreaties, and partly allured by the
hiope of adding to the glory which he had ac-
quired by his last expedition into Africa, Charles,
before he left Madrid, in his way to the Low
Countries, had issued orders both in Spain and
Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this pur-
pose. No change in circumnftances, since that
time, could divert him from this resolution, or
prevail on him to turn his arms towards Hun-
gary; though the success of the Turks in that
country seemed more immediately to require
his presence thete; though many of his most
faithful adherertq in Germany urged tht: the
defence of the FEmpire ought to be his firK .nd
peculiar care; thou>:' ,.'h as bore him n.' guod
will ridiculkd his pre. -: ;;s - ,:,L.L ' flying
from an er-mv almost at ,d:;^ tiia

,

, : h,

go in quell of a remote and more ignobie foi,
But to attack the Sultan in Hungary, holw
splendid soever that measure might appear, was
an undertaking which exceeded his power, and
was not consistent with his interest. To draw
troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them
into a country fa distant as Hungary, to pro-
vide the vast apparatus necefiary for transporting
thither artillery, ammunition, and baggage of
a regular army, and to push the war in that
quarter, where it could not be brought to any
issue during several campaigns, were undertak-
ings so expensive and unwieldy as. did not cor-
respond with the low condition of the Eipep-

ror's treasury. While his principal force was
thus employed, his dominions in Italy and the
Low Ccuntries must have lain open to the
French King, who would not have allowed such
a favourable opportunity of attacking them to go
unimprpved. "Whereas the African expedition,
the preparations for which were already finish-
ed, and almost the whole expence of it defrayed,
would depend upon a single effort; and besides
the tfecurity and fatisfa&ion which the success
of i' muff give his fubje&ts, would detain him
during so short a space, that Francis could
hardly take advantage of his absence, to in-
vade his dominions in Europe.

His preparationt.

On all these accounts, Charles adhered to

his first plan, and with fach determined obfti-
nacy, that he paid no regard to the Pope, who
advised, or to Andrew Doria who conjured
him not to expose his whole armament to almost
unavoidable deftru&ion, by venturing to ap-
proach the dangerous coast of Algiers at such
an advanced season of the year, and when the
autumnal winds were so violent. Having em-
barked on board Dorla's gallies at Porto-Venere
in the Genoese territories, he soon found that
this experienced sailor had not judged wrong
concerning the element with which he was so
well acquainted; for such a storm arose that it
was with the Iatxiioft difficulty and danger he

reached Sardinia, the place of general rendez-
vous. But as his courage was undaunted, and
his temper often inflexible, neither the remon-
ftrances of the Pope and Doria, nor the danger
to which he had already been exposed by dif.-
regarding them, had any other effe& than to
confirm him in his fatal resolution. The force,
indeed, which he had colle&ed was fuch'as
might have inspired a Prince less adventrous,
and less confident in his own schemes , with
the most sanguine hopes of success. It consisted
of twenty thousand foot, and two thousand
horse, Spaniards, Italians, and Germans, mostly
veterans, together with three thousand volun-
teers, the flower of the Spanish and Italian no-
bility, fond of paying court to the Emperor by
attending him in his favourite expedition, and
eager to share in the glory which they believed
he was going to reap; to these were added a
thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the order
of St. John, led by an hundred of its most gal-
lant Knights.

Lauds in Africa.

The voyage, from Majorca to the African

coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard ,
than that which he had just finished. When
he approached the land, the roll of the sea, and
vehemence of the winds, would not permit the
troops to disembark. But at last, the Emperor,
feiziing a favourable opportunity, lande.d them

without opposition, not far from lgiers, and
intmediately advanced towards the town. To
oppose this -mighty army , Haftea had only
eightl hundred Tnrks, and five thousand Moors,
partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees
from Granada, He returned, however, a fierce
and haughty anfwet when funnmoned to fur-.
render. But with such a handful of soldiers ,
neither his desp:erate courage, nor consummate
hkill in war , could have. long resifted forces
fpe~aior to those which had defeated Barbarossa
at the head of sixty thousand men, and which
had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his endea-
vours to save it.

The difarers which befel his army,

But howsoever far the Emperor might think

himself beyond -the reach of any danger from
the enemy, he was, suddenly exposed to a more
dyeadful calamity, and one againift which human
prudence and human efforts availed nothing.
On the second day after his landing, and before
he had time for any thing but to disperse some
lightarmed Arabs. who molested his troops on
their march-, the clouds began to gather, and
the heavens to.appear with a fierce. and threa-
tening afpe&. Towards evening, rain began to
fall, .4ccqmpanied with violent wind, and the
rage of the tenmpeft increasing, during the night,
the fQldiers, who had brought nothing ashore

but their arms, remained exposed to all its fury,
without tents, or shelter, or cover of any kind.
The ground was soon so wet that they could
not lie down on it; their camp being in a low
Iituation was overflowed with water, and they
funk at every step to the ankles in mud; while
the wind blew with such impetuosity, that, to
prevent their falling, they were obliged to
thrust their spears into the ground, and to sup-
port themselves by taking hold of them. Hafcen
was too vigilant an officer to allow an enemy
in fueh distress to remain unmolested. About
the dawn of morning, he sallied out with fol-
diers , who , having been screened from the
storm under their own roofs, were fresh and
vigorous. A body of Italians, who were fta-
tioned nearest the city, dispirited and benumbed
with cold, fled at the approach of the Turks.
The troops at the post behind them, discovered
greater courage; but as the rain had extinguish-
ed their matches and wet their powder, their
mrufkets were useless, and having scarcely
strength to handle their other arms , they were
soon thrown into confusion. Almost the whole
army, with the Emperor himself in perfoi, was
obliged to advance, before the enemy could be
repulsed, who, after spreading such general
consternation, and killing a considerable number
of men, retired at last in good order.

n<d fleetc,

" But all feeling or remembrxance of this loss
and danger 'were quickly obliterated by a more

' deadful:as well aS affe&ing fpe&acle. It was now

briaid day ; the hurricane had abated nothing
of its violence, and the sea appeared agitated
with all the rage' of which that deftruxive ele-
m'ent is capable ; all the Chips, an which alone
the, whole armiy knew that their safety and sub-
iiftence depended, were seen driven from their
an.hors, some dashing against each other, some
beat to pieces oih the rocks, many forced ashore,
and not a few sinking in the waves. In less
than an hour , fifteen ships of war , aud an
hundred and forty transports with eight thou-
sand men perished ; and such of the unhappy
crews as escaped the fury of the sea, were
murdered without mercy, by the Arabs, as
soon as they reached land. The Emperor stood
in silent anguish and aftonithment beholding
this fatal event , which at once blasted all his
hopes of success, and buried in the depths: the
vast fares which he had provided, as well for
annoying the enemy, as for subsisting his own
troops. He had it not in his power to. afford
them any other assistance o,r relief than by fend-
ing some troops, to drive away the Arabs, and'
thus delivering a few who. were so fortunate as.
to get ashore 'from the cruel fate which, their
companions had met with. At last the wind
began to. fall, and to give some hopes that as

many ships minght escape, as to save the army
from perishing by famine, and transport them
back to Europe. But these weri n~oly hopes;
the approach of evening covered the sea with
darkness; and it being impossible for the officers
aboard the ships which had outlived the itorm,
to fend any intelligence to their companions
who were ashore, they remained during the
night in all the anguish of suspense and uncer-
tainty.. Next day, a boait dispatched by Doria
made shift to reach land, with information ,
that having weathered out the fiorm, to Which,
during fifty years knowledge of the sea, he
hid never seen any equal in fierceness and hor-
ror, he had found it necessary to bear away
with his Chattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He
advised the Emperor , as the face of the sky
was still lowering and tempestuous, to march
with all speed to that place, where the troops
could re-embark with greater ease.

Obliged to retreat.

Whatever comfort this intelligence affordea

Charles, from being assured that part of his
fleet hi~ escaped , was balanced by the new
cares arid perplexity in which it involved him
with regard to his armyi MVetafuz was at least
three days march from his present camp; all
the provisions which he had brought ashore at
his first landing were now consumed; his fol-
diers, worn out with fatigue, were hardly able

for' fch a jouriney, ikven in a frienidly country;
and being dispirited by a succession of hardfhipsi
wtiith Vi&ory iiffelf would scarcely have ren-
dered to:lerale tliby were in no condition to
uidergo new toils. But -the situation of the
arimy Was f'uch as allowed not orie moment for
deliberation, stir left it in the least doubtful
wivhat:to choose. They were ordered itiftantly
to iarch , the wouiaded, the sick , and the
feeble , beitag placed in the centre ; such as
feediied most vigofous were ftatioied in the front
and rea~. Theii thli fad effefs of what 'they
ha~d fuffered began td appear inore nianifeftly
thari ever, and new eAlamitiis were added to
all thof'e which they had already endured.
Sonme couid hardly bear the Weight of their
armhis; others , spent with the toil of forcing
their way -through deep arid almost impassable
roads, funk down and died; many perished by
famine, as thC whole arirmy subsisted chiefly on
roots and berries, or the flesh of horses, killed
by the Emperor's order, and distributed among
the several battalions; imany were drowned in
brooks, which were fwoln so machi by the ex-
eeffive rains, that in pafling them th waded
up to the chin; not a few were killed by the
enemy, who, during the greatest part of their
retreat, alarmed, harassed, and annoyed themt
night and day. At last they arrived at Metafuz;
and the weather being now so calm as to restore
their communication with the fleet, they were

supplied with plenty of provisions, and cheer-
ed with the profpe&t of safety.

His fortitude of mind.

During this dreadfuly series of calatnties

the Emperor discovered great qualities, many
of which an almost uninterrupted flow of pro-
fperity had hitherto afforded him no opportunity
of displaying. He appeared eonfpicuous for
firmness and cbnftancy offpirit, for magnanimi-
ty, fortitude humanity, and compassion. He
endured as great hardships as the meanest fol-
dier; he exposed his own perfbn wherever
danger threatened; he encouraged the despond-
ing, visited the sick and wounded, and animat-
ed all by his words and example. When the
army embarked, he was among the last who
left the shore, although a body Arabs hoverred
at no great distance, ready to fall on the rear.
By there virtues, Charles atoned in rome de-
gree, for his obstinacy and presumption in un-
dertaking an expedition so fatal to his fubje&ts.

Returns td Europe.

The calamities which attended this unfor-

tunate enterprize did not end here; for no
sooner were the fortes got on board, than a
new storm arising, though less furious than
the former, scattered the fleet, and obliged
them, separately, to make towards such ports
in Spain or Italy as they could first reach; thus

fpreaditig the account of their disasters~ with
ail the circumstances of aggravation and horror,
which their fear or fatcy suggested. The Em-
peror himself, aftet escaping great dangers,
aind .being forced into the port of Bugia in As-
tica, where he was obliged by contrary winds
to retnain several weeks, arrived at last (De-
cem1 2.. 1541.) in Spain, in a condition very dif-
ferent fiom that in which he had returned from
his former expedition against the Infidels. z)

z) Car. V. Expeditio ad Argyriain per Nicolaum Villagnon4iri

Equitem Rhodium 6"p. Scardium, v. ii. 365, Jovii Hist. 1.
xl. p. 269, &c. Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos V. p. 83.
Sandov. Hiftor. ii. 299, &e.

THE

# BOOK VII. Renewal of hostilities by Francis, and his motives for it.

T .H E

H I S T O R Y

OF THE

R E I G N

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.

Renewal of hostilities by Francis, and his motives for it,

The calamities which the Emperor fuffered
in his unfortunate enterprize against Algiers
were great; and the account of these, which
augmented in proportion as it spread at a great-
er diftanee from the scene of his disasters, en-
couraged Francis to begin hostilities, on which
he had been for-Jome time resolved. But he
did not think it prudent to produce, as the
motives of this resolution, either his ancient
pretensions to the dutchy of Milan , or the Em-
peror's difingenuity in violating his repeated
promises with regard to the restitution of that
country. The former might have, been a good
reason against concluding the truce of Nice,

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. R

but was .sone for breaking it; the latter could
not be urged without exposing his own credu-
lity as much as the Emperor's want of integrity.
A Violent and unwarrantable ation of one of
the Imperial generals, furrniThed him with a
reason to justify Ihis taking arms, which wai
of greater weight than either of these, and
such as would have roused him, if he had been
as desirous of peace as he was eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at NJice,
without consulting Solymnan, gave (as he fore-
saw) great offence to that haughty Monarch,
who considered an alliance with h:a? as an
hoinoir of whiCh a Christian prince had cause
to be proud. The French King's friendly in-
terview ,vith the Emperor in Provence, foll6w-
ed by fu'h extraordinary appearances of union
and confidence as aceompanied Charles's recep-
tion in France, induced the Sultan to fufpeft
that the two rivals had at last forgotten their
ancient enmity ; in order that they might form
fuiich a geheral confederacy against the Ottoman
power, as had been long wished for in Chris-
tendom, and often attempted in vain. Char-
les, with his .usual art, endeavoured to con-
firm and strengthen these suspicions, by in-
ftruting his emiffarier .at Constantinople, as
well as in those courts with which Solymani
held any intelligence, to represent the concord
between him and Francis. to be so entire, that
their fentimerits, views, and pursuits, would

be the fame for the future, a) It was not
without difficulty that Francis effaced there im-
pretflons but the address of Rincon, the French
ambaflador at the Porte, together with the ma-
nifeft advantage of carrying on hostilities against
the house of Austria in concert with France, pre-
vailed at length oh the Sultan to enter into a
closer cohjun&ion with Francis than ever.
Rincon returned into France; in order to com-
municate to his maifer a fchente of the Sultan's,
for gaining the concurrence of the Venetians
in their operations against the common enemy.
Solyman having lately concluded a peace with
that republick, to which the mediation of Fran-
cis and the good offices of Rincon had greatly
contributed, thought it not impossible to allure
the senate by such adyantages, as, together
with the example of the Freich Monarch,
might overbalance any scruples arising either
from decency or caution, that could operate
on the other fide. Francis, warmly approving
of this measure , dispatched Rincon back to
Constantinople, and, directing him to go by
Venice along with Fregofo, a Genoese exile,
whom he appointed his ambassador to that re-
publick , empowered them to negociate the
matter with the senate, to whom Solyman had

R . b

a) em. de Ribier, tom. i. p. 50*.

Sent an envoy for tHe fame purpose. b) The
marquis del Guiafo, governor of the Milanese ,
aii officer of great abilities, but capable of at'
tempting and executing the most atrocious ac-
tions, got intelllgence of the motions and de-
Rination of these ambassadors. As he t'kiew
how much his master wished to discover the
intentions of the French King, and of what
bonfequence it was to retard the execution of
his measures, he employed some soldiers be-
longing to the garrison ofPavia to lie in wait for
Riricon arid, Fregofo as they failed down the
Po, who murdered them and most of their at-
tendarits, and seized their papers.

Th:e ildirder of his amnbaffadors his pretext for this.

' Upon receiving an account of this barbarous

dutragi, committed, during the fubfifterice of
a truce, against persons held sacred by the
molt uncivilized nations, Francis's grief Tor the
unhappy fate of two servants whom he loved
and trusted; his uneasiness at the interruption
of his schemes by their death, and every other
paflion, were swallowed up and loft in the
indignation wvhich this insult on the honour of
his crown excited. tie exclaimed loudly against
Gtiafto, who; having drawn upon himself all
the ikifamy of affaffination without making any
discovery of iinportance, as the ambafladors had

b) Hist. dle enet, de iiarata. iv. ias.

left their infiru&ions and other papers of con-
sequence behind them, now boldly denied his
being accessary in any wife to the crifne. He
sent ap ambassador to the Emperor, to demand
suitable reparation for an iEdignity, which zo
prince, bow inconsiderable soever or pufillani-
.mous, could tamely endure: And when Charles,
impatient at that time to set out on his African
expedition, endeavoured to put him off with an
evasive answer, be appealed to all the courts
in Europe, setting forth the beinoufpefs of the
injury, the spirit of moderation with which he
bad applied for redress, and the iniquity of the
Emperor in disregarding this just request.

Notwithstanding the confidence with which

Guaffo asserted his own innocence, the accufa-
tions of the French gained greater credit than
all his proteitations; and Bellay, the French
commander in Piedmont, procured , at length,
by his industry and address, such a minute de-
tail of the tranfa6&ion, with the testimony of
so many of the parties concerned.., as amounted
almost to a legal. proof of the marquis's guilt.
In consequence of this opinion of the publick,
confirmed by such strong evidence, Francis's
complaints were universally allowed to be well
founded, and the steps which he took towards
renewing hofiilities, were abfcribed not merely
to ambition or resentment, but to the unavoid-
able neceflity of vindicating the honour of his
crown c)

c) Be\sy , .367. &c. Joii. Hist. ib, xl. s68.

However just Francis might esteem his ow.n

cause, he did not traut so much to that, as to
'pegle& the proper precautions for gaining other
allies besides the 'Sultan , by whose aid he
'might counterbalance the Emperor's superior
power. But his negoeiations to this effe&t were
attended with very little success. Henry VIII.
eagerly bent at that time upon schemes against
Scotland, which he knew would at once dif-
solve his union with France, was inclinable
rather to take part with the Emperor, than to
contribute in any degree towards favouring the
operations against him. The Pope adhered in-
violably to his ancient system of neutrality. The
Venetians, notwithfianding Solyman's folicita-
tions, imitated the Pope's example. The Ger-
mans, satisfied with the religious liberty which
they enjoyed, found it more their interest to
gratify than to irritate the Emperor; so that
the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, who on
this occasion were first drawn into interest them-
selves in the quarrels of the more potent Mo-
.narchs of the south, and the duke of Cleves,
who had a dispute with the Emperor about the
poffeflion of Guelders, were the only confede-
rates whom Francis secured. But the 'dominions
of the two' former lay at such a distance, and
the power of. the latter was so inconsiderable,
that he gained little by their alliance.

Francis's industry in preparing for war.

Francis, however, supplied all defe&s by

his own ae.ivity. Being afflicted at this time
with a distemper, the effect of his irregular
pleasures, and which prevented his pursuing
them with the fame liceacious indulgence, he
applied to business with more than his usual in-
duftry. The fame cause which occasioned this
extraordinary attention to his affairs, rendered
him morose and diffatisfied with the ministers
whom he had hitherto employed. This acci-
dental peevishness being sharpened by refle&ting
on the false ifeps into which he had lately been
betrayed, as well as the insults to which he
bad been exposed, some of those in whom he
had hitherto placed the greatest confidence felt
the effe&s of this change in his temper., and
were deprived of their offices. At last he dif-
graced Montmorency himself, who had long di-
rested affairs, as well civil as military, with
all. the. authority of a minister no less beloved
than trusted by his master; and Flranis being
fond of fhewing that the fall of.i uch a powerful
favourite did. n.ot affe&a the vigour or prudence
of his administra.tion, this was a new motive to
redouble his diligence in prep aring to open
the war by some splendid and extraordinary
effort.

He brings five armies into the field.

Ftaneis accordingly brought (I542.) into

the field five armies. One to aa& in Luxembourg
under the duke of Orleans, 'accompanied by
the duke of Lortaine as his " inftru&or in
the art of war. Another commanded by the
dau.phin marched -towards 'the frontiers of Spain.
A third led by Van Roffemrn the narfhal of
Guelders, and composed Chiefly of the troops of
Cleves,. had Brabant allotted for the. theatre of
its operations. A fourth, of which the duke of
Vendome was general, hovered on the borders
of Slanders. The last, consisting of the forces
cantoned in Piedmont, was destined for" the ad-
miral Annibaut. The. dauphin and his brother
were appointed to command where the' chief
exertions were intended , and the greatest
honour to be reaped; the army of the former
amounted to forty thousand, that of the latter
to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears more
furprizing than that Francis did not pour with
these numerous and irresistible armies into the
1Milanese, which had so long been the obje&
Of his wishes as well as enterprizes; and that
ie should choose rather to turn almost his whole
strength into another dire&ion, and towards
new conqueRts. But the remembrance of the
disasters which he had met with in his former
expeditions into Italy, together with the diffi-
culty of supporting a war carried on at such a
distance from his own dominions, had gradually

abated his violent inclination to obtain footing
in that country, and made him willing to try
the fortune of his arms in another quarter. At
the fame time he expe&ted to make such
powerful impreflion on the frontier of Spain,
where there were few towns of any strength,
and no army assembled to oppose him, as might
enable him to recover poffeffion of the country
ofRoufillon, lately dismembered from the French
crown, before Charles could bring into the field
any force bile to obftru& his progress. The
nieceility of fapporting his ally the duke of
Cleves, and the hope of drawing a considerable
body of soldiers out of Germany by his means,
determined him to a& with vigour in the Low
Countries.

-- Their operations.

The dauphin and duke of Orleans opened

the campaign (June 1542.) much about the
fame time; the former laying siege to Perpignan
the capital of Roufillon , and- the latter entering
Luxembourg. The duke of Orleans pushed his
operations with the greatest rapidity and success,
one town falling after another, until no place
in that large dutchv remained in the Emperor's
hands but Thionville. Nor could he have failed
of over -running the adjacent provinces with
the fame ease, if he had not voluntarily ftopt
short in tbi career of viAory. But a report
prevailing that the Emperor had determined to
hazard a battle in order to save Perpignan, on

a tfdden the duke, prompted by youthful ar-
dour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy of his
brother, whom he both envied and hated,
abandoned, his, own conquest, and hastened to-
.wards Roufillon, in order to divide with him
the glory of the vi&ory.

On his departure fomne of his troops. were

disbanded, others deserted their colours; and
the reft, cantoned in the towns which he had
taken, remained inative. By this condu.&,
which leaves a difbonorable imputation either
on his understanding or his heart, or on~both,
he not only renounced whatever. he could have
hoped from such a promising commencement of
the canmpaign, but gave the enemy an oppor-
tunity of recovering, before the end of summer,
all the conquests which he had gained. On
the Spanish frontier,, the Emperor was not to
inconsiderate as to venture on a battle, the
loss of which might have endangered his king-
dom. Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and
briskly attacked, having been largely supplied
with amunition and provisions by the vigilance
of Doria, d) was defended so long and so vi-
goroufly by the duke of Alva, the persevering
obstinacy of whose temper fitted him admirably
for such service, that at last the French, after
a siege of three months, wasted by diseases,
repulsed in several assaults, and despairing of

d) Sigonii Vita A. Dorie , p. I.91.

success, relinquished the undertaking, and re-
tired into their own country, e) Thus all
Francis's mighty preparations, either from some
defe&t in his own condu&t, or from the fupe-
rior power and prudence of his rival, pro-
duced no effe&s which bore any proportion to
his expence and efforts, or such as gratified,
in any degree, his own hopes, or aofwered
the expetation of Europe. The only solid ad-
vantage of the campaign was the acquisi-tion of
a few towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained
rather by stratagem and address, than by the
force of his arms. f)

Preparations for another campaign. 1543-

Meanwhile the Emperor and Francis, though

both considerably exhausted by such great but
indecisive efforts, discovering no abatement of
their mutual animosity , employed all their at-
tention, tried every expedient, and turned
themselves towards every quarter, in order to
acquire new allies, together with such a rein-
forcement of strength as would give them the
superiority in the ensuing campaign. Charles,
taking advantage of the terror and resentment of
the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of
their country, prevailed'on the Cortes of the
several kingdoms to grant him subsid~ies with a

e) Sandov. Hillt. tom. ii. 315.
f) Sndov. Hist. i. 318. Bellay , g-7, &c. Ferrer. ix. S37-

more liberal hand than usual. At the fame
time he borrowed a large fum from John King
of Portugal, -and, by way of security for his
repaiymeiit, put him in poffefeion of the Mo-
lucca lfles in the Eafi Indies, with the gainful
commerce of precious spices, which that fequef-
tered eorner of the globe yields. Not satisfied
witht this, he niegociated a marriage between
Phiilipp his only son, now in his sixteenth year
and Mary daughter of that Monarch, with whom
her' father, the moit opulent prince in Europe,
gave a large dower; and having likewise per-
fuaded she Cortes of Aragon and Valencia to
recognise Philip as the heir of these crowns,
he obtained from them the donative' usual. on
ftuch occasions. g) These extraord-inary fiup-
plies enabled him to make such additions to
his forces in Spain, that he could 'detach a
great bddy into the tLow Countries, and yet
refeirve as "many as were fufficient for the
defence of the kingdom. Having thus pro-
vided sot 'the security of Spain, and com-

itted the governmient of it to his son, he

failed (MaE y i543.) for Italy, in his way to
Cermaniy. But how attentive soever to raise
the fuinds for carrying on the war, or eager to
grasp at any new expedient for that purpose,
he was not so incoinfiderate as to accept of an
overturi which Paul, knowing his necessities
artfully threw out to him. That ambitious

g) Ferreras J ix. I, 241x. Jovii Hilt. lib. xlii, 298. 6.

Pontiff, no less sagacious to discern, than
watchful to seize opportunities of aggrandizing
his family, solicited him to grant O&avio his
grandchild whom the Emperor had admitted
to the honour of being his fon-in-law, the in-
Veftiture of the dutchy of Milan, in return for
which he promised fich a vast fum of money
as would have gone far towards supplying his
present exigencies. But Charles, as well from
unwillingness to alienate a province of so much
value, as from disgust at the Pope, who had
hitherto refused to join in the war against Fran-
cis, reje&ed the proposal. His diffatisfa&ion
with Paul at that jun&ure was so great, that
he even refused to approve his alienating Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter.
and fettling them on his son and grandson as
a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no othezr
expedient for raising money among the Italian
states remained, he consented to withdraw the
garrisons which he had hitherto kept in the
citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in confid era-
tion for which, he received a large present
from Cosmo di Medici, who by this means fe-
cured his own independence, and got poffeffion
of two forts, which were justly called the set-
ters of Tuscany. h)

&a) Adriani iftoria, 1.195. Sleid. 312. Jovii HitL lib. xhii. p.

36z. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 34-

The Emperor's negociations with Henry V1.

But Charles, while he seemed to have turned

hi~s whdol attentiori towards raifihg the Tums
riebeflary for defraying the expences of the year,
had not bFeen negligent of objeats more distant;
thbtigh nt less importanit, and had conclqded a
leagte offenfive and defensiv-e with Henry VITI
fbfom which he derived, in the end, greater ad-
vantige than from all hiA other preparations.
Several flight bircumftances, whfich have alrea-
dy befen inentionred, hid bigun to alienate the
affe&ions of that Monarch from Francis his pre-
Lent ~lly , and inew incidents of greater mo-
inent had occurred to iidereafe his disgust and
animbfity.

hITery's upture with Franee and Scotland.

Henry, deiirous of effablifhing an tinifor,

mity in teligion in Great Britain, as well as
fond of iaking prdfelytes to his own opinions,
had formed a scheme of persuading his nephew
the King of Scotland td renounce the Pope's
fupremady , anid tb adopt the fame fyfem of
reformatibn, which he had ihtroduced into Eng-
land. This measure he pursued tith his usual
eagerness and impetuosity, making such ad-
vantageous offers to James, whom he confider-
ed as not over-fCrupuloufly attached to any
religious tenets, that he hardly doubted of fuc-
cess. His propositions were accordingly receiv-
ed in such a manner, that he flattered himfetf

With having gained his point. But the Scottifi
ecclefiafticks, foreseeing the ruin of the church
to be the consequence of the King's union with
England; and the pa'rtifans of France, no less
convinced that it would put an end to the in-
fluence of that crown upon the publick councils
of Scotland, combined together, and by their
insinuations defeated Henry's scheme at the very
moment when he expeEted it to have taken es-
se&t. Too haughty to brook such a disappoint-
ment, which he imputed as much to the arts
of the French, as to the levity of the Scottish
Monarch, he took arms against Scotland, threa-
tening to subdue the kingdom, since he could
not gait the friendship of its King. At the
fame time, his resentment at Francis quickened
his negociations with the Emperor, an alliance
with whom he was now as forward to accept
as the other could be to offer it. During this
war with Scotland, and before the conciluion
of his negociations with Charles , James V.
died , leaving his crown to Mary his only
daughter, an infant a few days old. Upon this
event, Henry altered at once his whole fyflem
with regard to Scotland , and abandoning all
thoughts of conquering it, aimed at what was
more advantageous as well as more pra&icable,
an union with that kingdom by a marriage be-
tween Edward his only son and the young
Queen. But here , too , he apprehended a
vigorous opposition from the French fa&ion in

Scitlsand, which began to heftir itself in order
to thwart.the measure. The necessity of cruising
this party among the Scots, and of preventing
Francis. from furnishing themt any effe&ual aid,
confirmted Henry's refolition of breaking with
France, and. ptfhed him, on to put a finishing
hand to the treaty of confederacy (Feb. ii.
1543.) with the Emperor.

Alliance between Charles and Henry.

In this league were contained first of all, ar-

ticles for securing their futare amity and mutual
defence ; then were euamerated the :demands
which they were refpe&ively to make upon
Francis; and the plan of their operations was
fixed, if he fhd6ld refuse to grant them fatif-
fa&ion. They agreed to require that Francis
should not only renounce his alliance with So-
lyman , which had been the source of infinite
calamities to Christendom , but also that he
should make reparation for the damages which
that unnatural union had occasioned ; that he
should restore Buargeundy to the Emperor; that
he fhouid desist immediately from ho;tilities, and
leave Charles at leisure to oppose the cotmmon
enemy of the Christian faith; and that he should
immediately pay the f~mns due to Henry, or put
some towns in his ha'rds as security to that es-
et&. If, wtthin forty days, he did not comply
with there deanands, they then -engaged to in-
vade France each with twenty thousand foot and

five

five thousand horse, and not to lay down their
arms until. they had recovered Burgundy, to-
gether with the towns on the Somme, for the
Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or even
the whole realm of France, for Henry. i) Their
-roalds, accordingly, set out with there haughty
requisitions ; but not being permitted to enter
France, could not perform their commission, and
the two Monarchs held themselves fully entitled
to execute whatever was stipulated in their
treaty.

Fraucis's negociations with Solyman.

Francis, on his part, was not lets diligent

in preparing for the approaching campaign. Hav-
ing early observed the fymptorms of'Henry's dif-
gust and alienation, and finding all his endea-
yours to tooth and reconcile him ineffectual, he
knew his temper too well not to expeat that
open hostilities would quickly follow upon this
cessation of friendship. For this reason be re-
doubled his endeavours to obtain from Solyman
such aid as might counterbalance the great ac-
cession of strength which the Emperor would
receive by his alliance with England. In order
to supply the place of the two ambassadors who
had been murdered by Guafto, he sent as his
envoy, first to Venice, and then to Conftan-

i) Rym. xiv. :6s. fHerb. 238.

Hist. of Char. . V. Vol. III. S

tinople, Paulin, a captain of foot, a man of a
daring a&ive spirit, and on account of these
qualities thought worthy of this service , to
which he was recommended by Bellay, who
had trained him to the arts of negociation, and
made trial of his talents and address on feveri#
occafiots. Nor did he belie the opinion con-
ceived of his courage and abilities. Hastening
to Constantinople, without regarding the dangers
to which he was exposed, he urged his mafter's
demands with such boldness, and availed himself
of every circumstance with such dexterity, that

* quickly he removed all the Sultan's difficulties.

As some of the Bafhaws, swayed either by
their own opinion, or influenced by the Em-
peror's emissaries, who hid made their way
even into this court, had declared in the Divan
against afting in concert with France, he found
means either to convince or silence them. k)
At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to fail
with a powerful fleet, and to regulate all his
operations by the direftions of the French King.
Francis was not equally fuccefsful in his at-
tempts to gain the princes of the empire. The
extraordinary rigour with which he thought it
necessary to punish such of his fubjeAs as had
embraced the protestant opinions, in order to
give some notable evidence of his own zeal for
the Catholick faith, and to wipe off the impu-

k) Sandov. Hifor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hist. lib. xli. 285, &c,

300, &c. Brantome.

4

tations to which he was liable from his confe-
deracy with the Turks, placed an insuperable
barrier between him and such of the Germans
as interest or inclination would have prompted
most readily to join him. 1) His chief advan-
tage, however, over the Emperor, he derived
on this, as on other occasions, from the con-
tiguity of his dominions, as well as from the
extent of the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and difap-
pointments unavoidable wherever popular affem-
blies provide for the expences of government
by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence his
domeftick preparations were always carried orp
with vigour and rapidity, while those of the
Emperor, unless when quickened by some so-
reign supply, or some temporary expedient,
were to the last degree flow and dilatory.

Operations in the Low Countries.

Long before any army was in readiness to

oppose him, Francis took the field in the Low
Countries, against which he turned the whole
weight of the war. He made himself master of
Landrecy, which he determined to keep as
the key to the whole province of Hainault; and
ordered it to be fortified with great care. Turn-
ing from thence to the right, he entered the
dutchy of Luxembourg, and found it in the

S2

1) Seck. lb, iib . at3.

fame defenceless slate as in the former yeair
While he was thus employed , the Emperor
having drawn together an army, composed of
all the different nations fubjet to his govern-
ment, entered the territories of the Duke of
Cleves, on whom he had vowed to infli& ex-
emplary vengeance. This prince, whose con-
du& and situation were similar to that of Robert
de la Mark in the first war between Charles and
Francis,. resembled him likewise in his fate.
Unable, with his feeble army, to face the Em-
peror, who advanced at the head of forty -four
thousand men, he retired at his approach; and
the Imperialists being at liberty to a&t as they
pleased, immediately invefied Duren. That
town , though gallantly defended, was won
(August -4. 1543.) by assault; all the inhabi-
tants put to the sword , and the place itself
reduced to ashes.

The Emperor becomes maiter of the Dutchy of Cleves.

This dreadful example of severity struck

the people of the country with such general
terror, that all the other towns, even such as
were capable of resistance, sent their keys to
the Emperor; and before a body of French, de- f
tached to his assistance, could come up, the
duke himself was obliged to make his fubmiflion
to Charles in the most abje& manner. Being
admitted into the Imperial pretence, he kneeled,
together with eight of his principal fubje&s ,

and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed
him to remain in that ignominious posture, and
eying him with an haughty and implacable look,
without daigning to answer a single word, re-
mitted him to his ministers. The conditions,
however, which they prefecribed (Sept. 7. 154 3-)
were not to rigorous as he had reason to have
expeEted after such a reception. He was oblig-
ed to renounce his alliance with France and
Denmark, to resign all his pretensions to the
dutchy of Gueldres ; to enter into perpetual
amity with the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans. In return for which, all his hereditary
dominions were restored, except two towns
which the Emperor kept as pledges of his si-
delity during the continuance of the war; and
he was re-inilated in his privileges as a prince
of the Empire. Not long after, Charles as a
proof of the fincrity of his rdconcilement, gave
him in marriage one

. tfihe daughters of his

brother Ferdinand. m)

Beflieges Landrecy.

Having thus chastised the presumption of

the Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies
from Francis, and added to his dominions in
the Low Countries a considerable province which
lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced to-
wardsHainault, and laid siege to Landrecy.There,

m) Haraei Annal. Brant, t. i. 628. Recueil des Traitez,

t. .ii. a6.

as the first fruits of his alliance with Henry,
he was joined by fix thousand English under
Sir John Wallop.

 The garrison, consisting of

veteran troops commanded by De la Lande and
Deffi , two officers of reputation, made a vi-
gorous resistance. Francis approached with all
his forces to relieve that place; Charles covered
the siege; both were determined, to hazard an
engagement; and all-Europe expe&ed to fee
this contest, which had continued so long, de-
cided at last by a. battle between two great ar-
mies, led by their refpe&tive Monarchs in person.
But the ground which separated their two camps
was fach, as put the disadvantage manifestly
on his fide who should venture to attack, and
neither of them chose to run that rifque. Amidst
a variety of movements, in order to draw the
enemy into the snare, or to avoid it themselves,
Francis, with admirable conduft and equal good
fortune, threw first a supply of fresh troops,
and then a convoy of provisions, into the town,
so that the Emperor, despairing of success,
withdrew into winter - quarters, n) in order to
preserve his army from being entirely ruined
by -the rigour of season.

Solymnan invades Hungary.

During. this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his

engagements to the French King with great

n) Bellay, 405 , &c.

pun&cuality. He himself marched (November
x 543.) into Hungary with a numerous army ;
and as the princes of the Empire made no
great effort to save a country which Charles,
by employing his own force against Francis,
seemed willing to sacrifice, there was no ap-
pearance of any body of troops to oppose his
progress. He besieged , one after another,
Quinque Ecclefiae, Alba and Gran, the three
most considerable towns in the kingdom, of
which Ferdinand had kept poffeffion. The first
was taken by storm; the other two surrendered;
and the whole kingdom, a small corner except-
ed was fubje&ted to the Turkish yoke. o)

Barbaroffa's descent on Italy.

About the fame time, BarbaroiFa failed

with a fleet of an hundred and ten gallies, and
coasting along the Thore of Calabria, made a de-
scent at Rheggio, which he plundered and burnt,
and advancing from thence to the mouth of the
Tiber, he ftopt there to water. The citizens
of Rome, ignorant of his destination, and fil-
led with terror, began to fly with such general
precipitation, that the city would have been
left deserted, if they had not resumed courage
upon letters from Paulin the French envoy,
affilring them that no violence or injury would
be offered by the Turks to any state in alliance

o) Ifhanheff, Hiftor. Hung. 1. xv. i6r,.

with the King his master. p) From Ostia,
Barbarossa failed to Marseilles, and being joined
by the French fleet with a body of land forces
on board, under the count d'Enguien, a gal-,
lant young princed of the house of Bourbon,
they dire&ed their course towards Nide, the sole
retreat of the unfortunate duke of Savoy. There,
(August io. 1543. ) to the astonishment and
Icandal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France
and Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjunc-
tion against a fortress on. which the Cross of
Savoy was displayed. The town, however,
was bravely defended againit their combined
force by Montfort a Savoyard gentleman, who
stood a general assault, and repulsed the enemy
with great loss, before he retired into the
cafle. That fort, situated upon a rock, on
which the artillery made no impression, and
wvhich could not be undermined, he held out
so long, that Doria had time to approach with
his fleet, and the marquis del Guafto to march
with a body of troops from Milan, Upon in-
telligence of this, the French and Turks raise4
the siege; q) (.Sept. 8.) and Francis had not
even the confolatijon of success, to render the
infamy, which he drew on himself by calling
in such an auxiliary, more tolerable,

p) Jovii Hilt. 1. xliii. 304. &c. Pallavic. x6o.
q) Guichenon Hiitoire de Savoye, t. i. p. 61r. Bellay,

435 &c.

Preparations for a new campaign.

From the small progress of either party dur-

ing this campaign, it was obvious to what a
length, the war might be drawn out between
two princes, whose power was so equally ba-
lanced, and who, by their own talents or ac-
tivity, could so vary and multiply their refour-
ces. The trial which they had now made of
each other's strength might have taught them
the imprudence of persisting in a war, wherein
there was greater appearance of their distress-
ing their own dominions than of conquering
those of their adversary, and should have difpof-
ed both to wish for peace. If Charles and
Francis had been influenced by considerations of
interest or prudence alone, this, without doubt,
must have been the manner in which they
would have reasoned. But the personal ani-
mofity, which mingled itself in all their quar-
rels, had grown to be so violent and implacable,
that, for the pleasure of gratifying it, they dif-
regarded every thing else; and were infinitely
more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, than
how to secure what would be of advantage to
themselves. No sooner then did the season
force them to suspend hostilities, than, without
paying any attention to the Pope's repeated
endeavours or paternal exhortations to reestablish
peace, they began to provide for the opera-
tions of the next year with new vigour, and
an aUtivity increating with their hatred.

Affairs of Germany.

Charles turned his chief attention towards

gaining the princes of the Empire, and endea-
voured to rouse the formidable but unwieldy
strength of the Germanick body against Francis.
In order to understand the propriety of the steps
which he took for that purpose , it is necessary
to 'review the chief tranfaftions in that country
since the diet of Ratisbon in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and forty-one.

Maurice of Saxony succeeds his father.

Much about the time that assembly broke

up, Mlaurice succeeded his father Henry in the
government of that part of Saxony which be-
longed to the Albertine branch of the Saxon
family. This young prince, then only in his
twentieth year, had, even at that early period,
begun to discover the great talents which qua-
lified him for a&ting such a distinguished part in
the affairs of Germany.

The views and conduft of this young prince.

As soon as he entered upon the adminif-

tration, he ftrack out into such a new and
singular path,. as fhewed that he aimed, from
the beginning, at something great and uncom-
mon. Though zealously attached to the Pro-
teftant opinions, both from education and prin-
ciple, he refused to accede to the league of

Smalkalde, being determined, as he said, to
maintain the purity of religion which was the
original object of that confederacy, but not to
entangle himself in the political interests or
combinations to which it had given rife. At
the fame time, Foreseeing a rupture between
Charles and the confederates of Smalkalde, and
perceiving which of them was most likely to
prevail in the contest, instead of that jealousy
and distrust which the other Protestants express-
ed of all the Emperor's designs, he affefted to
place in him an unbounded confidence; and
courted his favour with the utmost assiduity.
When the other Protestants, in the year fifteen
hundred and fourty-two, either declined assisting
Ferdinand in Hungary, or afforded him reluc-
"tant and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither
in person, and rendered himself conspicuous by
his zeal and courage. From the fame motive,
he had led to the Emperor's assistance, during
the last campaign, a body of his own troops;
and the gracefulness of his person, his dexte-
rity in all military exercises, together with his
intrepidity, which courted and delighted in
danger, did not distinguish him more in the
field, than his great abilities and insinuating
address won upon the Emperor's confidence
and favour. r) While by this conduft, which
appeared extraordinary to those who held the

r) Sleid. SI37. Seek. 1. iii. 37r, 386, 4-S.

fame opinions with him concerning religion ,
Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the Em-
peror, he ibegan Ito discover iome degree of jea-
lousy: of his cousin the Ele&or of Saxony. This,
which. proved in 'the sequel so fatal to the
Ele&or, had. almoit occasioned an open rupture
between them; and soon after Maurice's accef-
sion to the government, they both took arms
with equal rage, upon account of a dispute
about the: right of jurifdi&ion over a paultry
town situated on the Moldaw. They were
prevented, however, from proceeding to a&ion
by the mediation of the Landgrave of Hesse,
whose daughter Maurice had married , as well
as by the powerful and authoritative admonitions
of Luther. s)

The Pope proposes to hold a general council at Trent.

Amidst there tranfa&ions, the Pope, though

extremely irritated at the Emperor's conceflions
to. the Protestants at the diet of Ratisbon, was
so warmly solicited on all hands, by such as
were most. devoutly attached to the See of Rome,
no less than by those whose fidelity or designs
he fufpe&ed, to summon a general council, that
he found it impossible to avoid any longer calling
that assembly. The impatience for its meeting,
and the expe&ations of great effe&s from its
decisions, seemed to grow in proportion to the

s) Sleid. 29:. Seck. 1. iii. 403.

difficulty of obtaining it.' He still adhered,
however., to his original resolution of holding
it in some town of Italy, where, by the number
of ecclefiafticks , retainers to his court , and
depending on his favour, who could repair to
it without difficulty or expence, he might in-
fluence and even dire& all its proceedings. This
propofitioa, though often reje&ted by the Ger-
man~s, he inftruated his nuncio to the diet held
at Spires, in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and forty - two, (March. 3.) to renew
once more- and if he found it gave no greater
fatisfaftion than formerly, he, as a last con-
cession, empowered him, to propose for the
place of meeting, Trent, a city in the Tyrol,
1'ubje& to the King of the Romans, and situated
on the confines between Germany and Italy.
The Catholick princes in the diet, after giving
it as their opinion that the council might have
been held with greater advantage in Ratisbon,
Cologne, or some of the great cities in the Em-
pire, approved of the place which the Pope had
named. The Protestants unanimously expressed
their diffatisfa&ion , and protested that they
would pay no regard to a council held without
the precinc&s of the Empire , called by the
Pope's authority, and in which he assumed the
right of presiding. t)

t) Sleid. 291. Seek. I. iii. a83.

Summons it to meet,

The Pope, without taking any notice of

their objeftions, published (May 32. 1542.)
the bull of intimation, named three cardinals to
preside as his legates , and appointed them to
repair to Trent before the first of November ,
the day he had fixed for opening the council.
But if Paul had desired the meeting of a council
as sincerely as he pretended, he would not have
pitched on such an improper time for calling it.
Instead of thAt general union and tranquillity,
without which the dl]iberations of a council
could neither be conduced with security, nor
attended with authority, such a fierce war was
just kindled between the Emperor and Francis,
as rendered it impoffiible for the ecclefiafticks
from many parts of Europe to resort thither in
safety.

Obliged to prorogue it.

The legates, accordingly, remained several

months at Trent.; but as no person appeared
there , except a few prelates from the eccle-
fiaftical state, the Pope, in order to avoid the
ridicule and contempt which this drew upon
him from the enemies of the church, recalled
them and prorogued the council. u)

u) F. Paul, p. 97. Sleid. 9$6.

The Emperor courts the Protestants.

Unhappily for the authority of the papal

fee, at the very time that the German Protef-
tants took every occasion of pouring contempt
upon it, the Emperor and King of the Romans
found it necessary not only to connive at their
condu& , but to court their favour by repeated
a&s of indulgence. In the fame diet of Spires,
wherein they had protested in the most difre-
fpeftful terms against affembliug a council at
Trent, Ferdinand, who depended on their aid
for the defence of Hungary, not only permitted
that protestation to be inserted in the records of
the diet, but renewed in their favour all the
Emperor's concessions at Ratisbon, adding to
them whatever they demanded for their farther
security. Among other particulars, he granted
a suspension of a decree of the Imperial chamber
against the city of Gofiar, one of those which
had entered into the league of Smalkalde, on
account of its having seized the ecclesiastical
revenues within its domains, and enjoined
Henry duke of Brunfwvick to desist from his at-
tempts to carry that decree into execution.

Their vigorous proceedings.

But Henry, a furious bigot, and no less

obstinate than rash in all his undertakings, con-
tinuing to disquiet the people of Goflar by his
incursions, the Ele&or of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse, that they might not fuffer any member

of the Smalkaldick body to be oppressed, as-
fembled their forces, declared war in form
against Henry, and in the space of a few weeks,
stripping him entirely of his dominions, drove
him As a wretched exile to take refuge in the
court of Bavaria. By this at of vengeance,
no less severe than sudden, they filled all Ger-
many with dread of their power, and the con-
federates of Smalkalde appeared, by this first
effort of their arms, to be as prompt as capable
to protest those who had joined their affocia-
tion. x)

Emboldened by so many concefflons in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their
opinions daily made, the princes of the league
of Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the
Imperial chamber, and declined its jurifdi&ion
for the future, because that court had not been
visited or reformed according to the decree of
Ratisbon, arnd continued to discover a most in-
decent partiality in all its proceedings. Not
long after this, they ventured a step farther;
and protesting (April 23. 1543.) against the
recess of a diet held at Nuremberg, which
provided for the defence of Hungary, refused
to furnish their contingent for that purpose ,
unless the Imperial chamber were reformed, and

full

x) Sleid. 296. Commemoratio kfccinfa caufarum Belli, &c.

a Smalkaldicis contra Henr, Brunfw. ab iifdem edita; ap.
Scardium, torn, ii. 307.

Mfll security were granted them'in every point
with regard to religion. y)

Diet ad Spires, 1543.

Such were the lengths. to which the Pro-

teftants had proceeded, and such their confi-
dence in their own power, when the Emperor
returned frohi the Low Countries, to hold a
diet, which he had summoned to meet at Spires.
The refpet due to the Emperor, as well as the
importance of the affairs which were to be laid
before it, rendered this assembly extremely full.
All the Ele&tors, a great number of princes ec-
clefiaftical and secular, with the deputies of
most of the cities, were present. Charles soon
perceived that this was not a time to offend the
jealous spirit of the Protestants, by asserting in
any high tone the authority and do&trines of the
church, or by abridging, in the smallest article,
the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that,
bn the contrary, if he expected any support
from them , or wished to preserve Germany fromn
intestine deforders while he was engaged in a
foreign war, he must sooth them by new ccn-
ceflions, and a more ample extension of their
'eligious privileges. He began, accordingly,
wvith courting the Ele&or of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse , the heads of the Protestant
party, and by giving up some things in their

y) Sleid. 304. 307. Seck. 1. iii. 404. 416,
Hist. ofCharl. V. Vol. III. T

favour, and granting liberal pronifes with re-
gard to others, he secured himself from any
danger of opposition on their part. Having aft-
certained this capital point, he then ventured
to address the diet with greater freedom.

The Emp'eror solicits its aid against France.

He began by representing his own zeal,

and unwearied efforts with regard to two things
most essential to Christendom, the procuring of
a general council in order to compofe-the reli-
gious diffentions which had unhappily arisen in
Germany, and the providing some proper means
for checking the formidable progress of the
Turkish arms. But that his pious endeavours
had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable
ambition of the French King, who having wan-
tonly kindled- the flame of war in Europe,
which had been so lately exttinguifhed by the
truce of Nice, rendered it impoilible for the
fathers of the church to affimble in council, or
to deliberate with security; and obliged him to
employ those forces in his own defence, which,
with greater fatisfaftion to himself, as well as
fiore honour to Chrifftendotm, he would have
turned against the Infidels. That Francis, not
thinking it enough to have called him off from
opposing the Infidels, h'ad, with unexampled
impiety, invited them into the heart of Chris-
tendom, and, joining his arms to theirs, had
openly attacked the duke of Savoy a member of

the Empire. That Barbaroffa's fleet was now
in one of the ports of France, waiting only the
return of spring to carry terror and desolation
to the coast of some Christian fiate. That in
such a iituation it was folly to think of diflant
expeditions against the Turk, or of marching
to oppose his armies in Hungary, while such a
powerful ally received him into the centre of
Europe, and gave him footing there. That
prudence di&ated to oppose the nearest and most
imminent danger, first of all, and by humbling
the power of France, to deprive Solyman of
the advantages, which he derived from the un-
natural confederacy formed between him and a
Monarch, who frill arrogated the name of Most
Christian. That, in truth, a war against the
French King and the Sultan ought to be confi-
dered as the fa-me thing; and that every ad-
vantage gained over the former, was a severe
and sensible blow to the latter. That, there-
fore, he now demanded their aid against Francis .
not merely as an enemy of the Germanick body,
or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the
Christian name.

In order to give greater weight to this vio-

lent inveative of the Emperor, the King of the
Romans stood up, and related the rapid conquests
of the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he
said, by the fatal necessity imposed on his
brother, of employing his arms against France.

When he had finished, the ambassadors of Savoy
gave a detail of Barbaroffa's operations at Nice,
and of the ravages which he had committed on
that coast. All these, added to the general in-
dignation' which Francis's unprecedented union
with the Turks excited in Europe, made such an
impression on the diet as the Emperor vifhed,
and disposed most of the members to grant him
such effectual aid as he had demanded. The
ambassadors whom Francis had sent to explain
the motives of his conduc& , were not permitted to
enter the bounds of the Empire ; and the apology
which they published for their maiter, vindi-
cating his alliance with Solyman, by examples
drawn from scripture, and the pra&ice of Chris-
tian princes, was little regarded by men irri-
tated already or prejudiced against him to filch
a degree, as to be incapable of allowing their
proper weight to any arguments in his behalf.

His vast conceflions in order to gain the Pro-

teftants.

Such being the favourable" difpcfition of the'

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing otfhld
now obftrut his gaining all that he aimed at,
but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants,
whtch he determined to quiet by granting every
thing that the utmost solicitude of these pafiions
could desire for the security of their religion.
With this view he consented to a recess, where-
by all the rigorous edias hitherto issued against

the Protestants were suspended; a council either
general or national to be assembled in Germany
was declared necessary, in order to re-establish
peace in the church; until one of there should
be held (which the Emperor undertook to bring
about as soon as possible), the free and publick
exercise of the Protestant religion was autho-
rized ; the Imperial chamber was to give no
molestation to the Protestants; and when the
term, for which the present judges in that court
were ele&ed, should expire, persons duly qua-
lified were then to be admitted as members,
without any diftin&tion on account of religion.

Aid granted by the diet.

In return for there extraordinary a&ts of in-

dulgence , the Protefiants concurred with the
other members of the diet, in declaring war
against Francis in name of the Empire; in vot-
ing the Emperor a body of twenty-four thousand
foot and four thousand horse, to be maintained
at the publick expence for fix months, and to
be employed against France; and at the fame
time the diet imposed a poll-tax to be levied
throughout all Germany on every person without
exception, for the support of the war against
the Turks.

Charles's negociations with Denmark and England.

Charles, while he gave the greatest atten-

tion to the minute and intricate detail ot parti-

culers n.pceffty .towards condufiing the delibe-
rations ps ;a pitmerous and divided assembly to
such a fuqcefsfj1 period, negocited a separate
peace with .the King of Denmark ; who, though
he had hitherto performed nothing considerable
.n consequence of his alliance with Francis, .had
it in his power, however, to make a formidable
diversion in favour of that monarch, z) At the
fame time, he did not negle&t proper applica-
tions to the King of England, in order to rouse
him to more vigorous efforts against their com-
mon enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting to
accomplish this; for such events had happened
in Scotland as inflamed Henry to the most vio-
lent pitch of resentment against Francis. Hav-
ing concluded with the parliament of Scotland
, treaty of- marriage between his son and their
young Queen, by which he reckoned himself
secure of effe&ing the union of the two king-
dpoms, which had been long desired, and often
attempted without success by his predecessors,
Mary of Guise the Queen - mother, cardinal
Beatoun t and other partizans of France, found
means not only to break off the match; but to
alienate the Scottish nation entirely from the
friendship of England , and to flrengthen its
ancient attachment to France, Henry, however,
did not abandon an obje&t of so much impor-
tance; and as the humbling of Francis, besides

z) Dumont Corps Diplom. t,. iv. p. ii. p.- 74.

the pleasure of taking revenge upon an enemy
who had disappointed a favourite measure, ap-
peared the most effeaual method of bringing the
Shots to accept once more of the treaty which
they had reje&ed, he was so eager to accom-
plifh this, that he was ready to second whatever
the Emperor could propose to be attempted
against that monarch. The plan, accordingly,
which they concerted, was such, if it had been
punctually executed, as must have ruined France
in the first place, and would have augmented
so prodigiously the Emperor's power and terri-
tories as might in the end have proved fatal to
the liberties of Europe. They agreed to invade
France each with an army of twenty-five thou-
sand men, and, without losing time in besieging
the frontier towns, to advance dire&ly towards
the interior provinces, and to join their forces
near Paris. a)

The French take the field in Piedmont.

Meanwhile, Francis fIood alone in oppofi.

tion to all the enemies whom Charles was
mustering against him. Solyman had been the
only ally who did not desert him; but the as-
fiftance which he received from him bad render-
ed him so odious to all Christendom, that he
resolved rather to forego all the advantages of
his friendship, than to become, on that account,

a) Herbert 245. Bellay, 44S8

the objet of general detestation. For this
reason, he dismissed Barbarossa as Loon as winter
was over, who , after ravaging the coast of
Naples and Tufeany, returned to Conifantinople.
As Francis could' not hope to equal the forces
of his rival , he ,endeavoured to supply that
defe&b by dispatch, which was more in his
power, and to get the itart of hinr in taking
the field.

Invetl Carignan.

Early in the spring the count ,d'Enguien

invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont, which
the marquis del Guafto the Imperial general
having furlrifed the former year, considered as
of so much importance, that he had fortified
it at. great expence.

The Imperialists march to relieye it.

The count pushed the siege with fach

vigour, that Guato, fond of his own conquest,
and feeing no other way of saving it from fall-
ing into the hands of the French, resolved to
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began
his march from Milan for this purpose, and as
he was at no pains to conceal his intention,
it was soon known in the French camp. En-
guien, a gallant and enterprising young man,
wished passionately to try the fortune of a battle;
his troops desired it with no less ardour; but
the peremptory injun&ion of the King not to

venture a general engagement, flowing from a
prudent attention to the present situation of as-
fairs, as well as from the remembrance of for-
mer disasters , restrained him from venturing
upon it. Unwilling , however, to abandon
Carignan, when it was juft.ready to yield, and
eager to distinguish his commandc by some me-
morable aftion, he dispatched Moaluc to court,
in order to lay before the King the advantages
of fighting the enemy, and the hopes which
he had of vi&ory. The King referred the mat-
ter to the council; all the ministers declared,
one after another , against fighting, and sup-
ported their sentiments by reasons extremely
plausible. While they were delivering their
opinions, Monluc, who was permitted to be
present, discovered such visible and extravagant
symptoms of impatience to speak, as well as
such diffatisfa&ion with .what he heard , that
Francis , diverted with his appearance , called
on him to declare what he could offer in reply
to sentiments which seemed to be as just as
they were general. Upon this, Monluc, a plain
but spirited soldier, and of known courage, re-
presented the good condition of the troops, their
eagerness to meet the enemy in the field, their
confidence in their officers, together with the
everlasting infamy which the declining of a
battle would bring on the French arms; and he
urged his arguments with such lively impetuo-
fity, and such a flow of military eloquence, as

gahied over to his opinion, not only the King,
naturally fdtidn of daring aftion's, but several of
the council.' Franc-is, catching the fame enthu-
i~am which had animated his treops, suddenly
fartted up, and having lifted his 'hands. to Hea-
vfeh, and implored the Divine- proteftion, he
then addressed himself to Monluc, ,, Go, says
r, he, return to C Piedmont, and fight in -the
;,, name of God. "b)

Battle of Cerifoles.

No sooner was it known that the King had

given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists,
than such was, the martial ardour of the gallant
and high - spirited gentlemen of that age, that
the court was quite deserted, every person de-
firous of reputation , or capable of service,
hurrying to Piedmont, in order to share, as
volunteers, in the danger and glory of the
acAion. Encouraged by the arrival of so many
brave officers, Enguien immediately prepared
for battle, nor did Guafto decline the combat.
The number of cavalry was almost equal, but
the Imperial infantry exceeded the French by
at least ten thousand men. They met (April
ItI. 1544.) near Cerifoles, in an open plain,
which afforded to neither any advantage of
ground, and both had full time to form their
army in proper order. The shock was such as

b) Memoires de Monluc,

smight have been expe&ed 'between veteran
troops, violent and obftitiate. The French ca-
valry rushing forward to the charge with their
usual vivacity, bore down every thing that
opposed them; but, on the other hand, the
steady and disciplined valour of the Spanish in-
fantry having forced the body which they en-
countered to give way, vitory remained in
fufperice, ready to declare for whichever ge-
neral could make the best use of that critical
moment. Guafto, engaged in that part of his
army which was thrown into disorder, and
afraid of falling into the hands of the French,
whose vengeance he dreaded on account of the
murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his presence
of mind, and forgot to order a large body of
reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with
admirable courage and equal condu&, support-
ed, at the head of his gens d'armes, such ds
his battalions as began to yield; and at the
fame time he ordered the Swiss in his service,
who had been vi&torious wherever they fought,
to fall upon the Spaniards. This motion proved
decisive. All that followed was confusion and
slaughter. The marquis del Guafto, wounded
in the thigh, escaped only by the fwiftnefs of
his horse. The vi&ory of the French was com-
plete , ten toufand of the Imperialists being
slain, and a considerable number, with all their
tents, baggage and artillery taken. On the
part of the conquerors, their joy was without

allay, 'a few- only being killed, and among
theft no. officer of diftin&ion. c)

I ,ESffaieb. of it.

,

This splendid a&ion, beside the reputation

with which it waty ttended, delivered France
from'an imminent danger, as it, r ined the ar-
my with which Guafto had intended to invade
the country between Rhone and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor. regular
forces to oppose his progress. But it was not
in Francis's power to pursue the vi&ory with
fiuch vigour as to reap the advantages which
it might have yielded; for though the Milanefet
remained now almopf defenele-fs; though the
inhabitants , who 'had long murmured undei
the rigour of the Iymperial government, were
ready t to through off the yoke; though En.guient
fluhed with success, urged the King to seize,
this happy opportunity of recovering a country,
the acquisition of which had been long his fa-
vourite objet; yet, as the Emperor and King
of England were preparing to break in upon
the opposite frontier of France with superior
force, it became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts
of conquest to the publick safety, and to recal
twelve thodifand of Enguien's best troops to be
employed in defence of the kingdom. En-

c) Bellay, 429, &c. Memoires de Monluc. Jovii hiftr l.

xliy. p. 327. 6.

guien's subsequent operations were, of confe-
quence, so languid and inconsiderable, that
the redution of Carignan and rome other towns
in Piedmont, was all that he gained by his
great viftory at Cerifoles. d)

Operations in the Low Countries.

The Emperor, as usual, was late in tak-

ing the field, but he appeared, towards the
beginning of June, at the head of an army more
numerous, and better appointed than any which
he had hitherto led against France. It amount-
ed almost to fifty thousand men, and part of
it having reduced Luxemburg and some other
towns in the Netherlands , before he himself
joined it, he now (June I544.) marched with
the whole towards the frontiers of Champagne.
Charles according to his agreement with the
King of England, ought to have advanced di-
reftly towairds Paris; and the dauphin, who
commanded the only army to which Francis
trufied for the fecuritv of his dominions, was
in no condition to oppose him. But the success
with which the French had defended Provence
in the year one thousand five hundred and
thirty- fix, had taught them the most effetual
method ofdiftrefirng an invading enemy. Cham-
paigne, a country abounding more in vines than
corn, was incapable of maintaining a great

d) Bellay , 438, &c.

army;. and before the Emperor's approach,
whatever could be of any use to him had been
carried off or destroyed. This rendered it ne-
cefilry, for him to be master of some places of
streng-th, in order to secure the convoys-, on
which alone he now perceived that he must
depend for faubiftence; and he found the fron-
tier towns so ill provided for defence, that he
hope'd it would not be a work either of much
tiriie or difficulty to reduce them. Accordingly
Ligny and Commercy, which he first attacked,
fLirrendered after a short resistance.

The Emperor indefts St. Difier. July. S. i344.

He then invested St. Difier, which, though

it commanded an important pass on the Marne,
was de,stitute of every thing necessary for sus-
taining a siege. But the count de Sancerre and
M. de la Lande, who had acquired such repu-
tation by the defence of Landrecy, generously
threw themselves into the town, and undertook
to hold it out to the laI extremity. The Em-
peror soon found howcapable they were of mak-
ing good their promise, and that he could not
expe& to take the town without besieging it in
form. This accordingly he undertook; and as
it was his nature never to abandon any enter-
prise in which he had once engaged, he per-
sifted in it with an inconsiderate obstinacy.

Henry VI11. inuefts Bou-lgne.

The King of England's preparations for the

campaign were complete long before the Em-
peror's; but as he did not choose, on the one
hand, to encounter alone the whole power of
France, and was unwil'ing, on the other, that
his troops should remain ina&ive, he took that
opportunity of chaftiiing the Scots, by sending.
his fleet, together with a considerable part of
his infantry, under the earl of Hertford, to
invade their country. Hertford executed his
commiflion with vigo-r, plundered and burnt
Edinburgh and Leith, laid waste the adjacent
country, and reimbarked his men with such
dispatch, that they joined their sovereign soon
after his landing in France. When Henry ar-
rived (July 14. I544.) in that kingdom, he
found the Emperor engaged in the siege of St.
Difier; an ambaflador, however, whom he sent
to congratulate the English Monarch on his safe
arrival on the continent, solicited him to march,
in terms of the treaty, direftly, to Paris. But
Charles had set his ally such an ill example of
fulfilling the conditions of their confederacy
with exa&nefs, that Henry, observing him em-
ploy his time and forces in taking towns for
his own behoof, saw no reason why he should
not attempt the redu&ion of ofme places that
lay conveniently for himself. Without paying
any regard to the Emperor's remonftrances, he
immediately invested Boulogne, and commanded

the dukle of Norfolk to ptefs the siege of Mon-
treuil, xvthieh had been begun before his ar-
rival, by a body of Flemings, in 'conjunriort
with i'ine English troops. While Charles and
Lfenry fhewed such attention each to his own
interest, they both negle&ed the common cause.
Instead of the union and confidence requisite
towards candu~ting thd great plan that they had
formed, they early difcoiered a mutual jealousy
of each other, which, by degrees, begot dif-
trust , and ended in open hatred, e)

Gallant defence of St. Difier.

By this time, Francis had, with unwearied

indrftry, drawr together an army, capable, as
well froi the number as from the valour of the
troops, of shaking head againift the enemy. But
the dauphin, who still ated as general, pru-
dently decliiring a battle , the lofs" of vrhich
would have endangered the kingdom, satisfied-
Irimfelf With harassing the Emperor with his
light troops, catting off his convoys, and lay-
ing waRe the country around him. Though
extremely distressed by these operations, Charles
still prefled the siege of St. Difier, which San-
cerre defended with astonishing fortitude and
condu&t. He flood repeated assaults , repulsing
the enemy in them all; and undismayed even
by the death of the brave De la Lande, who

erwa

e) Herbert.

was killed by a cannon-ball, he continued to
shew the fame bold countenance and obstinate
resolution. At the end of five weeks, he was still
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granville's induced him to fur-
render. That crafty politician, having inter-
cepted, the key to the cypher which the Duke
of Guise used in communicating intelligence to
Sancerre, forged a letter in his name, autho-
rizing Sancerre to capitulate , as the King ,
thought highly satisfied with his behaviour,
though it imprudent to hazard a battle for his
relief. This letter he conveyed into the town
in a manner which could raise no suspicion, and
the governor fell into the snare. Even then,
he obtained such honourable conditions as his
gallant defence merited, and among others a
cessation of hostilities for eight days, at the ex-
piration of which he bound himself to open the
gates, if Francis, during that time , did not
attack the Imperial army , and throw fresh
troops into the town. f) Thus Sancerre, by
detaining the Emperor so long before an incon-
fiderable place, afforded his sovereign full time
to assemble all his forces, and what rarely falls
to the lot of an officer in such an inferior com-
mand, acquired the glory of having fared his
country.

f) Brantome, tom. vi. 4S9

Hist, of Charl. V. V ol. 11!. ,

The Emperor penetrates into the heart of France.

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, (August.

17. I544.) the Emperor advanced into the heart
of Champagne , but Sancerre's obstinate resist-
ance had damped his sanguine hopes of pene-
trating to Paris, and led him feriotifly to refle&t
on what he might expe&t before towns of greater
strength, and defended by more numerous gar-
rifons. At the fame time, the procuring sub-
fiftence for his army was attended with great
difficulty, which increased in proportion as he
withdrew from his own frontier. He had loft
a great number of his best troops in the siege of
St. Difier, and many fell daily in skirmishes,
which it was not in his power to avoid, though
they wasted his army insensibly, without leading
to any decisive a&tion. The season advanced
apace, and he had not yet the command either
of a fufficient extent of territory, or of any
such considerable town as rendered it safe to
winter in the enemy's country. Great arrears
too were due to his soldiers, who were upon
the point of munity for their pay, while he
knew not from what funds to satisfy them. All
these considerations induced him to listen to the
overtures of peace, which a Spanish Dominican,
the confeffor of his lifter the Queen of France,
had secretly made to his confeffor, a monk of
the fame order. In consequence of this, pleni-
potentiaries were named on both sides, and
began their conferences in Chaufld, a finall vil-

lage near Chalons. At the fame time, Charles,
either from a desire of making one great final
effort against France, or merely to gain a pre-
text for deserting his ally and concluding a fe-
parate peace, sent an ambassador formally to
require Henry, according to the f*ipulation in
their treaty, to advance towards Paris. While
he expected a return from him, and waited the
ilTue of the conferences at Chauffe. he continued
to march forward, though in the utmost distress
from scarcity of provision. But at last, by a
fortunate motion on his part, or through some
negleA or treachery on that of the French, he
surprised first Efperney and then Chateau Thierrv,
in both which were ccnfiderable magazines.
No sooner was it known that these towns, the
latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than
that great capital, defenceless, and susceptible
of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with confiernation. The in-
habitants, asif the Emperor had been already
at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and
despair, many sending their wives and children
down the Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans,
and the towns upon the Loire. Francis bimfelf,
more affliFted with this than with any other
event during his reign. and sensible as well of
the triumph that his rival would enjoy in in-
fulting his capital, as of the danger to which
the kingdom was exposed , could not refrain

U Z

from crying out, in the first emotion of his
fcurprife'and sorrow, ,, How dear, O my God,
do I pay for this crown, which I thought thou
hadst granted me freely! "g) But recovering
in a moment from this sudden sally of peevilh-
nets and impatience, he devoutly added, ,, Thy
will, however, be done; " and proceeded to
issue the necessary orders for opposing the ene-
my with his usual aftivity and presence of mind.
The dauphin detached eight thousand man to
Paris, which revived the courage of the affright-
ed citizens; he threw a itrong garrison into
Meaux, and by a forced march got into Fertc
between the Imperialists and the capital.

Obliged to retire.

Upon this, the Emperor, who began again

to feel the want of provilions, preceiving that
the dauphin still prudently declined a battle.
and not daring to attack his camp with forces
so much shattered and reduced by hard service,
turned suddenly to the right, $2d began to
fall back towards Soissons. Having about this
time received Henry's answer, whereby he re-
fused to abandon the lieges of Boulogne and
Montreuil, of both which he expe&ed every
moment to get pofleffion, he thought himself
absolved from all obligations of adhering to the
treaty with him, and at full liberty to consult

g) Brantome , rctu. vi. 381.

his own interest in what manner soever he
pleased. He consented, therefore, to renew
the conference, which the surprise of Efpernay
had broken off.

Peace bet e-en tint and Francis corjciL e a: Crerly.

To conclude a peace between two princes,

one of whom greatly desired, ard the other
greatly needed it, did not require a ]ong ne-
gociation. It was signed at Crefpy , a small
town near Meaux, otn the eighteenth of Sep-
tember. The chief articles of it were: That
all the conquest with either party had made
since the truce of Nice shall be refrored; That
the Emperor shall give in marriage to the Daue
of Orleans, either his own eldest daughter,
or the second daughter of his brother Ferdinand;
That if he chose to bestow on him his own
daughter he shall fettle on her a1l the provinces
of the Low Countries, to be ereEted into an
independent state, which fnall descend to the
male ifTue of the marriage; That if he d-eter-
mined to give him his niece, he fThail. with
her, grant him the inveftirure of Miluan and its
dependencies; That he shall within four months
declare which of there t wo PrincesSe: he had
pitched upon. and fulfil the refpecrive condi-
tions upon the confammation of the marriage.
which shall take place within a year from the
date of the treaty: That as loon as the Duke
of Orleans is put in pofreiiion either of the

Low Countries or of Milan, Francis shall re-
,iore to the Duke of Savoy all that he now
poffeffep of his territories, except Pignerol and
IVIontmelian; That Francis shall renounce all
pretensions to the kingdom of Naples, or to
the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois , and
Charles shall give up his claim to the dutehy
of Burgundy and County of Charolois; That
Francis shall give no aid to the exiled King of
Navarre; That both Monarchs shall join in mak-
ing war upon the Turk, towards which the
King shall furnish, when required by the Em-
peror and Empire, fix hundred men at arms,
and ten thousand soot.h)

Motives of concluding it.

Besides the immediate motives to this

peace arising from the difitrefs of his army
through want of provisions; from the difficulty
of retreating out of France, and the impoflibi-
lity of securing winter-quarters there, the Em-
peror was influenced by other, considerations,
more distant, indeed, but no less weighty.
The Pope was offended to a great degree, as
well at his concessions to the Protestants in
the late diet, as at his consenting to call a
council, and to admit of publick difputations
in dermany, with a*view- of determining the

h) Recueil des Traitez, t. i. 227. Belius de Caufis Pacis

Crepiac. in A&is Erudit. Lips. 1763.

do&rines in controversy. Paul considering both
there steps as sacrilegious encroachments on
the jurisdi&ion as well as privileges of the
Holy See, had addressed to the Emperor a re-
rnonftrance rather than a letter on this fubje&t,
written with such acrimony of language, and
in a style of such high authority, as discovered
more of an intention to draw on a quarrel than
of a desire to reclaim him. This ill humour
was not a little inflamed by the Emperor's
league with Henry, which being contraEted with
an heretick, excommunicated by the apoftolick
fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alliance,
and was not less dreaded by him than that of
Francis with Solyman. Paul's son and grand-
son, highly incensed at the Emperor for hav-
ing refused to gratify them with regard to the
alienation of Parma and Placentia, contributed
by their suggestions to four and disgust him
still more. To all which was added the power-
ful operation of the. flattery and promises which
Francis incessantly employed- to gain hirm.
Though from his desire of maintaining a neu-
trality, the. Pope had hitherto suppressed. his
own resentment, had eluded the artifices of
his own family, and resifted the folicitations
of the French King, it was not safe to rely
much an the fteadiefts of a man whom his
passions, his friends, and his interest combined.
to shake. The union of the Pope with France,
Charles well knew, would inrantly expose

his dominions in Italy to be attacked. The
Venetians, he foresaw, would probably follow
the example of a Pontiff, who was considered
as a model of political wisdom among the Italians;
and thus, at a junture when he felt himself
hardly equal to the burden of the present war,
he would be overwhelmed with the weight of
a new confederacy against him. i) At the fame
time, the Turks, almost unresisted, made such
progress in Hungary, reducingatown after town,
that they approached near to the confines of
the Austrian provinces. k) Above all these,
the extraordinary progress of the Protestant doc-
trines in Germany, and the dangerous combi-
nation into which the Princes of that profeffion
had entered, called for his immediate attention,.
Almost one half of Germany had revolted from
the established church; the fidelity of the reft
was much shaken; the nobility of Austria had
demanded of Ferdinand the free exercise of re-
ligion;l) the Bohemians, among whom some
feeds of the 'do trines of Huss still remained,
openly favoured the new opinions; the arch-
bishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among ec-
clefiafticks, had begun the reformation of his
diocese; nor was it possible, unless some ti-
mely and effe&ual chek were given to the fpi-
rit of innovation, to foresee where it would

i) F. Paul too. Pallavic. 163.
k) Iftuanhaffii Hist. Hung. 177.
1) Sleid. 285.

end. He himself had been a witness, in the
late diet, to the peremptory and deciiive tone
which the Protestants had now assumed. He
had seen how, from confidence in their number
and union, they had forgotten the humble styl.e
of their first petitions , having grown to such
boldness as openly to despise the Pope, and to
shew no great reverence for the Imperial dignity
itself. If, therefore , he wished to maintain
either the ancient religion or his own authority,
and would not choose to dwindle into a mere
nominal head of the Empire, some vigorous es-
fort was requisite, which could not be made
during a war that required the greatest exertion
of his strength against a foreign and powerful

enemy.

Such being the Emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty
of Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which
he had in view. By coming to an agreement
with Francis, he took from the Pope all pro-
fpe&t of advantage in courting the friendship of
that Monarch in preference to his. By the
proviso with regard to a war with the Turks,
he not only deprived Solyman of a powerful
ally, but turned the arms of that ally against
him. By a private article, not inserted in the
treaty that it might not raise any unseasonable
alarm, he agreed with Francis that both should
exert all their influence and power in order to
procure a general council, to affert' its autho-

rity, and to exterminate the Pro.testant heresy
out of their, dominions. T-his cut off all hope
f afli.ftance which the confederates of Smalkalde
might expe& from. the French King ; m) and
left their folicitations, or his jealousy of an
ancient rival, should hereafter tempt Francis to
forget this engagement, he left him embarrassed
with a war against England, which would put
it out of his power to take any part in the as-
fairs of Germany.

War ooptinues between France and England.

Henry, poffeffed at all times with an high

idea of his own power and importance, felt, is
the most sensible manner, the negle&t with
which the Emperor had treated him in conclud-
ing a separate peace. But the situation of his
affairs was such as. somewhat alleviated the
mortification which this occasioned. For though
he was obliged to recal (Sept, I4. 1544.) the
Duke of Norfolk from the siege of Montreuil,
because the Flemish troops received orders to
retire, Boulogne had surrendered before the ne-
gociations at Crefpy were broight to an issue.
While elated with vanity on account of this
conquest, and inflamed with indignation against
the Emperor , the ambassadors whom Francis
sent to make overtures of peace, found him too
arrogant to grant what was. moderate or equit-

m) Seek. 1. iii. 496.

able. His demands were indeed extravagant,
and made in the tone of a conqueror ; that
Francis should renounce his alliance with Scot-
land, and not only pay up the arrears of former
debts, but reimburse the money which he had
expended in the present war. Francis, though
sincerely desirous of peace; and willing to yield
a great deal in order to obtain it, be;ng now
free from the pressure of the Imperial arms, re-
je&ted these ignominious propositions with
disdain; and Henry departing for England, hof-
tilities continued between the two nations. n)

The dauphin difatisfied with the peace of Crefpy.

The treaty of peace, how acceptable soever

to the people of France, whom it delivered
from the dread of an enemy who had penetrated
into the heart of the kingdom , was loudly
complained of by the dauphin. He considered
it as a manifest proof of the King .his father's
extraordinary partiality towards his younger
brother, now Duke of Orleans, and complained
that, from his eagerness to gain an establishment
for a favourite son, he had sacrificed the honour
of the kingdom, and renounced the most ancient
as well as valuable rights of the crown. But
as he durst not venture to offend the King by
refusing to ratify it, though extremely desirous
at the fame time of securing to himself the pri-

a) Mer. ce Rib:er. t. i. p. 5-2. Herber:, "4, .

vil'ege of reclaiming what was now alienated so
much to his detriment, he secretly protested,
in presence of some of his adherents, against
thee whole tranfa&ion;; and declared whatever
he thould be obliged to do in order to confirm
it, null in itself, and void of all obligation.
The parliament of Toulouse, probably by the
instigation of his partisans, did the fame. o) But
Francis, highly pleased as well with having de-
livered his fubjets from the miseries of an in-
vafion , as with the profpe& of acquiring an
independent fettlemrent for his son at no greater
price than the renouncing conquests to which
he had no just claim; titles wlhich had hitherto
proved the source of expence or disasters to the
nation; and rights grown obsolete and of no
value ; ratified the treaty with great joy.
Charles, within the time p-refecribed by the treaty,
declared his intention of giving Ferdinand's
daughter in marriage to the Duke of Orleans,
together with the dutchy of Milan as her dowry.
p) Every circumstance seemed to promise the
continuance of peace. The Emperor, cruelly
affli&ed with the gout, appeared to be in no con-
dition to undertake any enterprise where great
a&ivity was requisite, or much fatigue to be
endured. He himself felt this , or wished at
least that it should be believed; and being so

o) Recueil de Traitez , t. ii. 235. 238.

p) Recue:l de Traitez , t. ii. r38.

much disabled by his excruciating distemper,
when a French ambassador followed him to Bras-
fels, in order to be present at his ratification of
the treaty of peace, that it was with the utmost
difficulty that he signed his name, he observed,
that there was no great danger of his violating
there articles, as a band that could hardly hold
a pen, was little able to brandish a lance.

The Emperor's schemes with rerpe&c to Germany.

The violence of his disease confined the Em-

peror several months in Brussels, and was the
apparent cause of putting off the execution of
the vast schemes which he had formed in order
to humble the Protestant party in Germany.
But there were other reasons for this delay.
For, however prevalent the motives were which
determined him to undertake this enterprise ,
the nature of that great body which he was
about to attack, as well as the situation of his
own affairs, made it necessary to deliberate long.
to proceed with caution, and not too suddenly
to throw aside the veil under which he had
hitherto concealed his real sentiments and fche-
mes. He was sensible that the Protestants

.

conscious of their own strength, but under con-
tinual apprehensions of his deigns, had all the
boldness of a powerful party joined to the
jealousy of a feeble fa'tion; and were no left
quick-fighted to discern the first appearance of
danger , than ready to take arms in order to

repel it. At the fanie time, he continued in-
volved in a Turkish war; and thodgh, in order
to deliver hitnfelf from this incumbrance, he
had determined t6 fend an envoy to the Porte
with most advantageous and even fuibmiflive
overtutee of peace, the resolutions of that
haughty court were to Uncertain , that before
these were known, it would have been highly
imprudent to have kindled the flames of civil
war in his own dominions:

The Pope fummoris t general council to meet at Trent.

Upon this account, he appeared diffatisfied

With a bull issued by the Pope immediately after
the peace of Crefpy; (Nov. 19. 1544.) summon-
ing the council to assemble at Trent early next
spring ,; and exhorting all Christian Princes to
embrace the opportunity that the present happy
interval of tranquillity afforded them, of sup-
pressing those herefies which threatened so sub-
vert whatever was sacred or venerable among
Chriftiaris. Brit after such a flight expression of
dislike, as was necessary in order to cover his
designs , he determined to countenance the
council, which might become no inconsiderable
instrument towards accomplishing his projefts,
and therefore not only appointed ambassadors to
appear there in his name, but ordered the ec-
clefiafticks in his dominions to attend at the
time prefixed. q)

q) F. Paul, 104.

Diet at VWorms.

Such were the Emperor's views, when the

Imperial diet, after several prorogations, was
opened (March. 24. 1545.) at Worms. The
Protestants, "who enjoyed the free exercise of
their religion by a very precarious tenure, hav-
ing no other security for it than the recess of
the last diet, which was to continue in force
only until the meeting of a council, wished
earnestly to establish that important privilege
upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a
perpetual not a temporary title.

Ferdinand requires the Germans to acknowledge the

council.

But, instead of offering thetm any additional

security, Ferdinand opened the diet with ob.
serving , that there were two points , chiefly,
which required consideration , the prosecution
of the war against the Turks, and the frate of
religion; that the former was the most urgent,
as Solyman, after conquering the greatest part
of Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the
Austrian provinces; that the Emperor, who,
from the beginning of his reign , had negleFed
no opportunity of annoying this formidable
enemy, and with the hazard of his own perfoh
had resifted his attacks , being animated still
with the fame zeal, had now consented to stop
short in the career of his success against France,
that, in conjun9tion with his ancient rival, he

might turn his arms with greater vigour against
the common adversary of the Chriffian faith ;
that it became all the members of the Empire
to second those pious endeavours or its head;
that therefore, they ought, without delay, 'to
vote him such effe&ual aid as not only their
duty but their interest called upon them to fur-
nifh; that the controversies about religion were
so intricate, and of such difficult difcuflion, as
to give no hope of its being possible to bring
them at present to any.final issue; that by per-
severance and repeared solicitation the Emperor
had at length prevailed on the Pope to call a
council, for which they had so often wished
and petitioned; that the time appointed for its
meeting was now come, and both parties ought
to wait for its decrees, and submit to them as
the decisions of the universal church.

The popish members of the diet received

this declaration with great applause, and si-
gnified their entire acquiescence in every parti-
cular which it contained. The Protestants ex-
pressed great farprife at propositions , which
were so manifestly repugnant to the recess of
the former diet; they insisted that the questions
with regard to religion, as first in dignity and
imnportance, ought to come first under delibe-
ration; that, alarming as the progress of the
Turks was to all Germany, the securing the
free exercise of their religion touched them
fiill more nearly, nor could they prosecute a

foreign

foreign war with spirit, while solicitous and
concerned about their domeftick tranquillity;
that if the latter were once rendered firm and
permanent, they would concur with their coun-
trymen in pushing the former, and yield to
none of them in a&ivity or zeal. But if the
danger from the Turkish arms was indeed so
imminent, as not to admit of such a delay as
would be occasioned by an immediate examina-
tion of the controverted- points in religion, they
required that a diet should be instantly appoint-
ed, to which the final settlement of their re-
ligious disputes should be referred; and that in
the mean time the decree of the former diet
concerning religion should be explained in a
point which they deemed efiential. By the
recess of Spires it was provided, that they
should enjoy unmolested the publick exercise
of their religion, until the meeting of a legal
council; but as the Pope had now called a
council, to which Ferdinand had required them
to submit, they began to suspecT that their ad-
verfaries tnight take advantage of an ambiguity
in the terms of the recess, and pretending that
the event therein mentioned had taken place,
might pronounce them to be no longer entitled
to the fame indulgence. In order to guard
against this interpretation, they renewed their
former remonftrances against a council called
to meet without the bounds of the Empire,
summoned by the Pope's authority, and in

Hist. of Charl. . Vol. III. X

Which he assumed the right of presiding; and
declared that, nhtwithftanding the convocation
of any such illegal assembly, they still held the
recess of the late diet to be in full force.

The Emperbt arrives at Worms.

At other jun&ures , when the Emperor

thought it of advantage to sooth and gain the
Protestants, he had deviled expedients for giv-
ing them fatisfadtion with regard to demands
seemingly more extravagant, but his views at
present being very different, Ferdinand, by his
command, adhered inflexibly to his first pro-
positions, and would make no conceflions which
had the most remote tendency to throw dif-
credit on the council, or to weaken its autho-
rity. The Protestants, on their part, were
no less inflexible; and, after much time spent
in fruitless endeavours to convince each other,
they came to no conclusion. Nor did the pre-
fence of the Emperor, who upon his recovery
arrived (May 15. 1545.) at Worms, contri-
bute in any degree to render the Pr6teftants
more. compliant. Fully convinced that they
were maintaining the cause of God and of truth,
they fhewed themselves superior to the allure-
ments of interest, or the suggestions of fear;
and in proportion as the Emperor redoubled
MJis folicitations, or discovered his designs, their
boldness seems to have increased.

The Proteflants disclaim all connexion with the council of Trent.

Atlaft they openly declared, that they would

not even deign to vindicate their tenets in pre-
fence of a council, assembled not to examine,
but to condemn them; and that they would
pay no regard to an assembly held under the
influence of a Pope, who had already precluded
himself from all title to a&t as a judge, by his
having stigmatized their opinions with the name
of heresy, and denounced against them the
heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude of
his usurped power, he could infli&.r)

Condu& of Maurice of Saxony in this diet.

While the Protestants, with such union as

well as firmness, rejected all intercourse with
the council, and refused their assent to the Im-
perial demands in refpe&t to the Turkish war,
Maurice of Saxony alone fhewed an inclination
to gratify the Emperor with regard to both.
Though he profeffed an inviolable regard for
the protestant religion, he alfamed an appear-
ance of moderation peculiar to himself, by
which he confirmed the favourable sentiments
which the Emperor already entertained of him,
and gradually paved the way for executing
the ambitious designs which always occupied

X

2

r) Sleid. 343, &c Sect-. ii: ,a43. &,. Thiuan. Hiftor, 1;i

i r, 56

his aEtive and enterprising mind. s) His ex-
ample, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions ;
and Charles perceived that he could not hope
either to procure present aid from the Protest-
ants against the Turks, or to quiet their fears
and jealousieS on account of their religion. But
as his schemes were not yet ripe for execution,
nor his preparatiotis so far advanced that he
could f6rce their compliance, or punish their
ojbftinacy, he artfully concealed his own inten-
tions. That he might augment their security,
he appointed (August 4.. 1545.) a diet to be
held at Ratisbon early next year, in order to
adjust what was now left undetermined ; and
previous to it, he agreed that a certain number
of divines of each party should meet, in order
to confer upon the points in dispute. t)

The Protestants begin to finfpe& the Emperori

But how far soever this appearance of a de-

fire to maintain the present tranquillity might
have imposed upon the Protestants, the Empe-
ror was incapable of such uniform and thorough
dissimulation, as to hide altogether from their
view the dangerous designs which he was me-
ditating against them. Herman count de Wied,
Archbishop and Ele&or of Cologne, a prelate
conspicuous for his virtue and primitive fimpli-

s) Seck. iii. 57I,
t) Sleid. 351.

city of manners, though not more distinguished
for learning than the other descendents of noble
families, who in that age poffeffed most of the
great benefices in Germany, having become a
proselyte to the doftrines of the Reformers,
had begun in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty-three, with the assistance of Melanc-
thon and Bucer, to abolish the ancient super-
ftition in his diocese, and to introduce in its
place the rites established among the Protestants.
But the canons of his cathed-ral, who were not
poffeffed with the fame spirit of innovation, and
who foresaw how fatal the levelling genius of
the new seCt would prove to their dignity and
wealth, opposed, from the beginning, this un-
precedented enterprize of their Archbishop, with
all the zeal flowing from reverence for old in-
ftikitions, heightened by concern for their own
interest. This opposition, which the Archbishop
considered only as a new argument to demon-
ftrate the necessity of a reformation, neither
shook his resolution, nor slackened his ardour
in prosecuting his plan. The canons, perceiv-
ing all their endeavours to check his career to
be ineffeftual, solemnly protested against his
proceedings, and appealed for red-ress to the
Pope and Emperor, the former as his ecclefiaf-
tical, the latter as his civil sup.erior. This ap-
peal being laid before the Emperor, during his
residence in Worms. he took the canons of
Cologne under his immediate prote&ion; en-

joined them to proceed with rigour against all
who revolted from the established church; pro-
hibited the Archbifbop to make any innovation
in his diocese; and summoned him to appear
at Brussels within thirty days, to answer the
accnfations which Thould be preferred against
him. u)

To this clear evidence of his hoffile inten-

tions against the Protestant party, Charles'added
.other proofs still more explicit. In his heredi-
tary dominions of the Low Countries, he per-
fecuted all who were fufpe&ed of Lutheranifm
with unrelenting rigour. As soon as he arrived
at Worms, he silenced the Protestant preachers
in that city. He allowed an Italian monk to
inveigh a:gainst the Lutherans from the pulpit
of his chapel, and to call upon him, as he re-
garded the favour of God, to exterminate that
pestilent heresy. He dispatched the embafiy,
which has been already mentioned, to Conftan-
tinople, with overtures of peace, that he might
be free from any apprehension of.danger or in-
terruption from that quarter. Nor did any of
these steps, or their dangerous tendency, escape
the jealous observation of the Protestants, or
fail to alarm their fears, and to excite their so-
licitude for the safety of their fe&.

u) Sleid. 31o. 340. 351. Seckend. iii. 443. 553.

Death of the Duke of Orleans.

Meanwhile, Charles's good fortune, which

predominated on all occasions over that of his
rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty,
from which, with all his sagacity and address,
he would have found it no easy natter to have
disentangled himself. Just about the time (Sept.
8. 1545.) when the Duke of Orleans should
have received Ferdinand's daughter in marriage,
and together with her the poffieffion of the Mi-
ianefc, he died of a pestilential fever. By this
event, the Emperor was freed from the necef-
firv of giving up an important province into the
hands of an enemy , or from the indecency of
violating a recent and solemn engagement ,
which must have occasioned an immediate rup-
ture with France. He affected, however, to
express great sorrow for the untimely death
of a young Prince, who was to have been so
nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided
entering into any fresh difcufiions concerning
the Milanese; and would not listen to a proposal
which came from Francis of new-modeilin:g the
treaty of Crefpy, ib as to -ake him some re-
paration for the advantages which he had loft
by the demise of his son. In the more active
and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a declara-
tion of war would have been the certain and
intianteneous consequence of such a flat refusal
to comply with a demand fecmingly so equit-
able.; but the declining state of" his own health

the exhausted condition of his kingdoms, to-
gether with the burden of the war against Eng-
land obliged, him at present, to dissemble
his resentment, and to put off thoughts of re-
venge to some other jun&ure.. In consequence
of this evetr, the unfortunate Duke of Savoy
loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of his
territories; and the rights or claims relinquished
by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force
to the crown of France, to serve as pretexts
for future wars. x)

The Pope grants the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to

his son.

Upon the first intelligence of the Duke of

Orleans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde
flattered themselves that the essential alterations
which it occasioned could hardly fail of pro-
ducing a rupture, which would prove the means
of their safety. But they were not more difap-
pointed with regard to this, than in their ex-
pe&ations from an event which seemed to be
the certain prelude of a quarrel between the
Emperor and the Pope. When Paul, whole
paflion for aggrandizing his family, increased as
he advanced in years, and as he saw the dignity
and power which they derived immediately from
him becoming more precarious, found that he
could not bring Charles to approve of his am-

3) Belcaril Comment. 769. Paruta, Hist. Venet. iv. p. 177.

bitious schemes, he ventured to grant his son
Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Pla-
centia, though at the risk of incurring the dif-
pleasure of the Emperor. At a time when a
great part of Europe inveighed openly against
the corrupt manners and exorbitant power of
Ecclefiaflicks; and when a council was fuam-
moned to reform the disorders in the church,
this indecent grant of such a principality, to a
son of whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought
to have been ashamed, and whose licentious
morals all good men detested, gave general of-
fence. Some Cardinals in the Imperial interest
remonstrated against such an unbecoming alie-
nation of the patrimony of the church; the
Spanish ambassador would not be present at the
solemnity of his infeofment; and upon pretext
that there cities were part of the Milanese
state, the Emperor peremptorily refused to
confirm the deed of inwe41iture. But both the
Emperor and Pope being intent upon one com-
mon object in Germany, sacrificed their par-
ticular passions to that publick cause, and sup-
pressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they
might jointly pursue what each esteemed of
greater importance. y)

y) Parmta, Hist. Venet iv. l?8. Paklavic, ZSg.

Henry of Brunswick kindles a war in Germany.

About this time the peace of Germany was

disturbed by a violent but short eruption of
Henry Duke of Brunswick. This Prince,
though still stript of his dominions, which the
Emperor held in sequestration, until his differ-
ences with the confederates of Smalkalde should
be adjusted, poffeffed however so much credit
in Germany, that he undertook to raise for the
French king a considerable body of troops to be
employed in the war against England. The
money flipulated for this purpose was duly ad-
.vanced by Francis; the troops were levied; but
lienry, instead of leadin-g them towards France,
suddenly entered his own dominions at their
head, in hopes of recovering them before any
army could be assembled to oppose him. The
confederates were not more surprised at this
unexpe&ed attack, than the King of France
was astonished at a mean thievish fraud, so un-
becoming the charafter of a Prince. But the
Landgrave of Hesse, with incredible expedition,
colle&ed as many men as put a stop to the pro-
grefs of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being
joined by his fon-in-law, Maurice, and by some
troops belonging to the Ele&or of Saxony, he
gained such advantages over Henry, who was
rash and bold in forming his schemes, but feeble
and undetermined in executing them, as obliged
him to disband his army, and to surrender him-
self, together with this eldest son, prisoners at

dikcretion. He was kept in close confinement,
until a new reverse of affairs procured him li-
berty. z)

The Reformation of.the Palatiua=e

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise

added new reputation to tbe arms of the Pro-
teftants, the Reformation of the Palatinate
brought a great accession of strength to their
party. Frederick, who facceeded his brother
Lewis in that EleCtorate, had long been suspect-
ed of a secret propensity to the doctrines of the
Reformers, which upon his accefflon to the
principality, he openly manifested. But as he
expefed that something effectual towards a ge-
neral and legal establishment of religion, would
be the fruit of so many diets, conferences, and
negociations, he did not, at first, attempt any
publick innovation in his dominions. Finding
all these issue in nothing, he thought himself
called, at length, (Jan. Io. I546.) to counte-
nance by his authority the system which he ap-
proved of, and to gratify the wishes ofhis sub-
je&ts, who, by their intercourse with the Pro-
teftant states , had universally imbibed their
opinions. As the warmth and impetuosity which
accompanied the spirit of Reformation in its first
efforts, had somewhat abated, this change was

z) Sleid. 3532. Seek, iii. 567,

made with great order and regularity; the aq-
cient rites were abolished, and new forms in-
troduced, without any aats of violence, or
symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adopt-
ed the religious system of the Protestants, he
imitated the example of Maurice, and did not
accede to the league of Smalkalde. a)

The council assembles at Treut.

A few weeks before this, revolution in the

Palatinate, the general council was opened
with the accustomed folemnities at Trent. The
eyes of the Catholick states were turned with
much expe&ation towards an assembly, which
all had considered as a natural and adequate re-
medy for the disorders of the church when they
first broke out, though many were afraid that
it was now too late to hope for great benefit
from it, when the malady, by being fulfered to
make progress. during twenty-eight years, had
become inveterate, and grown to such extreme
violence. The Pope, by his last b.ull of con-
vocation, had appointed the first meeting to be
aeld in. March. But his views, and those of
the Emperor, were so different, that almost the
whole year was spent in negociations. Char-
les., who foresaw that the rigorous decrees of
the council against the Protestants would soon
drive them, in felf-defence as well as from re-

a) Sleid. 356. Seck. I. iii. 616l

fentment, to some defparate extreme, labour-
ed to put off its meeting until his warlike pre-
parations were so far advanced, that he might
be in a condition to second its decisions by the
force of his arms. The Pope, -who had early
sent to Trent the legates who were to preside
in his name, knowing to what contempt it
would expose his authority, and what suspicions
it would beget of his intentions, if the fathers
of the council should remain in a Rate of inaati-
vity, when the church was in such danger as
to require their immediate and vigorous interpo-
fition, insisted either upon tranfiating the coun-
cil to some city in Italy, or upon suspending
altogether its proceedings at that jun&ure, or
upon authorizing it to begin its deliberations
immediately. The Emperor rejeded the two
former as equally offenfive to the Germans of
every denomination, but finding it impossible to
elude the latter, he proposed that the council
should begin with reforming the disorders in
the church, before it proceeded to examine or
define articles of faith. This was the very
thing which the court of Rome dreaded most,
and which had prompted it to employ so many
artifices in order to prevent the meeting offuch
a dangerous judicatory. Paul, though more
compliant than some of his predeceefors with re-
gard to calling a council, was no less jealous
than they had been of its jurifdi&ion, and saw\
what matter of triumph such a method of pro-

ceedihg would afford the hereticks. He ap-
prehended cbnfequences not only humbling
but fatal to the papal fee, if the council came
to confider an inquest into abused as their
onily business ; '

c- if inferior prelates were

allowed to gratify their own envy 'and pee-
vifhnefis, by prescribing ruleS to those who
were exalted above them in dignity and power.
Without listening, therefore, to this insidious
proposal of the Emperor, he iniftruted his lega-
tes to open the council.

Its proceedings.

'The firift session (Jan. I8. 1546.) was spent

in matters of form. In a subsequent one, it
was agreed that the framing a confeffion of
faith, wherein should be contained all the arti-
cles which the church required its members to
believe, ought to be the first and principal
business of the council; but that, at the fame
time, due attention should be given to what
was necessary towards the reformation of man-
ners and discipline. From this first symptom of
the spirit with which the council was animated,
fi-om the high tone of authority which the lega-
tes who presided in it assumed, and from the
implicit deference with which most of the mem-
bers followed their direftions, the Protestants
conje&ured with ease what decisions they might;
expe&. It astonished them, however, to fee
forty prelates (for no greater number were yet

aff'embled) affime authority is .#eprefettatives
of the universal church, and proceed to deter-
mine the most important points of do&rine in*
ith name. Sensible of this indecency , as well
as of the ridicule with which it might be at-"
tended, the council advanced slowly in its de-
liberations, and all its proceedings were for
fofne time languishing and feeble. b) As soon
as the confederates of Smalkalde received infor-
mation of the opening of the council, they pu-
blithed a long manifesto , containing a renewal.
of their protest against its iheeting , together
with the reasons which induced them to decline
its jurifdi&ions. c) The Pope and Emperor,
on their part, were so little solicitous to quicken
or add vigour to its operations, as plainly dif-
covered that some obje&t of greater importance
occupied and interested them.

Apprehensions of the<Proteftants.

The Protestants, as they were not inatten-

tive or unconcerned fpef&ators of their motions,
entertained every day more violent suspicions
of their intentions , and received intelligence
from different quarters of the machinations car-
rying on against them. The King of England
informed them, that the Emperor having long

b) F. Paul, 120, &c. Pallavic. p. igo, &r.

e) Seckend. 1. iii. 602, &.

resolved to exterminate their opinions, Woul&
not fail to employ this interval of tranquillity
which he now enjoyed, as the mbft favourable
juncture for carrying his design into execution.
The merchants of Augsburg, which was at that
time a city of extensive trades received advice,
by means of their correspondents in Italy,
among Whoii wefe foine who secretly favoured
the Protestant cause, d) that a dangerous con-
federacy against it was forming between the
Pope and Emperor. In confirmation of this,
they heard fronm the Low Countries that Charles
had iffled orders, though with every precaution
which could keep the measure concealed, for
raifihg troops both there and in other parts of
his dominions.

Their deliberations.

Such a variety of information, corroborat-

ing all that their own jealousy or observation
led them to apprehend, left the Proteflants little
reason to doubt of the Emperor's hostile inten-
tions. Under this impreflion, the deputies of
the confederates of Smalkalde assembled at
Francfort, and by communicating their intelli-
gence and sentiments to each other, recipro-
cally heightened their sense of the impending
danger. But their union was not such as their

fitua-

d) Seeck. 1. iii. 57.9.

situation required, or the preparations of their
enemies rendered neceirary. Their league had
now subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers, whose territaries were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom
of Germany, had created an infinite variety of
mutual rights and claims by intermarriages, al-
liances, and contrats of different kinds, sub-
je&s of jealousy and discord had unavoidably
arisen. Some of the confederates, being con-
ne&ed with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly
disgusted with the Landgrave, on account of the
,rigour with which he had treated that rash but
unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Ele&or
of Saxony and the Landgrave, the heads of the
league, with having involved the members in
unnecessary and exorbitant expences by their
profufenefs or want of oecpnomy. The views,
likewise, of those two great Princes, who, by
their superior power ajad authority, influenced
and dire&ed the whole body, being extremely
different, rendered all its motions languid, at
a time when the utmost vigour and dispatch
were requisite. The Landgrave, of a violent
and enterprising temper , but not forgetful,
amidst his zeal for religion, of the usual maxims
of human policy , insisted that, as the danger
which threatened them was manifest and un-
avoidable , they should have recourse to the
most effeatual expedient for securing their own
safety, by courting the proteftion of the Kings

Hifl. of CharL. V. V ol. III. Y

of Franrie and England, or hy joining in al-
likhnte With the Protestant cantons of Swiffer-
land, from whom they might expeft such power-
ful shd present assistance, as their situation de-
manded. The Ele&or, on the other hand, with
the 'tnoft tipight intentions of any Prince iin that
age, and with talebts which might htve qualified
him abundantly for the administration of govern-
ment in any tranquil period, was poffeffed with
such fiperftitious veneration for all the parts of
the Lutheran fyftern, and fuci bigoted attach-
ment to all its tenets, s tmnade him averse to
ah union with thbfe ivh'o differed from him in
any article of faith, and rendered himn very in-
capable of undertaking its defence in times of
difficulty and dahger. He seemed to think, that
the concerns of religion were to be regulated
by principlee and maxims totally different from
those which apply to the common affairs of life;
ahndbeing swayed too much by the opinions of
Luther, who was not only a stranger to the
rules of political conduft, but despised them;
he often discovered an uncomplying spirit, that
proved 6f the greatest detriment to the cause
which he wished to support. Influenced,
on this occasion, by the severe and rigid- no-
tidns of that Reformer, he refused to enter
into any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to
fblicit the friendship of Henry, because he was
no less impious and profane than the Pope him-

self; or even to join in alliance with the Swift,
becaafe they differed from the Germans in fe-
veral eflential articles of faith. This dissention,
about a point of such consequence, produced its
natural effefts. Each secretly censured and re-
proached the other. The Landgrave considered
the Ele&or as fettered by narrow prejudices,
unworthy of a Prince called to aat a chief part
in a scene of fach importance. The Ele&or
fufpe&ed him of loose principles and ambitious
views, which corresponded ill with the sacred
cause wherein they were engaged. But though
the Ele&or's scruples prevented their timely ap-
plication for foreign aid; and the jealousy or
discontent of the other Princes defeated a pro-
pofal for renewing their original confederacy,
the term dauring which it was to continue in
force being on the point of expiring; yet the
sense of their common danger induced them to
agree with regard to other points, particular-
ly, that they would never acknowledge the as-
fembly at Trent as a lawful council, nor fuffer
the Archbishop of Cologne to be oppressed on
account of the steps which he had taken to-
wards the reformation of his diotefe. e)

Their negociations with the Emperor.

The Landgrave, about this time, desirous

of penetrating to the bottom of the Emperor's

Y Seid

e) Se'k. I :i. $66, 5$ o. 6l.. Sleid. 355.

intentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew
to be thoroughly acquainted with all his maiter's
schemes, informing him of the several particu-
lars, which raised the fUfpiciokis of the Protest-
ants, ahd beggihg an explicit declaration of
what they had to tear or to hope. Granvelle,
in return, assured them, that the intelligence
which they had received of the Emperor's mili-
tary preparations was exaggerated, and all their
fifpticiofs destitute of foundation; that, though
in order to guard his frontiers against any insult
0 the French or English , he had commanded
a small body of men to be raised in the Low
Countries, be was as solicitous as ever to main-
tain tranquillity in Germany. f)

Bfut the Emperor's adiots did not corre-

Spond with there profeffions. For, instead of
appointing men of known moderation and a pa-
Cifick temper to appear in defence of the Ca-
tholick doftrinses at the conference which had
beeh agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots,
attached to their own fyftetm with a blind ob-
f.inacy, that rendered all hope of a reconcile-
ment defparate. Malvenda, a Spahifh divine,
who took the condut of the 4ebate on the part
of the Catholicks, managed it with all the subtle
dexterity of a fcholaftick metaphysician, more
ludious. to perplex his adversaries than to con-
iince th.em , and more intent ojn palliating error

F) Sleid. 356.

than on discovering truth. The Protestants fill-
ed with indignation, as well at his sophistry,
as at some regulations which the Emperor en-
deavoured to impose on the difputants, broke
off the conference abruptly, being now fully
convinced that, in all his late measures, the
Emperor could have no other view than to amuse
them, and to gain time for ripening his own
schemes. g)

g) Steid. 35&. Seck. 1. iii. 620

# BOOK VIII. Death of Luther

THE

H I S T OR Y

OQF THE

R E I G N

O F THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.

Death of Luther,

W HILE appearances of danger daily increased,
and the tempert which had been so long a ga-
thering was ready to break forth in all its vio-
lence against the Protestant church, .Luther was
saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or
beholding its. deftrufive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining ifate of health, and dur-
ing a rigorous season, to his native city of
Eyfleben, in order to compose, by his autho-
rity, a dissention among the counts of Mans-
field, he was seized (Feb. Ig. 1546.) with a
violent inflammation in his stomach, which in
a few days put an end to his life, in the fix-
ty-third year of his age. As he was raised up
by Providence to be the author of one of the
greatest and most interesting revolutions record-

ed in history, there is not any person perhaps
whose charaEter has been drawn with such op-
pofite colours. In his own age, one party,,
struck with horror and inflamed with rage.,
when they saw with what a. daring, hand he
overturned every thing which they held to be
fhcred, or valued as beneficial, imputed to him
not only all the defeEts and vices of a man,
but the qua~ities of a. daemon, The other,
warmed with the admiration and gratitude,
which they thought he merited as the restorer
of light and liberty to the Christian church,
ascribed to him perfeftions above the condition
of humanity, and viewed all his actions with
a veneration bordering on that which should
be paid only to. those who are guided by the
immediate inspiration of Heaven.

His chara&er.

It is his own conduEt not the undiftin-

guifhing cenfare or the exaggerated praise of
his contemporaries, that ought to regulate the
opinions of the present age concerning him.
Zeal for what- he regarded as troth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain his own fyftenm, abili-
ties both natural and acqu ired to defend his
principles, and unwearied industry in propa-
gating them are virtues which' shine so con-
fpicuoufly in every part of his behaviour, that
even his enemies must aHow him to have
pofleffed them in an eminent degree. To

these may be added , with equal .jufice,
such purity and even austerity of manners,
.as became one who assumed the character
of a Reformer; such san&ity of life as suited
the do&rine which he delivered; and such per-
fe& disinterestedness as affords no flight pre-
fumption of his fihcerity. Superior to all fel-
fish considerations, a stranger to the elegancies
of life, and despising its pleasures, he left the
honours and emoluments of the church to his
disciples, remaining satisfied himself in his
original state of profeffor in the university,
and pastor of the town of Wittemberg , with
the moderete appointments annexed to there
offices. His extraordinary qualities were allay-
ed with no inconsiderable mixture of human
frailty and human paflions. These, however,
were of such a nature, that they cannot be
imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart,
but seem to have taken their rife from the
fame source with many of his virtues. His
mind, forcible and vehement in all its opera-
tions, roused by great objeats, or agitated by
violent passions, broke out, on many occasions,
with an impetuosity which astonishes men of
feebler spirits, or such as are placed in a more
tranquil situation. By carrying some praise-
worthy dispositions to excess, he bordered some-
times on what was culpable, and was often
betrayed into a&ions which exposed him to
censure. His confidence that his own opinions

were well founded, approached to arrogance;
his courage in asserting them, to rashness; his
firmness in adhering to them, to obstinacy;
and his zeal in confuting his adversaries, to
rage and scurrility. Accustomed himself to
confider every thing as subordinate to truth,
he expe&ed the fame deference for it from
other men; and, without making any allow-
ances for their timidity or prejudices, he
poured forth against such as disappointed him
in this particular, a torrent of inve&ive mingled
with contempt. Regardless of any diftinc-
tion of rank or chara&er when his do&rines
were attacked, he chastised all his adversaries
indiscriminately, with the fame rough hand;
neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII. nor
the eminent learning and abilities of Erasmus,
screened them from the fame gross abuse with
which he treated Tetzel or Eckius.

But these indecencies of which Luther was

guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
lence of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which by putting continual restraint on the
passions of individuals, have polished society
and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind
were managed with heat, and strong emotions
were uttered in their natural language, without
reserve or delicacy. At the fame time, the
works of learned men were all composed in

Latin, and they .were not only authorized, by
the example of eminent writers in that language,
to use their antagonists with the most illiberal
scurrility; but, in a dead tongue, indecencies
of every kind appear less shocking than in a liv-
ing I~nguage, whose idioms and ph.ases seem
gross, because they are familiar.

In pailing judgment upon the charafters of

men, we ought to try them by the principles
and maxims of their own age, not by those
of another. For, although virtue and vice
are at all times the. fame , manners and cuf-
toms vary continually. Some parts of Lu-
ther's behaviour, which to us appear most
culpable, gave no disgust to his contempora-
ries. It was even by some of those qualities,
which we are now apt to blame , that he
was fitted for accomplishing the great work
which he undertook. To route mankind ,
when funk in ignorance or superstition, and
to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with. power , required the. utmost vehemence
of weal , as well as. a temper daring to ex-
cefss A gentle call would, neither have reach.-
ed , nor have excited, those to whom it
was addressed. A spirit more amiable, but
less vigorous than Luther's, would have shrunk
back from the dangers , which he braved and
furmoaunted. Towards the close of Luther's
life, though withoujt any perceptible declension
of his zel or. abilities, the infirmities of his

temper increased upon him, so that he grew
daily more peevish, more irascible, and more
impatient of contradiction. Having lived to be
witness of his own amazing success; to fee a
great part of Europe embrace his do&rines; and
to shake the foundation of the papal throne,
before which the mightiest Monarchs had
trembled, he discovered , on some occaflons
symptoms, of vanity and self- applause. He
must have been, indieed, more then man, if,
upon contemplating all that he actually accom-
plifhed, he had never felt any sentiment of this
kind rising in his breast. *)

Some time before his death he felt his

frrength declining, his constitution being worn
out by a prodigious multiplicity of business,
added to the labour of discharging his ministerial

*) A remarkable infrance of this, as well of a certain fingu-

laritv and eleva:ion of fenriment, is fouud in his last
will. Though the effeFts which he had to bequeath were
verv inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a
Teframent, but fccrued to frame it with the uCual legal
formalities. Norus fum, says he, in coelo, in terra, &
;nferno, & au&oritatem ad hoc fuiffcientem habeo, ut
Inihi foei credatur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet damna-
bili. & miferabiii peccatori, ex paterna mirericordia Evan-
gelium filii fui crediderit, dederitque at in eo verax &
fidelis fueriun, itr ut multi in mundo illud per me acce-
perint, & me pro Do&tore veriratis agnoverint, fpreto
banno PapaE Caeraris. Regum , Principum & facerdotum.
immo omnium d-mnonum odio. Quidni, igitur, ad difpo-
firionem hanc, in re exigua. fuffciat, si adfit manus mer
reftimoniu. , & dici poIf?, hec scrip&t D. Martinus Lu-
ther, ,Notar;us De:. & tefris Evancelii ejus. Sec. 1. iii.
P. 651

fun&ion with unremitting diligence, to the fa-
tigue of constant itudy, betides the composition
of works as voluminous as if he had enjoyed
uninterrupted leisure and retirement. His na-
tural intrepidity did not forsake him at the ap-
proach of death; his last conversation with his
friends was concerning the happiness reserved
for good men in a future world, of which he
spoke with the fervour and delight natural to
one who expe&ed and wished to enter soon
upon the enjoyment of it. a) The account of
his death filled the Roman Catholick party with
excessive as well as indecent joy, and damped
the spirits of all his followers; neither party
fufficiently considering that his do&rines were
now so firmly rooted, as to be in a condition
to flourish independent of the hand which first
had planted them. His funeral was celebrated
by order of the Ele&or of Saxony with extraor-
dinary pomp. He left several children by his
wife Catherine a Boria, who survived him.
Towards the end of the last century, there were
in Saxony some of his descendants in decent and
honourable stations. b)

The Emperor endeavours to amuse and deceive the

Protestants.

The Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan

of diflimulation with which he had set out, em-

a) Sleid. 362. Seck, lib. iii. 632, &c.
b) Seck. 1. iii. 651.

ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and
to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this pur-
pose he contrived to have an interview (March
28. 1546.) with the Landgrave of Hesse, the
most aftive of all the confederates, and the most
suspicious of his designs. To him he made such
warm profeffions of his concern for the happiness
of Germany, and of his aversion to all violent
measures; he denied in fach express terms, his
having entered into any league, or having begun
any military preparations which should give
cause of alarm to the Protestants, as seem to
have dispelled all the Landgrave's doubts and
apprehensions, and sent him away fully satisfied
of his pacifick intentions. This artifice was of
great advantage, and effeftually answered the
purpose for which it was employed. The Land-
grave upon his leaving Spires, where he had
been admitted to this interview , went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldick confederates
were aflembled, and gave them such a flattering
representation of the Emperor's favourable difpo-
fition towards them, that they, too apt, as well
from the temper of the German nation, as from
the genius of all great associations or bodies of
men, to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive
in their deliberations, thought there was no ne-
ceflity of taking any immediate measures against
danger, which appeared to be distant or ima-
ginary. c)

 S1eid. Hist, 36-, 375

Proceedings of the council againa the Piotefthnts.

Such events, however, soon ockctirred, as

faggered the credit which the Protefthnts had
given to the Emperor's decilaations. The council
of Trent, though, still dompofed of a firiall
number of Italian and Spanish prelates, without
a single deputy from any of the kingdoms which
it assumed a right of binding by ith decrees,
being ashamed of its long ina&tivity, proceeded
now to fettle articles of the greatest impor-
tance. Having begun with examining the first
and chief point in controversy between the
church of Rome and the Reformers, concerning
the rule which should be held as supreme and
decisive ill matters of faith, the council, by its
infallible authority, determined : (April 8-. I546.)
,, That the books to which the designation of
Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority With those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed dowrr from
the apoftolick age, and preserved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the do&trines
and precepts which the inspired authors have
committed tb writing; that the Latin translation
of the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Je-
iome, and known by the name of the Vulgate
ttanflation, should be read in churches, and ap-
pealed to in the schools as authentick and ca-
nonical."' Against all who diflclaimed the truth
of these tenets, anathemas were denounced in

the name and by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. The decision of there points, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the Pro-
teftants what judgment they might expe& when
the council should have leifare to take into con-
fideration the particular and subordinate articles
of their creed. d)

This discovery of the coucil's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was
soon f;llowed by a striking instance of the Po-
pe's resolution to punish such as embraced them.
The appeal of the canons of Cologne against
their Archbishop having been carried to Rome,
Paul eagerly seized on that opportunity, both
of difpaying the extent of his own authority,
and of teaching the German ecclefiafticks the
danger of revolting from the established church.
As no person appeared in behalf of the Arch-
bishop, he was held to be convited of the
crime of heresy, and a Papal bull was issued,
(April 16. 1546.) depriving him of his eccle-
fiaftical dignity, ihfliEting on his the sentence
of excomtnunication, and absolving his fubjefts
from the oath of allegiance which they had
taken to him as their civil superior. The coun-
tenance which be had given to the Lutheran
heresy was the only crime imputed to him , as
Well as the only reason afligned to justify thb

d) F. Paul, 141. Pallav. co6,

the extraordinary rigour of this decree. The
Protestants could hardly believe that Paul, how
zealous soever to defend the established fyflten,
or to humble those who invaded it, would have
ventured to proceed to fach extremities against
a Prince and Ele&or of the Empire, without
having previously secured such powerful protec-
tion as would render his censure something more
than an impotent and despicable sally of resent-
ment. They were of course deeply alarmed at
this sentence against the Archbishop, confider-
ing it as a sure indication of the malevolent in-
tentions not only of the Pope, but of the Em-
peror, against the whole party. d)

Charles about to commence hostilities against the Protestants.

Upon this fresh revival of their fears, with

such violence as is natural to men rouzed from
a faife security, and conscious of their having
been deceived, Charles saw that it was now
necessary to throw aside the veil, and to de-
clare openly what part he determined to at.
By a long series of artifice and fallacy, he had
gained so much time, that his measures,
though not altogether ripe for execution, were
greatly matured. The Pope , by his proceed-
ings against the Eledtor of Cologne, as well as
by the decree of the council, had precipitated

mat-

d) Sleid. 354. F. Paul, I55. Pallavic. 324.

matters into fach a situation, as rendered a
breach between the Emperor and the Protest-
ants almost unavoidable, Charles had now no
choice left him but either to take part with them
in overturning what the See of Rome had de-
termined, or to support the authority of the
church, openly by force of arms.

Negociates with the Pope,

Nor did the Pope think it enough to have

brought the Emperor under a necessity of a&-
ing; he pressed him to begin his operations, by
promising to second him with such vigour as
could not well fail of securing his faccefs.
Transported by his zeal against heresy, Paul
forgot all the prudent and cautious maxims of
the Papal See, with regard to the danger of
extending the Imperial authority beyond due
bounds; and in order to cruth the Lutherans,
he was willing to contribute towards raising
up a master, that might one day prove for-
midable to himself as well as to the reft of
Italy.

Concludes a truce with Solyman.

But, besides the certain expeftation of assist-

ance from the Pope, Charles was now secure
from any danger of interruption to his designs
by the Turkish arms. His negogations at the
Porte, which he had carried on with great affi-
duity since the peace of Crefpy, were on the

Hist. of Charl. V. V ol. IIL Z

point of being terminated in such a manner as
he desired. Solyman, partly in compliance
with the French King, who, in order to avoid
the disagreeable obligation of joining the Em-
peror against his ancient ally, laboured with
great zeal to bring about an accommodation be-
tween them; and partly from its being.necef-
fary to turn his arms towards the east, where
the Persians threatened to invade his dominions,
consented without difficulty to a truce for five
years. The chief article of it was: That each
should retain poffeffion of what he now held
in Hungary; and Ferdinand , as a sacrifice to
the pride of the Sultan, submitted to pay an
annual tribute of fifty thousand crowns. e)

Gains Maurice, and other Princes in Germany.

But it was upon the aid and concurrence of

the Germans themselves that the Emperor relied
the greatest confidence. The Germanick body
he knew, were of such vast strength, as to be
invincible if it were united, and that it was
only by employing its own force that he could
hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the union
of the several members in this great system was
so feeble, the whole frame was so loosely com-
pa&ed, ind its different parts tended so violent-
ly towards separation from each other, that it
was almoff impoilible for it, on any important

e) lituanhafiui Hlif. HIung, igo. Mem, de Ribilr, tom. i. 5S=J

emergence , to join in a general or vigorous
effort. In the preernt juncture, the sources of
discord were as many, and as various, as had
been known on any occasion. The Roman
Catholicks, animated with zeal in defence of
their religion proportional to the fierceness with
which it had been attacked, were eager to
second any attempt to humble those innovators,
who had overturned it in many provinces, and
endangered it in more. John and Albert of
Brandenburg, as well as several other Princes,
incensed at the haughtiness and rigour with
which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated
by the confederates of Smalkalde, were im-
patient to rescue him, and to be revenged on
them. Charles observed, with fatisfaftion, the
working of those passions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever
he should think it proper to act, he found it,
in the mean time. more necessary to moderate
than to inflame their rage.

Holds a die: a: Ra:i:fbon.

Such was the situation of affirs, such the

discernment with which the Emperor foresaw
and provided for every event, when the dIet
of the Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the
Roman Catholick members appeared there in
person, but most of the confederates of Smal-
kalde, under pretence of their being unable to
bear the expence occasioned by the late unne-

Z z

ceffary frequency of such affenblies, sent only
deputies. Their jealousy of the Emperor, to-
gether with an apprehension that violence might,
perhaps, be employed, in ordes to force their
approbation of what he should propose in the
diet, was the true cause of their absence. The
speech with which the Emperor opened the diet
was extremely artful. After profeffing, in
common form, his regard for the prosperity of
the Germanick body, and declaring, that, in
order to bestow his whole attention upon the
re-establishment of its order and tranquillity, he
had at present abandoned all other cares, re-
jeted the most pressing folicitations of his other
fubje&s to reside among them, and postponed
affairs of the greatest importance; he took no-
tice, with some disapprobation, that his dif-
interested example had not been imitated; many
xhembers of chief consideration having negle&ed
to attend ah assembly to which he had repaired
with such manifest inconvenience to himself.
He then mentioned their unhappy diflentions
about religion; lamented the ill success of his
past endeavours to compose them; complained
of the abrupt dissolution of the late conference,
and craved their advice with regard to the best
and mo1t effe&tual method of restoring union to
the churches of Germany, together with that
happy agreement in articles of faith, which
their ancestors had found to be of no lets ad-

vantage to their civil interest, than becoming
their Christian profeflion.

By this gracious and popular method of

consulting the members of the diet, rather than
of obtruding upon them any opinion of his own,
besides the appearance of great moderation, and
the merit of paying much repet to their judg-
ment , the Emperor dexterously avoided dif-
covering his own sentiments, and reserved to
himself, as his only part, that of carrying into
execution what they should recommend. Nor
was he less secure of fach a decision as he
wished for, by referring it wholly to them-
selves. The Roman Catholick members, prompt-
ed by their own zeal, or prepared by his in-
trigues, joined immediately in representing that
the authority of the council now met at Trent
ought to be final in all matters of controversy;
that all Christians should submit to its decrees
as the infallible rule of their faith; and there-
fore they besought him to exert the power ,
with which he was invested by the Almighty,
in protesting that assembly, and in compelling
the Protestants to acquiesce in its determinations.
The Protestants, on the other hand, presented
a memorial, in which, after repeating their ob-
je&ions to the council of Trent, they propoefed,
as the only effe&aual method of deciding the
points in dispute , that either a free general
council should be assembled in Germany, or a
national council of the Empire should be called,

or a feleft number of divines thould be appoint-
ed out of each party to examine and define ar-
ticles of faith.. They mentioned the recesses of
several diets favourable to this proposition, and
which had afforded them the profpeft of termi-
nating all their differences in this amicable
manner; they now conjured the Emperor not
to depart from his former plan, and by offering
violence to their consciences, to bring calamities
upon Germany, the very thought of which must
fill every lover of his country with horror. The
Emperor receiving this paper with a contemp-
tuous smile, paid no farther regard to it. Hav-
ing already taken'his final resolution, and per-
ceiving that nothing but force could compel
them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched (June 9.
1546.) the Cardinal of Trent to Rome, in order
to conclude an alliance with the Pope , the
terms of which were already agreed on ; he
commanded a body of troops, levied on purpose
in the Low Countries, to advance towards Ger-
many; he gave commissions to several officers
for raising men in different parts of the Empire;
he warned John and Albert of Brandenburg,
that now was the proper time of exerting them-
selves, in order to rescue their ally, Henry of
Brunswick, from captivity. f)

f) Sleid. 374. Seek. iii. 65g8

The Protefrantm alarme&d

All these things could not be tranfa&ed

without the observation and knowledge of the
Protestants. The secret was now in many hands;
under whatever veil the Emperor frill affe&eed
to conceal his designs, his officers kept no such
mysterious reserve; and his allies and fubjeds
spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarmed with
reports of this kind from every quarter, as well
as with the preparations for war which they
saw begun, the deputies of the confederates
demanded audience of the Emperor, and, in
the name of their masters, required ro know
whether these military preparations were carried
on by his command, and for what end, and
against what enemy? To a question put i-n such
a tone, and at a time when fats were become
too notorious to be denied, it, was neceffarV to
give an explicit answer. -Charles owned the
orders which he had ifiued, and profefirng his
purpose not to molest any on account of religion
who should aft as dutiful fubjets ; declared
that he had nothing in view but to maintain the
rights and prerogatives of the Imperial dignity,
and, by punishing some factious members, to
preserve the ancieut conrditution of the Empire
from being impaired or dissolved by their irre-
gular and licentious condu&. Though the Em-
peror did not name the persons whom he charg-
ed with such high crimes, and destined to be
the objects of his vengeance, it was obvious

that he had the Ele&or of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi-
dering what he had said, as a plain declaration
of his hostile intentions, immediately retired
from Ratisbon. g)

The emperor's treaty with the Pope.

The Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult

matter to treat with the Pope, who havirg at
length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan
which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he propoaed. The
league was signed a few days after the Cardi-
nal's arrival at Rome. (July 26. 1546.) The
pernicious herefies which abounded in Germany,
the obstinacy of the Protestants in rejefing the
holy council assembled at Trent, and the necef-
fity of maintaining found do&rine, together
with good order in the church , are mentioned
as the motives of this union between the con-
tra.ting parties. In order to check the growth
of these evilst and to punish such as had im-
piously contributed to spread them, the Em-
peror, havirg long and without success made
trial of gender remedies, engaged instantly to
take the field with a fufficient army, that he
r.ight compel all who disowned the council, or
had apostatized from the religion of their fore-
fathers, to return into the bosom of the church,

g) Sleid. 376.

and fabmit with due obedience to the Holy See.
He likewise bound himself not to conclude a
peace with them daring fix months without the
Pope's consent, nor without afligning him his
share in any conquests which should be made
upon them; and that even after this period he
fthould not agree to any accommodation which
might be detrimental to the church, or to the
interest of religion. On his part, the Pope fti-
pulated to deposit a large fum in the bank of
Venice towards defraying the expence of the
war; to maintain, at his own charge, daring
the space of fix months, twelve thousand foot,
and five hundred horse; to grant the Emperor,
for one year, half of the ecclesiastical revenues
throughout Spain; to authorize him, by a bull,
to alienate as much of the lands, belonging to
religious houses in that country, as would
amount to the fum of five hundred thousand
crowns; and to employ not only spiritual cen-
fures, but military force against any Prince who
thould attempt to interrupt or defeat the exe-
cution of this treaty. h)

Endeavours iill to conceal his intentions from che

Protestants.

Notwithfianding the explicit terms in which

the extirpation of heresy was declared to be the
obje& of the war which was to follow upon

?) Sleid. 3X. Patlav, 255. Dumont Corps Diplom. II.

this treaty, Charles still endeavoured to persuade
the Germans that he had no design to abridge
their religious liberty, but that he aimed only
at vindicating his own authority, and repressing
the insolence of such as had encroached upon it.
With this view, he wrote circular letters in the
fame strain with his answer to the deputies at
Ratisbon, to most of the free cities, and to fe-
veral of the Princes who had embraced the Pro-
teftant dofrines. In these he complained loudly,
but in general terms, of the contempt into
which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and of
the presumptuous as well as disorderly behaviour
of some members of the Empire. He declared
that he nowv took arms, not in a religious, but:
in a civil qu arrel; *not to oppress any who con-
tinued to behave as quiet and dutiful fubjet ,
but to humble the arrogance of such as had
thrown oXT all sense of that subordination in
which they were placed under him as head of
the Germanick body. Gross as this deception
was, and manifest as it might have appeared to all
who considered the Emperor's condu& with at-
-tention, it became necessary for him to make
trial of its effe&; and fiuch was the confdence
and dexterity with Which he employed it, that
he derived the most solid advantages from this
artifice. If he had avowed at once an intention
of overturning the Protestant church, and of
reducing all Germany under its former state of
fubjeftion to the Papal See, none of the cities

or Princes who had embraced the new opinions
could have remained neutral after fueh a decla-
ration, far less could they have venturec_ to
assist the Emperor in such an enterprize. Where-
as by concealing, and even disclaiming any
intention of that kind, he not only saved him-
self from the danger of being overwhelmed by
a general confederacy of all the Protestant fta-
tes, but be furnished the timid with an excuse
for continuing inaftive, and the designing or
interested with a pretext for joining him, with-
out exposing themselves to the infamy of aban-
doning their owvn principles, or having an a&ive
hand in suppressing them. At the fame time
the Emperor well knew, that if, by their as-
fiftance, he were enabled to break the power
of the Ele&tor of Saxony and Landgrave, he
might afterwards prescribe what terms he pleas-
ed to the feeble remains of a party without
union or leaders, who would then regret, too
late, their mistaken confidence in him, and
their inconsiderate desertion of their associates.

The Pope disconcerts his plan.

The Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen dif-

play of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted
this plan which the Emperor had formed with
so much care and art. Proud of having been
the author of such a formidable confederacy
against the Lutheran heresy, and happy in think-
ing that the glory of extirpating it was reserved

For his Pontificate, he published the articles of
his league with the Emperor, in order to de-
monitrate the pious intention of their confede-
racy, as well as to djiplay his own zeal, which
prompted him to make fieh extraordinary efforts
for maintaining the faith in its purity. Not fa-
tisfied with this, he soon after issued a bull,
containing most liberal promises of indulgence
to all wio should engage in this holy enter-
prize, together with warm exhortations to such
as could not bear a part in it themselves, to in-
crease the fervour of their prayers, and the
severity of their mortifications, that they might
draw down the blessing of Heaven upon those
who undertook it. i) Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pupe to make declarations
so inconsistent with the account which the Em-
peror himself gave of his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
diflimulation in such a cause; at his seeming to
be ashamed of owning his zeal for the church,
and at his endeavours to make that pats for a
political contest, which he ought to have glo-
ried in as a war which had no other object than
the defence of religion. With as much folici-
tude, therefore, as the Emperor laboured to
disguise the purpose of the confederacy, did the
Pope endeavour to publish their real plan, in
order that they might came at once to an open

i) Du Moat Corps Diplonm,

rapture with the Protestants, that all hope of
reconcilement might be cut off, and that Char-
les might be under fewer temptations, and have
it less in his power than at present, to betray
the interests of the church by any accommoda-
tion beneficial to himfelf.k) * I

The Emperor, though not a little offended

at the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making
this discovery, continued boldly to pursue his
own plan, and to assert his intentions to be no
other than what he had originally avowed. Se-
veral of the Protestant states, whom he had
previonily gained, thought themselves justified,
in some measure, by his declarations, for aban-
doning their associates, and even for giving afiift-
ance to him.

The preparation of the Protestants for their own defence.

But these artifices did not impose on the

greater and founder part of the Protestant con-
federates. They clearly perceived it to be
against the reformed religion that the Emperor
had taken arms; and that not only the fuppref-
sion of it, but the extin6tion of the German li-
berties, would be the certain consequence of
his obtaining such an entire superiority as would
enable him to execute his schemes in their full
extent. They determined therefore, to pre-
pare for their own defence, and neither to

k) F. Paul, rgg. Thunn, Hilt. i. 61.

renounce those religious truths, to the know-
ledge of which they had attained by meand so
wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights,
which had been transmitted to them by their
ancestors. In order to give the necessary di-
re&ions for thi Mirpofe, their deputies met at
Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure from
Ratisbon. Their deliberations were now con-
du&ed with such vigour and unanimity, as the
imminent danger which threatened them requir-
ed. The contingent of troops, which each
of the confederates was to furnish, having been
fixed by the original treaty of union, orders
were given for bringing them immediately into
the field. Being sensible, at last, that through
the narrow prejudices of some of their mem-
bers, and the imprudent security of others,
they had negle&ed too long to strengthen them-
selves by foreign alliances, they now applied
with great earnestness to the Venetians and
Swiss.

They solicit the aid of the Venatians.

To the Venetians they represented the Em-

peror's intention of overturning the present syst em
of Germany, and of reafing himself to absolute
power in that country by means of foreign force
furnished by the Pope; they warned them how
fatal this event would prove to the liberties of
Italy, and that bry fuffering Charles to acquire
unlimited authority in the one country, they

would soon feel his dominion to be no less def-
potick in the other; they besought them, there-
fore , not to grant a passage through their
territories to those troops, which ought to be
treated as common enemies, because by sub-
duing Germany they prepared chains for the
reft of Europe. These refleftions had not es-
caped the sagacity of those wife republicans.
They had communicated their sentiments to the
Pope, and had endeavoured to divert him from
an alliance, which tended to render irresistible
the power of a potentate, whose ambition he
already knew to be boundless. But they had
found Paul so eager in the prosecution of his
own plan, that he disregarded all their remon-
ftrances. 1) This attempt to alarm the Pope
having proved unfuccefsful, they would do no-
thing more towards preventing the dangers
which they foresaw ; and in return to the ap-
plication from the confederates of Smalkalde,
they informed them, that they could not ob-
ftru& the nmarch of the Pope's troops through
an open country, but by levying an army strong
enough to face them in the field; and that this
would draw upon themselves the whole weight
of his as well as of the Emperor's indignation.
For the fame reason they declined lending a
fum of money, which the Ele&or of Saxonv

i) Adriani Iftoria di suo; temp: . Ev v. p. 33 .

and Landgrave proposed to borrow of themrn,
towards carrying on the war. m)

Of the Swiss.

The detlahds of the confederates upon the

Swis were not confined to the obftrucing of
the entrance oft foreigners into Germany; they
required of themh, as the nearest neighbours and
closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with
their wotited vigpur for the preservation of its
liberties, and not to stand as ina&ive fpeftators,
,while their brethren were oppressed and enfiaved.
But with whatever zeal the reformed Cantons
might have been disposed to ar when the cause
of the Reformation Was in danger, the Helve-
tick body was to divided with regard to religion,
as rendered it unsafe for the Protestants to take
any ltep without consulting their associates;
and among them the emissaries of the Pope and
Emperpr had such inlu,ence, that a refolation
of maintaiping an exit& neutrality Ietwween the
contending parties, ,wrs the utmost which could
be procured. nr

m) Sleid. 381. Paruta Iftor. Venet. tom. iv. i8o. Lamber-

tus Hortenfius de bello Germanico, apud Scardium , vol. ii.
p. 547-

ia) Sleid. 392.

Of FrurLs I. and Heury VI,

Being disappointed in both these applications,

the Protestants, not long after, had recourse to
the Kings of France and England; the approach
of danger either overcoming the Ele&or of
Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield to
the importunities of his associates. The situation
of the two Monarchs flattered them with hopes
of success. Hostilities between them had con-
tinued for some time after the peace of Crefpy;
but becoming weary at last of a war, attended
with no glory or advantage to either, they had
lately terminated all their differences by a peace
concluded at Campe near Ardres. Francis hav-
ing with great difficulty procured his allies, the
Scots, to be included in the treaty, in return
for that conceffidon he engaged to pay a great
faum, which Henry demanded as due to him on
several accounts, and he left Boulogne in the
hands of the English, as a pledge for his faithful
performance of that article. But though the
re-establishment of peace seemed to leave the
two Monarchs at liberty to turn their attention
towards Germany , so unforrunate were the
Protestants, that they derived no immediate ad-
vantage from this circumstance. Henry ap-
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the fapreme director
of their league; a pre - eminence which, as the
bonds of union or interest between them were

Hist, of Charl, V. Vo. III. A a

but feeble, and as he differed from them so
widely in his religious sentiments, they had no
inclination to admit. o) Francis, more power-
fully inclined by political considerations to afford
them assistance , found his kingdom so much
exhausted by a long war, and was so much
afraid of irritating the Pope, by entering into
close- union with excommunicated Hereticks,
that he durst not undertake the prote&ion of
the Smalkaldick league. By this ill-timed cau-
tion, or superstitious deference to scruples, to
which at other times he was not much addi&ed,
he loft the most promising opportunity of morti-
fying and distressing his rival, which presented
itself during his whole reign.

The Proteltant.R take the field with a great army.

But, notwithifanding their ill success in

their negociations with foreign courts, the con-
federates found no difficulty at home, in bring-
ing a fufficient force into the field. Germany
abounded at that time in inhabitants; the feudal
inflitutions, which subsisted in full force, en-
abled the nobles to call out their numerous
vassals, and to put them in motion on the short-
eft warning; the martial spirit of the Germans,
not broken or enervated by the introdu&ion of
commerce and arts , had acquired additional
vigour during the continual wars in which they

o) Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, 25S-

had been enployed, for half a century, either
in the pay of the Emperors, or Kings of France.
Upon every opportunity of entering into ser-
vice, they were accustomed to run eagerly to
arms; and to every standard that was ereted ,
volunteers flocked from all quarters, p) Zeal
seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour.
Men on whom the do&rines of the Reformation
had made that deep imprefilon, which accom-
panies truth when first discovered, prepared to
maintain it with proportional vigour; and among
a warlike people, it appeared infamous to re-
main ina&tive , when the defence of religion
was the motive for taking arms. Accident com-
bined with all these circumstances in facilitatingr
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being dismissed by the King on the pro-
fpeft of peace iwith England , joined in a body
the standard of the Protestants. q) By such a
concurrence of causes , they were enabled to
assemble in a few weeks an army composed of
seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse,
provided with a train of an hundred and twenty
cannon, eight hundred ammunition waggons,
eight thousand beasts of burden, and fix thou-

Aa 2

o) Thuan. 3 M;

sand pioneers. r) This army, one of the most
numerous, and undoubtedly the best appointed
of any which had been levied in Europe during
that century, was not raised by the united es-
fort of the whole Protestant body. The Ele&or
of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke
of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhalt, and the
Imperial cities of Aufbourg, Ulm, and Straf-
burg, were the only powers which contributed
towards this great armament; the ele&brs of Co-
logne and of Brandenburg, and the Count Palatine
overawed by the Emperor's threats, or deceived,
by his profeffions, remained neuter. John mar-
quis of Brandenburg Bareith, and Albert of
Brandenburg Anfpach, though both early con-
verts to Lutheranifm, entered openly into the
Emperor's service, under pretext of having ob-
tained his promise for the security of the Pro-
teftant religion; and Maurice of Saxony soon
followed their example.

The inequality of the Emperor's forces to theirs.

The number of their troops, as well as the

amazing rapidity wherewith they had assembled
them, astonished the Emperor, and filled him
with the most disquieting apprehensions. He
was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a
mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of

r) Thuan. 1. i. 601. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Commen-

mentariorum de bel. Germ. Ub. duo, Antw, 1550. I2mo.

p. 13, a.

Do great strength, whose inhabitants being
mostly Lutherans, would have been more ready
to betray than to aifft him, with -only three
thousand Spanish foot, who had served in Hun-
gary, and about five thoufaud Germans who had
joined him from different parts of the Empire,
he must have been overwhelmed by the ap-
proach of such a numerous army, which he
could not fight, nor even hope to retreat from
in safety. The Pope's troops , though in full
march to his relief, had hardly reached the
frontiers of Germany ; the forces which he ex-
pe&ed from the Low Countries, had not ver be-
gun to move, and were even far from being
complete. s) His situation, however, called
for more immediate succour, nor did it seem
praCricable for him to wait for such distant au-
xiiiaries, with whom his junction was to pre-
carious.

Th:ev :n; rua.enr:'y ne:ocia-e infteacd -, ac- ng,

But it happened forrunately for Charles.

that the confederates did nor avail themfeives
of the advantage which lay so full in their view.
In civil wars, the first steps :.re cc rrror1lv taken
with much timidity and he-ration. IVien are
solicitous, at that time, to put -on the fembiance
of moderatlon and equity ; they strive to gain
partisans by seeming to adhere frriCtry to known

*" S.e -S9 \.;4 a . $ &

forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those established institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have heen accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory, when they ought to be most
vigorous and decisive. Influenced by those con-
fiderations, which, happily for the peace of
society, operate powerfully on the human mind,
the confederates could not think of throwing
off that allegiance which they regularly owed
to the head of the Empire, or of turning their
arms against him without one solemn appeal
more to his candour, and to the impartial judg-
ment of their fellow-fubje&s. For this pur-
pose, they addreiffed (July 15. 1546.) a letter
to the Emperor, and a manifesto to all the inha-
bitants of Germany. The tenonr of both was
the fame. They represented their own conduf
with regard to civil affairs as dutiful and sub-
missive; they mentioned the inviolable union in
which they had lived with the Emperor, as well
as the many and recent marks of his good - will
and gratitude wherewithal they had been ho-
n oured ; they asserted religion to be the sole
cause of the violence which the Emperor now
meditated against them; and in proof of this
produced many arguments to convince those
who were to weak as to be deceived by the ar-
tifices with which he endeavoured to cover his
real intentions; they declared their own refolu-
tion to risk every thing in maintenance of their

religious rights, and foretold the dissolution of
the German constitution, if the Emperor should
finally prevail against them. t)

The Emperor p~ts them under the ban cf the Empire.

Charles, though in such a perilous situation

as might have inspired him with moderate fen-
timents, appeared as inflexible and haughty as
if his affairs had been in the most prosperous
state. His only reply to the address and mani-
fefto of the Protestants, was to publish (July
20. I546.) the ban of the Empire against the
EleFtor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, their
leaders, and against all who should dare to aflift
them. By this sentence, the ultimate and mofl
rigorous one which the German jurisprudence
has provided for the punishment of traitors , or
enemies to their country, they were declared
rebels and outlaws, and deprived of every pri-
vilege which they enjoyed as members of the
Germanick body; their goods were confiscated;
their fubjefts absolved from their oath of alle-
giance; and it became not only lawful but me-
ritorious to invade their territories. The no-
bles, and free cities, who framed or perfeCted
the constitution of the German Government ,
bad not been to negligent of their own safety
and privileges as to trust the Emperor with this
formidable jurifdiftion. The aluthority of a diet

* Sleid. 3P4,

of the Empire ought to have been interposed
before any of its members could be put under
the ban. But Charles overlooked that formality.
well knowing that, if his arms were crowned
with success, there would remain none who
would have either power or courage to call in
question what he had done. u) The Emperor,
however, did not found his sentence against
the Eletor and Landgrave on their revolt from
the established church, or their condut with
regard to religion; he affe&ed to assign for it
reasons purely civil, and those too expressed in
such general and ambiguous terms , without
specifying- the nature or circumfftances of their
guilt, as rendered it more like an a&t of def-
potick power than of a legal and limited jurif-
dition. Nor was it altogether from choice, or
to conceal his intentions, that Charles had re-
course to the ambiguity of general exprefflions;
he durit not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every afion which he could
have charged upon the Eleftor and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal justice to condemn many of the Protestants
whom he still pretended to confider as faithful
fubje6fs, and whom it would have been extre-
mely imprudent to alarm or disgust.

u) Sleid. 386. Du Mont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. i. 314.

Pfeffel Hilt. Abregde du Droit Publ. I68. 736. 155.

They declare war against Charles.

The confederates, now perceiving all hopes

of accommodation to be at an end, had only to
choose whether they would submit without re-
serve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hofiilities. They were not destitute ofpublick
spirit and resolution to make the proper choice.
A few days after the ban of the Empire was
published, they, according to the cufrom of
that age, sent a herald to the Imperial camp
with a solemn declaration of war againfr Char-
les, to whom they no longer gave any other
title than that of pretended Emperor, and re-
nounced all allegiance, homage or duty which
he might claim, or they had hitherto yielded
to him.

Their first operations;

But previous to this formality, part of their

troops had begun to at. The command of a
considerable body of men raised by the city of
Augsburg having been given to Sebastian Scher-
tel, a soldier of fortune, who by the booty
that he got when the Imperialifis plundered
Rome, together with the merit of long service.
had acquired wealth and authority which placed
him on a level with the chief of the German
nobles : that gallant veteran resolved, before
he joined the main body of the confederates, to
attempt something suitable to his former fame.
and to the expe&ation of his countrymen. As

the Pope's forces were hastening towards Tyrol,
in order to penetrate into Germany by the nar-
row passes through the mountains which run
across that country, he advanced thither with
:the utmost rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and
Cuffftein, two strong castles which commanded
the principal defiles. Without flopping a mo-
ment, he continued his march towards Infpruck,
by getting poffeflion of which he would have
obliged the Italians to flop short, and with a
small body of men could have resifted all the
efforts of the greateif armies. Caftlealto, the
governor of Trent, knowing what a fatal blow
this would be to the Emperor, all whose de-
signs must have proved abortive if his Italian
auxiliaries had been intercepted, raised a few
troops with the utmost dispatch, and threw him-
self into the town. Schertel, however, dd
not abandon the enterprize, and was preparing
to attack the place, when the intelligence of
the approach of the Italians, and an order from
the Eleft6r and Landgrave, obliged him to de-
sift. By his retreat the passes were left open,
and the Italians entered Germany without any
opposition, but from the garrisons which Scher-
tel had placed in Ehrenberg and Cuffftein, and
these having no hopes of being relieved, fur-
rendered, after a short resistance. v) *

v) Seckend. lib. ii. 7o. Adriani Iftoria di fuoi tempi, lib. I 3S5.
'1 Seckendorf, the induitrious author of the Commentari'as

Apolog;eicus tle Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long and

and ill condurt.

" '

Nor was the recalling of Schertel the only

error of which the confederates were guilty.
As the supreme command of their army was
committed, in terms of the league of Smalkalde
to the Ele&or of Saxony and Landgrave of
Hesse with equal authority, all the inconveni-
encies arising from a divided and co-ordinate
authority, which is always of fatal consequence
in the operations of war, were immediately felt.
The Ele&tor, though intrepid in his own per-
son to excess, and most ardently zealous in the
cause, was flow in deliberating, uncertain as
well as irresolute in his determinations, and
constantly preferred measures which were cau-
tious and safe, to such as were bold or decisive.
The Landgrave , of a more aftive and enter-
prifing nature, formed all his resolutions with
promptitude , wished to execute them with
:pirit, and uniformly preferr-ed such schemes as

iifel\ foilowe 7 . ?s ti. -:^e i; German alTaiwr , was art ;
icendent from SLicrr:e. W.tbh e e rre and feti'ltude of
a Germr.r . c:., ' -.. hr

,

bir el of

o noble birth , Seckeiondrf

r. .s Fubib'.'hec *. loi: d'c-:efmc-n concernig hsl. anceio Lt
calculated ciefi:- ro -T.ow i.cw- Schertel WVs tenrbie, .
,rd h. po. teri: aI.)ec :o ,raiiy cf tie

r i? ti cietm fasi-

ies E.in the EIn.pire. Amrrrn o:i :er curiou prt:tilnrs, he
ii ~ s us a: c.iilu: of ih', \ e::th , the Eilef i'ouree of
 ir.c- vHp- -!.*, Iur-,Ler ;.e ;,o: a: Rnrne, iP lai:)do d eftatt-
V4

,A s ic . ;- L;?. . ;:,.-.d: .-

" f .xl hj lnr.rrd fh!iiutlld florioi.

B ,- :his ~-t :',." ;Orru. ;i;:i; e l..e, ,:

, e ti t.' * ti'nP .$ d by

L:'e Co i-

- ::.e: . o: .,): .-;ir

,.. r. :." erc.

; r- r .r- .tl-n pd i,

tr^: .
: ;:e t~r.^..: -: ^- ^C Z

h rtf.

1i oi'y)

<aptl:S~; S-= k;ue ii: ;, 7

?

tended to bring the contest to a speedy issue.
Thus their maxims, with regard to the condudt
of the war, differed as widely as those by
which they were influenced in preparing for it.
Such perpetual contrariety in their sentiments
gave rife, imperceptibly, to jealousy and the
spirit of contention. These multiplied the dif-
fentions flowing from the incompatibility of their
natural temper, and rendered them more vio-
lent. The other members of the league confi-
dering themselves as independent, and fubjet
to the EleCtor and Landgrave, only in consequence
of the articles of a voluntary confederacy, did
not long retain a proper veneration for com-
manders, who proceeded with so little unani-
mity; and the numerous army of the Protest-
ants, like a vast machine whose parts are ill
compa&ed, and which is destitute of any power
fufficient to move and regulate the whole, ated
with no consistency, vigour, or effe&t.

The Pope's troops join the Emperor.

The Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-

maining at Ratisbon, he might render it impof-
fible for the Pope's forces to join him, having
boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft ftome days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the ter-
ritories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they sudden-

ly abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave
only a small garrison. By this time the papal
trobps, amounting fully to that number vWhich
Paul had stipulated to furnish, had reached
Landshut, and were soon followed by fix thou-
sand Spaniards of the veteran bands ifationed in
Naples. The confederates, after Schertel's
spirited but fruitless expedition, seem to have
permitted these forces to advance unmolested to
the place of rendez-vous, without any attempt
to attack either them or the Emperor fepara-
tely, or to prevent their junaion. x) The Im-
perial army amounted now to thirty-fix thou-
sand men, and was still more formidable by the
discipline and valour of the troops, than by their
number. Avila, commendador of Alcantara,
who had been present in all the wars carried
on by Charles, and had served in the armies
which gained the memorable vitory at Pavia,
which conquered Tunis, and invaded France ,
gives this the preference to any martial force he
had ever seen assembled. y) O&avio Farnese,
the Pope's grandson, assisted by the ablest offi-
cers formed in the long wars between Charles
and Francis, commanded the auxiliaries. His
brother, the Cardinal Farnese , accompanied
him as papal legate; and in order to give the

x) Adriani Itoria de fuoi tempi, lib, , 340,

y) Avilt, l.

war the appearance of a religious enterprize,
b1 proposed to march at the head of the army,
with a crots carried before him, and to publish
indulgences wherever he came, to all who
should give them any affifttance, as had ancientZ
ly been the praftice in the Crusades against
the Infidels. But this the Emperor ftriftly pro-
hibited, as inconsistent with all the declarations
which he had made to the Germans of his own
party; and the legate perceiving, to his afto-
nifhment, that the exercise of the Protestant
ieligion, the extirpationi of which he confldered
as the sole obje& of the war, was publickly
permitted in the Imperial camp, soon returned
in disgust to Italy. z)

The arrival of there troops enabled the Em-

peror to fend such a reinforcement to the garri-
son at Ratisbon, that the confederates, relin-
quifhing all hopes of reducing that town, march-
ed toWairds Ingolstadt on the Danube, near
to which Charles was now encamped. They
exclaimed loudly against the Emperor's noto-
rious violation of the laws and constitution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to
lay waste Germany, and to oppress its liber-
ties. As in that age, the dominion of the
Roman See was to odious to the Protestants,
that the name of the Pope alone was fufficient
to inspire them with horror at any enterprize

z) F. Paul, iq1

which he countenanced . and to raise in their
minds the blackef suspicions; it came to be
universally believed among them, that Paul,
not satisfied with attacking them openly by force
of arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over
Germany, to set on fire their towns and ma-
gazines, and to poison the wells and fountains
of water. Nor did this rumour spread only
among the vulgar, being extravagant as well
as frightful enough to make a deep impreflion
on their credulity; even the leaders of the
party, blinded by their prejudices, published
a declaration, in which they accused the Pope
of having employed such Antichriftian and dia-
bolical arts against them. a) These sentiments
of the confederates were confirmed, in some
measure, by the behaviour of the papal troops,
who, thinking nothing too rigorous towards
Hereticks anathematized by the church, were
guilty of great excesses in the Lutheran terri-
tories, and aggravated the calamities of war,
by mingling with it all the cruelty of bigoted
zeal.

The confederates advance towards the imperiai armz

The first operations in the field, however,

did not correspond with the violence of those
passions which animated individuals. The Em-
peror had prudently taken the resolution of

a) Stiid 399.

avoiding ant akion with an enemy so far fu-
petior in number, b) especially as he foresaw
that nothing could keep a body composed of so
many and such dissimilar members from falling
to pieces, but the pressing to attack it with an
inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates,
though it was no less evident that to them
every moment's delay was pernicious, were
lill prevented by the weakness or division of
their leaders from exerting that vigour, with
which their situation, as well as the ardour of
their soldiers, ought to have inspired them.
On their arrival at Ingolstadt, ( August. 29.
1546. ) they found the Emperor in a camp
not remarkable for strength, and surrounded
only by a flight entrenchment. Before the
camp lay a plain of such extent, as afforded
fufficient space for drawing out their whole
army, and bringing it to a& at once. Every
consideration should have determined them to
haveifeized this opportunity of attacking the
Emperor; and their vast superiority in numbers,
the eagerness of their troops, together with
the stability of the German infantry in pitched
battles, afforded them the most probable ex-
pefation of vi&ory. The Landgrave urged
this with great warmth, declaring that if the
sole command were vested in him, he would
terminate the war on that occasion, and decide

by

b) Avila, 78, 6.

by one general action the fate of the two par-
ties. But the EIeftor, reflet&ing on the valour
and discipline of the enemy's forces, animated
by the presence of the Emperor, and condu&ed
by the best officers of the age , would not
venture upon an action, which he thought to
be so doubtful, as the attacking such a bodv
of veterans on ground which they themselves
had chosen, and while covered by fortifications
which, though imperfet , would afford them
no small advantage in the combat. Notwith-
standing his hesitation and remonftrances, it
was agreed to advance towards the enemy's
camp, in battle array, in order to make a trial
whether by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw
the Imperialists out of their works.

The Emperor declines a battle.

But the Emperor had too much sagacity to

fall into this snare. He adhered to his own
system with inflexible constancy; and drawing
up his soldiers behind their trenches, that they
might be ready to receive the confederates if
they Thould venture upon an assault, calmly
waited their approach; and carefully restrained
his own men from any excursions or fkirmiihes
which might bring on an engagement. Mean-
while, he rode along the lines, and addrefflng
the troops of the different nations in their own
language, encouraged them by the cheerfulne f

Hist. ofCharl. V, Vo, III, B b

of his voice and countenance; he exposed him-
self in places of greatest danger, and amidst
the warmest fire of the enemy's artillery, the
mnoft ~nmerous that had hitherto been brought
into the field by any army. Roused by his
example, not a man quitted his ranks; it was
thought infamous to discover any symptom of
fear when the Emperor appeared so intrepid ;
and the meanest soldier plainly perceived, that
their declining the combat at present was not
the effe&t of timidity in their general, but the
result of a well weighed caution. The confe-
derates , after firing several hours on the Im-
perialifts , with more noise and terror than
execution , feeing no profpet of alluring them
to fight on equal terms, retired to their own
camp. The Emperor employed the night with
such diligence in strengthening his works, that
the confederates, returning to the cannonade
next day, found that, though they had now
been willing to venture upon such a bold ex-
periment, the opportunity of making an attack
with advantage was loft. c)

The Flemish troops join the Emperor.

After such a discovery of their own feeble-

ness or irresolution, and of the prudence as well
as firmness of the Emperor's condu&t, the con-
federates turned their whole attention towards

c) Sleid. 395. 397. Avila ,

7 , a. Lamb. HortenC apb

Scard. ii.

preventing the arrival of a powerful reinforce-
ment of ten thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, which the count de Buren was bringing
to the Emperor from the Low countries. But
though that general had to traverse such an
extent of country; though his route lay through
the territories of several states warmly disposed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach , and by their vast
fuperioritv in numbers might easily have detach-
ed a force fufficient to overpower him, he ad-
vanced with such rapidity, and by such well
concerted movements, while they opposed him
wirh such remiirnefs, and so little military skill,
that he condu&ted this body (Sept. 10. 1546.)
to the Imperial camp without any lois. d)

Stzre of borh armes.

Upon the arrival of the Flemings, in whom

he placed great confidence, the Emperor altrer-
ed, in some degree, his p(an cf operations,
and began to aet more uipCn the offenrve,
though he still avoided a buirle wvith the utnoft
industry. He made himself mnfter of fNeuh'rg.
Dillingen , and Donawert on the Danube; of
Nordlingen, and several other towns. fr'?ted
on the most considerable frreams which ftl, into
that mighty river. By this he got the command

Bb

-

*} Sleild, 40

of a great extent of country, though not with-
out being obliged to engage in several sharp
encounters, of which the success was various,
nior without the most imminent danger, oftener
than once, of being drawn into a battle. In
this manner the whole autumn was spent;
neither party gained any remarkable superiority
over the other , and nothing was yet done
towards bringing the war to a period. The
Emperor had often foretold, with confidence,
that discord and the want of money would
compel the confederates to disperse that unwiel-
dy body, which they had neither abilities to
guide, nor funds to support; e) but though he
waited with impatience for the accomplifhnent
of his predition, there was no profpe& of that
event being at hand. Meanwhile he himself
began to fuffer from the want of forage and
provisions even the Catholick provinces being
to much incensed at the introdu&ion of for-
eigners into the Empire , that they supplied
them with relu&ance, while the camp of the
confederates abounded with a profusion of all
necessaries, which the zeal of their friends in
the adjacent countries furnished with the utmost
liberality and good will. Great numbers of the
Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the cli-
mate or food of Germany, were become unfit

e) Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Graeco fermone fcriptns a

Joach. Camerario, ap. Frehcrum. vol. iii. p. 479-

for service through sickness. f) Considerable
arrears were now due to the troops, who had
scarcely received any money from the beginning
of the campaign; the Emperor, experiencing
on this, as well as on former occasions, thar
his jurifdi&tion was more extensive than his re-
venues , and that the former enabled him to as-
femble a greater number of soldiers, than the
latter were fufficient to pay. Upon all these
accounts, he found it difficult to keep his army
in the field; some of his ablest generals, and
ev en the Duke of Alva himself, persevering and
obflinace as he usually was in the profecuion
of every measure, advising him to disperse his
troops into winter-quarters. But as the argu-
ments urged against any- plan which he had
adopted, rarely made much impreflion upon the
Emperor. he paid no regard to their opinion

,

and deterermned to continue his eforts in order
to weary ou: the confederates; being well as-
sured that if he could once oblige them to fe-
parate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body. g) Stil, howe\er, it
remained a doubtful point , whether his ften-
dinefs was most likely to fail, or their zeal to
be exhausted. It was frili uncertain which
party , by irft dividing its forces, would give
the fuperiorirv to the other; when an auetpeeti-

D * L

ed event decided the contest, and occasioned a
fatal reverse in the affairs 9f the confederates.

The schemes of Maurice of Saxony.

1Maurice of Saxony having insinuated him-

seif into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts
which have already been described, no sooner
Law hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
profpefts of ambition began to open upon him.
That .portion of Saxony, which descended to
him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying
his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea-
sure the approach of civil war, as amidst the
revolutions and convulsions occasioned by it,
opportunities of acquiring additional power or
dignity, which at other times are fought in
vain , present themselves to an enterprising
spirit. As he was thoroughly acquainted with
the tate of the two contending parties, and
the qualities of their leaders, he did not hefi-
tate long in determining on which fide the
greatest advantages were to be expefted. Hav-
ing revolved all these things in his own mind,
and having taken his final resolution of joining
the Emperor,, he prudently determined to de-
clare early in his favour; that by the merit of
this, he might acquire a title to a proportional
recompense.

His league witt~ t~he Emperor.

With this view, he had repaired to Ratif,

bon in the month of May, under pretext of
attending the diet ; and after many conferences
with Charles or his ministers, he, with the
most mvfteric us secrecy, concluded a treaty, in
which he engaged to concur in alifring the Em-
peror as a faithful fubjeEt; and Charles, in re-
turn, fripulated to befrow on him all the spoils
of the E-lefor of Saxony, his dignities as well
as territories, h) Hifrory hardly records any
treaty that can be considered as a more manifest
vio'arion of the mofi powerful principles which
ought to influence human aEtions. Maurice ,
a profeffed Protefrant, at a time when the be-
lief of religion, as well as zeal for its inrerefts,
took strong poffefilon of every mind, binds him-
self to contribute his aflifrance towards carrying
on a war which had manifestly no other object
than the extirpation of the Protestant do&rines.
He engages to rake arms againfi his father-in-
law, and to strip his nearest relation of his
honours and dominions. He loins a dubious
friend again- a known benefaEtor, to whom
his obligations were both great and recent.
Nor was the Prince who ventured upon all this,
one of those audacious politicians, who, pro-
vided they can accompliih their ends. and fe-
cure their interest, avowedly disregard the mofl

') Harr" Anrn. B-aban:, vo:. . t'3S,. S::-uvil Corp. o45-

sacred obligations, and glory in contemning
whatever is honourable or decent. Maurice's
condu&, if the whole mnuit be ascribed to po-
licy, was more artful and rnafterly; he executed
his plan in all its parts, and yet endeavoured
to preserve, in every step which he took, the
appearance of what was fair, and virtuous, and
laudable. It is probable, from his subsequent
behaviour, that, with regard to the Protestant
religion at least, his intentions were upright,
that he fondly trusted to the Emperor's pro-
miles for its security, but that, according to
the fate of all who refine too much in policy,
and who tread in dark and crooked paths, in
attempting to deceive others, he himself was ,
in some degree, deceived.

His artifices in order to conceal his intentions.

His first care, however, was to keep these

engagements with the Emperor closely conceal-
ed: and so perfe6t a master was he in the art
of diffiimulation, that the confederates, not-
withstanding his declining all connexions with
them, and his remarkable assiduity in paying
court to the Emperor, seemed to have enter-
tained no suspicion of his designs. Even the
Ele&or of Saxony, when he marched at the
rbeginning of the campaign to join his associates,
committed his dominions to Maurice's protec-
tion, which he, with an insidious appearance

of friendship, readily undertook. i) But cfear-
cely had the Elector taken the field, when Mau-
rice began to consult privately with the King
of the Romans how to invade those very terri-
tories, with the defence of which he was en-
trusted. Soon after, the Emperor sent him a
copy of the Imperial ban denounced against the
EleAor and Landgrave. As he was next heir
to the former, and particularly interested in
preventing f:rangers from getting his dominions
into their poffeffion, Charles required him, not
only for his owvn fake, but upon the allegiance
and duty which he owed to the head of the
Empire, instantly to seize and detain in his
hands the forfeited estates of the Eleclor . warn-
ing him, at the fame time, that if he neglect-
ed to obey these commands, he should be held
as accessary to the crimes of his kinsman, and
be liable to the fame punifnment. k)

This artifice, which it is probable Maurice

himself suggested , was employed ty him in
order that his conduct towards the Elector
might seem a matter of neceiirty but not of
choice, an act of obedience to his superior,
rather than a voluntary invasion of the rights of
his kinsman and ally. But in order to give
some more specious appearance to this thin veil.
with which he endeavoured to cover his ambi-

"-) S:-_Dv: CrF-. 1046.

;, S e;i, 3$cz. Thu $

g

tion, he, soon after his return from Ratisbon,
had called together the states of his country;
and representing to them that a civil war be-
tween the Emperor and confederates of Smal-
kalde was now become unavoidable , desired
their advice with regard to the part which he
should at in that event. They being prepared,
no doubt, and tutored beforehand, as well as
desirous of gratifying their Prince, whom they
bath esteemed and loved, gave such counsel as
they knew would be most agreeable ; advising
him to offer his mediation towards reconciling
the contending parties; but if that were reje&t-
ed, and he could obtain proper security for the
Protestant religion, they delivered it as their
opinion that, in all other points, he ought to
yield obedience to the Emperor. Upon receiv-
ing the Imperial rescript, together with the
ban, against the Eletor and Landgrave, Maurice
summoned the states of his country a second
time; he laid before them the orders which he
had received, and mentioned the punishment
with which he was threatened in cafe of dif-
obedience; he acquainted them that the confede-
rates had refused to admit of his mediation, and
that the Emperor had given him the most fatif-
fa&ory declarations with regard to religion; he
pointed out his own interest in securing posses-
sion of the. electoral dominions, as well as the
danger of allowing f&rangers to obtain an efta-
blifhment in Saxony; and upon the whole, as

the point under deliberation refpeEted his sub-
je&s no less than himself, he desired to know
their sentiments, how he should freer in that
difficult and arduous conjun&ure. The states,
no less obsequious and complaisant than for-
merly, relying on the Emperor's promises as a
perfe&t security for their religion , proposed
that, before he had recourse to more violent
methods, they would write to the EleEror, ex-
horting him, as the best means , nor only of
appeasing the Emperor, but of preventing his
dominions from being seized by foreign or bof-
tile powers, to give his consent that Maurice
should take poffeffion of them quietly and with-
out opposition. Maurice himself seconded their
arguments in a letter to the Landgrave, his
father-in-law. Such an extravagant proposition
was rejeEted with the scorn and indignation
which it deferred. The Landgrave, in return
to Maurice, taxed him with his treachery and
ingratitude towards a kinsman to whom he was
so deeply indepted: he treated with contempt
his affetation of executing the Imperial ban,
which he could not but know to be altogether
void by the unconstitutional and arbitrary man-
ner in which it had been issued: he besought
him. not to fuffer himself to be to far blinded
by ambition. as to forget the obligations of
honour and friendship. or to betray the Pro-
reftant religion, the extirpation of which out
of Germany, even by the acknowledgment of

the Pope himself, was the great objet of the
present war. 1)

He invades the territories of the Ele&or of Saxony.

But Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-

verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or
arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-
cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried
on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his
boldness in a&ion inferior to his subtlety in con-
trivance. Having assembled about twelve thou-
sand men, he fu4denly (November 1546.) in-
vaded one part of the eletoral provinces, while
Ferdinand, with an army composed of Bohemi-
ans and Hungarians, overran the other. Mau.
rice, in two fbarp encounters, defeated the
troops which the Ele&ar had left to guard hii
country; and improving these advantages to the
utmost, made himself master of the whole Elec-
torate , except Wittemberg, Gotha, andEifen.
ach, which being places ofconfiderable strength
and defended by futfficient garrisons, refused t(
open their gates. The news of these rapid con
quests soon reached the Imperial and confede
rate camps. In the former, their fatisfaftioi
with an event, which it was foreseen would b
produaive of the most important consequences
was expressed by every possible demonftratioj

I) Sleid. 405, &c. Thuan.. 85. Gamerar. 4g4.

or joy. The latter was filled with aftonifl ment
and terror. The name of Maurice was men-
tioned with execration , as an apofrate from re-
ligion, a betrayer of the German liberty, and a
contemner of the most sacred and natural ties.
Ever- thing that the rage or invention of the
party could suggest, in order to blacken and ren-
der him odious; inveftives, satires and lam-
poons, the furious declamations of their prea-
chers, together with the rude wit of their au-
thors, were all employed against him. WVhile
he, trusting to the arts which lie had so long
prafrifed, as if his aEtions could have admirred
of any serious justification. publifTed a mam-
fefto, containing the fame frivolous reasons for
his condnt&, wvhich he had formerly alleged in
the meeting of his frates, and his letter to the
Landgrave. m)

Tie confedera:re r mae cvertures of acrc rnTrov ator :c

. the

The Ele&or. upon the firt intelligence .of

Maurice's motions. proposed to return home
with his troops for the defence of Saxony. Bu;
the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm .
prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with
the army, and to prefer the success of the com-
mon cause before the fecurirv of his own domi-
nions. At length the fufferings and complaints

tRi S eld. <:-o A IC

of his fubjefts increased so much, that he dif-
covered the utmost impatience to set out, in
order to rescue them from the oppreflion of
Maurice, and from the cruelty of the Hunga-
rians, who, having been accustomed to that li-
centious and merciless species of war which was
thought lawful against the Turks, committed,
wherever they came, the wildest a&ts of rapine
and violence. This desire of the Ele&tor was
so natural and so warmly urged, that the de-
puties at Ulm, though fully sensible of the un-
happy consequences of dividing their army,
durst not refuse their consent, how unwilling
soever to grant it. In this perplexity, they
repaired to the camp of the confederates at Gien-
gen on the Brenz, in order to consult their con-
ftituents. Nor were they less at a loss what
to determine in this pressing emergence. But,
after having considered seriously the open defer-
tion of some of their allies; the scandalous luke-
warmness of others, who had hitherto con-
tributed nothing towards the war; the into-
lerable load which had fallen of consequence
upon such members as were most zealous for
the cause, or most faithful to their engagements;
the ill success of all their endeavours to obtain
foreign aid; the unusual length of the campaign;
the rigour of the season; together with the
great number of soldiers, and even officers, who
had quitted the service on that account; they
concluded that nothing could save them, but

either the bringing the contest to the immediate
decision of a battle by attacking the Imperial
army, or an accommodation of all their differ-
ences with Charles by a treaty. Such was the
despondency and dejeEtion which now oppress-
ed the party, that of these two they chose what
was most feeble and unmanly, empowering a
minister of the EleFor of Brandenburg to pro-
pound overtures of peace in their name to the*
Emperor.

w-hich he rejet s.

No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty,

confederacy, which had to lately threatened to
drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the first advances towards an agreement,
than conciuding th'eir spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed
the tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had
been already at his mercy, would not hear of
a negociation, but upon condition of the Elector
of Saxony's cenfenting previously to give up
himself and his dominions absolutely to his dif-
pofal. n) As nothing more intolerable or igno-
minious could have been prescribed, even in
the worst situation of their affairs , it is no
wonder that this proposition was reje&ted by a
party , humbled and disconcerted rather than
fubdu ed,

i) Hortenfi.s: aS . Scard. ,, 45.:

The troops of the confederacy separate.

But though they refused to submit tamely

to the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to
pursue the only plan which could have preserved
their independence; and forgetting that it was
the union of their troops in one body which had
hitherto rendered the confederacy formidable,
and had more than once obliged the Imperialists
to think of quitting the field, they inconfidera-
tely abandoned this advantage , which, in spite
of the diversion in Saxony, would still have
kept the Emperor ift awe; and yielding to the
EleCor's entreaties, consented to his proposal
of dividing the army. Nine thousand men were
left it the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in order to
protest that province, as well as the free cities
of Upper Germany ; a considerable body marched
with the Eletor towards Saxony; but the great-
er part returned with their refpe~&ive leaders
into their own countries, and were dispersed
there. o)

Almost ,all the members of it submit to the Emperor.

The monient that the troops separated, the

confederacy ceased to be the objeCt of terror;
and the members of it, who, while they com-
posed part of a great body, had felt but little
anxiety about their own security, began tc

tremblE

.) Sleid. 4UZ.

tremble when they refle&ed, that they now
stood exposed singly to the whole weight of the
Emperor's vengeance. Charles did not allow
them leifare to recover from their consternation,
or to form any new schemes of union. As soon
as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the
depth of winter, he resolved to keep the field,
in order to make the most of that favourable
junclure for which he had waited so long. Some
small towns, in which the enemy had left gar-
rifons, immediately opened their gates. Nord-
lingen, Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could not
prevent the EleEtor from levying, as he re-
treated, large contributions upon the archbi-
shop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclefiafticks, p) this was more than balanced
by the submission of Ulm , one of the cities of
Saabia, highly distinguished by its zeal for the
Smalkaldick league. As soon as an example
was set of deserting the common cause, the
reft of the members became instantly impatient
to follow it, and seemed afraid left others . by
getting the start of them in returning to their
duty, should, on that account, obtain more
favourable terms. The Ele&tor Palatine, a weak
Prince, who, notwithstanding his profefilons
of neutrality, had, very prepofterouflvy, sent

p) Thuan. Sg.

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. 111. C s

to the confederates four hundred horse; a bo-
dy so inconsiderable as to be scarcely any ad-
dition to their strength, but great enough to
tender him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the most abjet
manner. The inhabitants of A'gfDurg, fnaken
by so many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleased to
grant them.

The Duke of Wurtenberg, though among

the first who had o ered to fabmit , was oblig-
ed to sue for pardon on his knees; and even
after this mortifying humiliation, obtained it
with difficulty. q) Memminrgen, and other free
cities in the circle of Suabia, being now aban-
doned by all their former associates, found it
necessary to provide for their own safety , by
throwing themselves on the Emperor's mercy.
Strafburg and Frankfort on the Maine, cities
far remote from the feat of danger, difcoveredc
no greater steadiness than those which lay
tmore exposed. Thus a confederacy, lately so
powerfuli as to shake the Imperial throne,
fell to pieces', and was dissolved in the space
of a few weeks; hardly any member of that
formidable combination frow remaining in arms,
but the EleCtor and Landgrave, whom the
Emperor, having from the beginning marked out

q) Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 589.

as the vi&tims of his vengeance, was at no pains
to reconcile.

The rigorous conditions imposed by rhe Emperor.

Nor did he grant those who fabmitted to

him a generous and unconditional pardon. Con-
fcioas of his own superiority, he treated them
both with haughtiness and rigour. All the
Princes in person, and the cities by their de-
puties, were compelled to implore mercy in the
humble pofitre of fapplicants. As the Emperor
laboured under great difficulties from the want
of money, he imposed heavy fines upon them,
which he levied with most rapacious exa&nefs.
The Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred
thousand crowns; the city of Augsburg an
hundred and fifty thonfand; Ulm an hundred
thousand ; Frankfort eighty thousand; Meme.
mingen fifty thousand; and the reft in propor-
tion to their abilities, or their different degrees
of guilt. They were obliged, besides, to re-
nounce the league of Smalkalde; to fTrnifh
afiftance, if required, towards executing the
Imperial ban against the Ele&tor and Land rave;
to give up their artillery and warlike sores to
the Emperor; to admit garrifors into their prin-
cipal cities and places of strength; and, in this
disa~rmed and dependent Etaation to expeLt
the final award which the Emperor tfhuld
think proper to pronounce when the war came

Cc a

to an issue. r) But, admidft the great variety
of articles di&ated by Charles on this occasion,
he, in conformity to his original plan, took
care that bothing relating to religion Thould be
insetted; and to such a degree were the confe-
derates humbled or over-awed, that, forgetting
the zeal which had to long animated them,
they were solicitous only about their safety,
without venturing to insist on a point, the men-
tion of which they saw him avoiding with so
much industry. The inhabitants of Memmin-
gen alone made some feeble efforts to procure
a promise of prote&ion in the exercise of <their
religion, but were checked so severely by the
Emperor's ministers, that they instantly fell
from their demand.

The Eletor of Cologne, whom, nothwith-

flanding the fentenee of excommunication issued
against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in poffeffion of the archi-
episcopal fee, being now required by the Em-
peror to submit to the censures of the church;
this virtuous and disinterested prelate, unwil-
ling to expose his fubjeas to the miseries of a
war on his own account, voluntarily resigned
(Jan. 25. 1547.) that high dignity. With a
moderation becoming his age and chara&er,
he chose to enjoy truth together with the
exercise of his religion in the retirement of a

rj Sleid. 411x. &c. Thuan, lib. iv. p. 125. Mern, de Ribier,

tom. i. 60o6.

private life, rather than to difrurb society by
engaging in a doubtful and violent struggle in
order to retain his office.s)

The Eteftor returns to Saxony, and recovers pofefion of it.

Meanwhile the Ele&cor of Saxony reached

the frontiers of his country unmolested. As
Maurice could assemble no force equal to the
army which accompanied him, he, in a short
time, not only recovered poTfeiion of his own
territories, but over- ran Mifnia, and firipped
his rival of all that belonged to him, except
Dresden and Leipfic, which, being towns of
some strength, could not be suddenly rediaced
Maurice. obliged to quit the field. and to shut
himself up in his capital, dispatched courier
after courier to the Emperor. reprefentinr his
dangerous situation, and soliciting him with the
most earnest importunity to march immnediately
to his relief. But Charles, busy at that time
in prescribing terms to such members of the
league as were daily returning to their allegiance,
thought it fufficient to detach Albert Marquis of
Brandenburg - Anfpach with th:ee thouifand men
to his assistance. Albert, though an enterprif-
ing and active oaicer, was unexpecredly far-
prized by the Ele&or, who killed many of his
troops, dispersed the remainder, and took him

A1 Sleid. 41S. T an. .ib_ iv Ir.

prisoner, t) M1Iaurice continued as much ex-
posed as formerly; and if his enemy had known
how to improve the opportunity which present-
ed itself, his ruin must have been immediate
and unavoidable. But the Eletor, no less flow
and dilatory when invested with the sole com-
mand, than he had been formerly when joined
in authority with a partner, never gave any
proof of military ativity but in this enterprize
against Albert. Instead of marching direatly
towards Maurice, whom the defeat of his ally
had greatly alarmed, he inconsiderately listened
to overtures of accommodation, which his artful
antagonist proposed with no other intention than
to amuse him, and to slacken the vigour of his
operations.

The Emperor prevented from attacking the Ele&or and

Landgrave.

Such, indeed, was the poRture of the Em-

peror's affairs that he could not march instantly
to the relief of his ally. Soon after the fepa-
ration of the confederate army, he, in order to
ease himself of the burden of maintaining a
superfluous number of troops, had dismissed the
count of Buren with his Flemings, u) imagin-
ing that the Spaniards and Germans, together
with the papal forces, would be fully fufficient

t) Avila, 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier, torn. i. 62o.

u) Avila, 83. 6. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 59g .

to crufn any degree of vigaur that yet remained
among the members of the league. But Paul,
growing wife too late, began now to discern
the imprudence of that measure ,. from which
the more sagacious Venetians had endeavoured
in vain to dissuade him. The rapid progress of
the Imperial arms, and the ease with which
they had broken a combination that appeared no
less firm than powerful, opened his eyes at
length, and made him not only forget at once
all the advantages which he had expeted from
such a complete triumph over heresy, but placed,
in the strongest light, his own impolitick con-
daLc, in having contributed towards acquiring
for Charles fach an imnnenfe increase of power ,
as would enable him, after oppreifng the liber-
ties of Germany, to give law with absolute
authority to all the states of Italy.

The Pope recalls his rroops.

The moment that he peroeived his error,

he endeavoured to correct it. Without giving
the Emperor any warning of his intention, he
ordered Farnese, his grandson, to return in-
ftantly to Italy with all the troops under his
command , and at the fame time recalled the
licence which he had granted Charles, of ap-
propriating, to his own use, a large share of
the church - lands in Spain. He was not defti-
tate of pretences to justify this abrapt desertion
of his ally. The termn of fix months, during-

which the flipulations in their treaty were to
continue in force, was now expire4; the league.
in opposition to which their alliance had been
framed, seemed to be entirely dissipated; Char-
les, in all his negociations with the Princes and
cities which had submitted to his will, had
neither consulted the Pope, nor had allotted
him any part of the conquests which he had
made, nor had communicated to him any share
in the vast contributions which he had raised.
He had not even made any provision for the
fupprefflion of heresy, or the re-establishment of
the catholick religion, which were Paul's chief
inducements to bestow the treasures of the
church so liberally in carrying on the war.
These colours, however specious, did not con,
ceal from the Emperor that secret jealousy which
was the true motive of the Pope's condu&t. But,
as Paul's orders with regard to the march of his
troops were no less peremptory than unexpe&t-
ed, it was impossible to prevent their retreat.
Charles exclaimed loudly against his treachery,
in abandoning him so unseasonably, while he
was prosecuting a war undertaken in obedience
to the papal injunftions , and from which , if
fuccefsful, so much honour and advantage would
redound to the church. To complaints he added
thre'ats and expoftulations. But Paul remained
inflexible; his troops continued their march to-
wards the ecclefiaflical fRate, and in an elabo-
rate memorial, intended as an apology for his

behaviour, he discovered new and more manifest
symptoms of alienation from .the Emperor, to-
gether with a deep-rooted dread of his power, x)
Charles, weakened by the withdrawing of so
great a body from his army, which was already
much diminifbed by the number of garrisons
that he had been obliged to throw into the
towns which had capitulated, found it necessary
to recruit his forces by new levies, before he
could venture to march in person towards
Saxony.

A conspiracy to overturn the government of Genoa.

The fame and splendour of his success could

not have failed of attra&ting such multitudes of
soldiers into his service from all the extensive
territories now fubjeEt to his authority, as must
have soon put him in a condition of taking the
field against the Ele&or; but the sudden and
violept eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as
well as the great revolutions which that event,
extremely myfiterious in its firlt appearances,
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid en-
tangling himself in new operations in Germany,
until he had fully discovered its source and
tendency. The form of government which had
been established in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of

x) F. Paul o08. Pailavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thuan. I 6.

former diffentions, and received at firlI with
eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near
twenty years, give universal fatlsfa&ion to thole
turbulent and factious republicans.

The objeft of the confpiratori.

As the entire adminiffration of affairs was

now lodged in a certain number of noble fami-
lies, many envying them that pre-eminence,
wifned for the restitution of a popular govern-
ment, to which they had been accustomed; and
though all reverenced the disinterested virtue of
Doria, and admired his talents, not a few were
jealous of that ascendant which he had acquired
in the councils of the commonwealth. His age,
however, his moderation, and love of liberty,
afforded ample security to his countrymen that,
he would not abase his power, nor ifain the
dlofe of his days by attempting to overturn , that
fabrick, which it had been the labour and pride
of his life to ere&. But the authority and in-
fluence which in his hands were innocent, they
easily saw would prove deftruttive, if usurped
by any oitizen of greater ambition, or less
virtue. A citizen of this dangerous charafter
had a&ually formed such pretensions, and with
fame profpe& of faccefs. Giannetino Doria,
whom his. grand uncle Andrew destined to be
the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise
at being his successor in power. His temper
haughty, inMfoent, and overbearing to such a

degree as would hardly have been tolerated in
one born to reign, was altogether infuppertable
in the citizen of a free state. The more saga-
cious among the Genoese already feared and
bated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While
Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and
undifcerning affe&.ion which persons in advanced
age often contra& for the younger members of
their family, set no bounds to the indulgence
with which he treated him; seeming less soli-
citous to secure and perpetuate the freedom of
the commonwealth , than to aggrandize that
undeferving kinsman.

Y'iefco count of Lavagna the head of the conspiracy.

But whatever suspicion of Doria's designs,

or whatever diffatisfa&ion with the system of
administration in the commonwealth, these cir-
cumftances might have occasioned, they would
have ended, it is probable, in nothing more
than murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis
Fiefco count ofLavagna, observing this growing
disgust, had not been encouraged by it to at-
tempt oneB of the boldest actions recorded in
history. That young nobleman, the richest and
most illnufrious fubje& in the republick, pofeff-
ed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities
which win upon the human heart, which conm-
mand refpe , or secure attachment. He was
graceful and maieftick in his person; magnifi-

cent to profufioi ; of a generosity that prevent-
ed the withes of his friends, and exceeded the
expectations of strangers; of an insinuating ad-
dress, gentle manners, and a flowing affability.
But under the appearance of there virtues,
which seemed to form him for enjoying and
adorning civil life , he concealed all the difpo-
fitions which mark men out for taking the
lead in the most dangerous and dark confpira-
cies; an insatiable and restless ambition, a cou-
rage unacquainted with fear, and a mind that
difdained subordination. Such a temper could
ill brook that fiation of inferiority, wherein
he was placed in the republick; and as he en-
vied the power which the elder Doria had
acquired, he was filled with indignation at the
thoughts of its defcen'ding, like an hereditary
poffeflion, to Giannetino. These various paflions,
preying with violence on his turbulent and afpir-
ing mind, determined him to attempt overturn-
ing that domination to which he could not submit.

Intrigues and preparations of the confpiriators.

At first he thought of an alliance with

Francis, and even proposed it to the French am-
haffadors at Rome, as the most effe&tial means
of accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria,
together with the Imperial fa&ion, by his as-
Iiftance, he resolved to put the republick once
more under the prote&ion of that Monarch,
hoping in return for that service to be entrusted

with the principal share in the adminifrration
of government. But having communicated his
ftheme to a few chosen confidents, from whom
be kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of
them, a man of desperate fortune, capable atil
ke of advising and executing the most audacious
deeds, remonstrated with earnestness against the
folly of exposing bimfelf to the mos t imminent
danger, while he allowed another to reap all
the fruits of his success; and exhorted him
warmly to aim himself at that preeminence in
his country, to which he was defrined by his
illuffrious birth; was called by the voice of
his fellow-citizens, and would be raised by the
zeal of his friends. This discourse opened such
vast profpe&fs to Fiefco, and so suitable to his
genius, that abandoning his own plan, he eager-
ly adopted that of Verrina. The other persons
prefenr, though sensible of the hazardous na-
ture of the undertaking, did not choose to con-
demn what their patron had so warmly ap-
proved. It was instantly resolved, in this dark
cabal, to affaffinare the two Dorias, as well
as the principal persons of their party, to over-
turn the established f-fiem of government, and
to place Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa.
Time, however, and preparations were requi-
site to ripen such a design for execution; and
while he was employed in carrying on there,
Fiefco made it his chief care to guard against
every thing that maight betray his secret,

or create fufpiciota. The disguise he assumed ,
was of all others the most impenetrable.
*He seemed to, he abandoned entirely to plea-
filre, and dissipation. A perpetual gaiety,
diversified by the pursuit of all the amuse-
ments becoming his age and rank, engrossed,
in appearance, the whole of his time and
thoughts. But amidst this hurry of difipation,
he prosecuted his plan with' the most cool at-
tention, neither retarding the design by a ti-
mid hesitation, nor precipitating the execution
by an excess of impatience. He continued his
correspondence with the French ambaflfador at
Rome, though without communicating to him
his real intentions, that by his means he might
secure the prote&tion of the French arms, if
hereafter he should find it necessary to call
them to his aid. He entered into a close con-
federacy with Farnese Duke of Parma, who
being disgusted with the Emperor for refusing
to grant him the investiture of that dutchy
Was eager to promote any measure that tended
to diminish his influence in Italy, or to ruin a
family so implicitly devoted to him as that of
Doria. Being sensible that, in a maritime
state, the acquisition of naval power was what
he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased four
galleys from the Pope, who probably w:ts not
unacquainted with the design which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of these galleys to fail

o a cruise againfi the Turks, he not only as-
rembled a good number of his own vassals, but
eneaged in his service many bold adventurers,
wh cm the truce between the Emperor and So-
Ivtman had deprived of their nfial occupation
and subsistence.

While Fiefco was taking these important

fleps

, he preserved so admirably his afual appear-

aoce of being devoted entirely to pleafare and
amrufemen t, and paid court with such artfol address
to the two Dorias, as iarpofed net only on the ge-
nerous and iifufpicious mind of Andrewx, bnt de-
ceived Giannetino, who, conscious of his own
criminal intentions, was more apt to diftnift
the designs of others. So many instruments
being now prepared; nothing remained but to
strike the blow. Various consultations were
held by Fiefco with his confidents, in order to
fettle the manner of doing it with the greatest
certainty and effe&. At fert, they proposed to
murder the Dorias and their chief adherents,
during the celebration of high mafrs in the princi-
pal church; but as Andrew was often absent fromn
religious fokemnities, on account of his great
age, that design w3as laid aside. It was then
concerted that Fiefco framId invite the un-cle
and nephew, with all their friends whom they
had marked out as vi&ims, to his houne;
where it woeld be easy to cut them off at once
without danger or resistance: but as Giantetino
Wva obliged to leave the town on the day

which they had chof'en, it became peceffary
likewise to alter this plan. They at last de-
termined to attempt by open force, what they
found diffecult to effe& by stratagem, and fixed
on the night between the second and third of
January, for the execution of their enterprize.
The time was chosen with great propriety; for
as the Doge of the former year was to quit
his office according to cutom, on the first of
the month, and his successor could not be ele&-
ed sooner than the fourth, the republick re-
mained during that interval in a fort of anar-
chy, and Fiefco might with less violence take
poffeffion of the vacant dignity.

The conspirators assemble to execute their plan.

'The morning of that day, Fiefco employed

in visiting his friends, passing some hours
among them with a spirit as gay and unembar-
raffed as at other times. Towards evening,
he paid court to the Dorias with his ufaal marks
of refpe&, and fnrveying their countenance and
behaviour with the attention natural in his si-
tuation, was happy to observe the perfe&t fe-
curity in which they remained, without the
least foresight or dread of that storm which had
been so long a gathering, and was now ready
to burst over their heads. From their palace
he hastened to his own, which stood by itself
in the middle of a large court, surrounded by

a high

a high wall. The gates had been set open in
the morning, and all persons, without diftinc-
tion, were allowed to enter, but strong guards
posted within the court fuffered no one to re-
turn. Verrina, meanwhile, and few persons
trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, after
oonducting Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews
of his galleys into the palace in small bodies,
with as little noise as possible, dispersed them-
selves through the city, and, in the name of
their patron, invited to an entertainment the
principal citizens whom they knew to be dif-
gufted with the administration of the Dorias,
and to have inclination as well as courage to
attempt a change in the government. Of the
vast number of persons who now filled the pa-
lace, a few only knew for what purpose they
were assembled; the reft, astonished at finding,
inifead of the preparations for a seas , a court
crowded with armed men, and apartments fill-
ed with the instruments of war, gazed on each
other with a mixture of curiosity, impatience,
and terror.

Fiefco's exhortations to thenm

MWhile their minds were in this Rtate of sus-

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a
look full of alacrity and confidence, he addressed
himself to the persons of chief diftinAion , telling
them, that they were not now called to partake
of the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join

Hiif of Charl V. V ol. II D d

in a deed of valour, which would lead them
to liberty and immortal renown. He set before
their eyes the exorbitant as well as intolerable
authority of the elder Doria, which the ambi-
tion of Giannetino, and the partiality of the
Emperor to a family more devoted to him than
to their country, was about to enlarge and to
render perpetual. This unrighteous domination,
continued he, you have it now in your power
to subvert, and to establish the freedom of your
country on a firm balls. The tyrants muff be
cut off. I have taken the most effe&ual measures
for this purpose. My associates are numerous.
I can depend on allies and protectors if necef-
fary. Happily the tyrants are as secure as I
have been provident. Their insolent contempt
of their countrymen has banished the suspicion
and timidity which usually render the guilty
quick-fighted to discern, as well as sagacious to
guard against the vengeance which they deserve.
They will now feel the blow, before they sus-
peRt any hostile hand to be nigh. Let us then
sally forth, that we" may deliver our country
by one generous effort, almost unaccompanied
with danger, and certain of success. These
words , uttered with that irresistible fervour
which animates the mind when roused by great
obje&s, made the desired impretlion on the au-
dience. Fiefco's vassals, ready to execute what-
ever their master should command, received
his discourse with a murmur of applause. To

many , whose fortunes were desperate, the li-
cence and confafion of an infurretion afforded
an agreeable profpe&. Those of higher rank
and more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover
the surprise or horror with which they were
struck at the proposal of an enterprize r-& less
unexpe&ted than atrocious; as each of them
imagined the other to be in the secret of the
conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by per-
sons, who waited only a fig-al from their leader,
to perpetrate the greatest crime, with one voice
then all aptlauded, or feigned to applaud, the
u c rt lakin- .

-. -n --ie, v-ith his ife.

Fiefco having thus fixed and encouraged

his associates, before he gave them his last or-
ders, he hastened for a moment to the apart-
ment of his wife. a lady of the noble house of
Cibo. whom he loved with tender affe&ion, and
whole beauty and virtue rendered her worthyv
of his love. The noise of the armed men who
crowded the court and palace. having long be-
fore this reached her ears . she concluded some
bazardous enterprize to be in hand, and she
trermittli for her husband. He fourd her in all
the anguifr: of uncertainty and fear; and as it
-wasS now impoflible to keep his defgn concealed,
he informed her of what be had undertaken.
The profee&: of a scene so fall of horror as well
.s dancer. completed her agonv; and fcrebod-

ing immediately in her mii:d the fatal issue of
it, she endeavoured, by her tears, her entrea-
ties, and her despair, to divert him from his
purpose. Fiefco, after trying in vain to sooth
and to inspire her with hope, broke from a si-
tuation into which an excels of tenderness had
unwarily seduced him, though it could not shake
his resolution. ,, Farewel, he cried, as he
quitted the apartment, you shall either never
fee me more, or you shall behold to-morrow
every thing in Genoa fubje&t to your power. "

They attack the city.

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he

allotted each his proper station; some were ap-
pointed to afiault and seize the different gates
of the city; Come to make themselves masters
of the principal streets or places of strength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the
harbour where Doria's gallies were laid up, as
the post of chief importance, and of greatest
danger. It was now midnight, and the citi-
zens -slept in the security of peace, when this
band of conspirators, numerous, desperate, and
well-armed, rushed out to execute their plan.
They surprised some of the gates, without
meeting with any resistance. They got posses-
sion of others after a sharp confli&t with the fol-
diers on guard. Verrina, with the galley which
had been fitted out against the Turks, blocked
Uip the mouth of the Darfena or little harbour

where Doria's fleet lay. All possibility of es-
cape being cut off by this precaution, when
Fiefco attempted to enter the galleys from
the shore to which they were made fafi,
they were in no condition to make refif-
tance, as they were not only unrigged and
disarmed, but had no crew on board, except
the slaves chained to the oar. Every quarter
of the city was now filled with noise and tu-
mult, all the streets resounding with the cry of
Fiefco and Liberty. At that name, so popular
and beloved, many of the lower rank took
arms, and joined the conspirators. The nobles
and partisans of the aristocracy, astonished or
affrighted, shut the gates of their houses, and
thought of nothing but of securing them from
pillage. At last the noise excited by this scene
of violence and confusion, reached the palace
of Doria; Giannetino started immediately from
his bed, and imagining that it was occasioned
by some mutiny among the sailors, rushed out
with a few attendants, and hurried towards
the harbour. The gate of St. Thomas, through
which he had to pas , was already in the pof-
feflion of the conspirators, who, the moment
he entered, fell upon him with the utmost
fury, and murdered him on the fpor. The fame
must have been the fall of the elder Doria. if
Jerome de Fiefco had executed his brother's
plan, and had proceeded immed'a-.v- to arrack
him in ;us r;'1ace: hu" -c, f:'. :>p he. ,'Crr. d con-

fideration of preventing its being plunSered
amidit the confusion, having forbid his follow-
ers to advance, Andrew got intelligence of his
nephew's death, as well as of his own danger,
and mounting on horseback, saved himself by
flight. Amidif this general consternation, a
few senators had the courage to assemble in the
palace of the republick. y) At firlt, some of
the most daring among them attempted to rally
the scattered soldiers, and to attack a body of
the conspirators; but being repulsed with loss,
all agreed that nothing now remained, but to
treat with the party which seemed to be irre-
fiftible. Deputies were accordingly sent to learn
of Fiefco what were the concessions with which
he would be satisfied, or rather to submit to
whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

Cause of their miscarriage.

But by this time, Fiefco, with whom they

were empowered to negociate, was no more.
Just as he was about to leave the harbour,
where every thing had succeeded to his wish,
that he might join his vi&torious-companions,
he heard Tome extraordinary uproar on board
the Admiral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and
fearing that the slaves might break their chains,
and overpower his associates, he ran thither;
but the plank which reached from the shore to

y) II p;;zzo del!a SigSoria.

tbe vessel bappening to overturn. he fell into
the sea. whilst he hurried forward too precipi-
tately. Being loaded with heavy armonur, he
funk to the bottom , and perished in the very
moment when he mufr have taken full pofleFion
of every thing that his ambitious heart could
desire. Verrina was the f~rft who discovered
this fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once.
all its consequences,. concealed it with the ut-
most indiaftrv from every one but a few leaders
of the conspiracy. Nor was it difficult, amidst
the darkness and confusion of the night, to have
kept it fecrer, unril a trearv with the fenarors
fbould have put the cirv in the power of the
conspirators. All their hones of this wvere dif-
concenred by the imprudence of Jerome Fiefco.
-who. when the deputies of the senate inquired
for his brother, the count of Laragna. that
they might make their proposals to him, replied
with a childish vanity: .. I am now the only
person to whom that title belongs. and with
me you rmuf treat. ** These words difcevered
as well to his friends as to his enemies whar
had happened. and made the impression which
might have been expeted upon both. The de-
puries . encouraged by this event, the only one
which could occasion foch a sodden revolution
as migbt rurn to their advantage, assumed in-
franty -. wirh admirable presence of mind. a
new tone. fi'table to the change in their cir-
cu - r~ ccr. and made hibh demands. \-hi e

they endeavoured to gain time by protraCing
the negociation, the reft of the senators were
busy in assembling their partisans, and in form-
ing a body capable of defending the palace of
the republick. On the other hand, the con-
fpirators, astonished at the ,death of a man
whom they adored and trusted, and placing no
confidence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their
courage die away, and their arms fall from their
hands. That profound and amazing secrecy
with which the conspiracy had been concerted,
and which had contributed hitherto so much to
its success, proved now the chief cause of its
mnifcarriage. The leader was gone; the greater
part of those who ated under him, knew not
his confidents, and were strangers to the ob-
je&s at which he aimed. There was no person
among them whose authority or abilities en-
titled him to assume Fiefco's place, or to finish
his plan; after having loft the spirit which ani-
mated it, life and a&ivity deserted the whole
body. Many of the conspirators withdrew to
their houses, hoping that amidst the darkness
of the night they had passed unobserved, and
might remain unknown. Others fought for
safety by a timely retreat; and before break of
dary, most of them fled with precipitation from
a city, which, but a few hours before, was
ready to acknowledge them as masters.

Tranquillity re-eftabliflhed in Genoa.

Next morning every thing was quiet in

Genoa; not an enemy was to be seen; few
marks of the violence of the former night ap-
peared, the conspirators having conduced their
enterprize with more noise than bloodshed, and
gained all their advantages by surprise, rather
than by force of arms. Towards evening,
Andrew Doria returned to the city, being met
by all the inhabitants, who received him with
acclamations of joy. Though the disgrace as
well as danger of the preceding night were
fresh in his mind, and the mangled body of
his kinsman still before his eyes, such was his
moderation as well as magnanimity, that the
decree issued by the senate against the con-
fpirators, did not exceed that just meafare
of severity which was requisite for the sup-
port of government, and was difated neither
by the violence of resentment, nor the rancour
of revenge. z) *)

z) Thuan. 93. Siaonii vita Andreae Dorisa, 1196. La Conjura-

tion du Comte de Fiefque, par le Cardin. de Retz. Adriani
Iftoria, lib. vi. 369. Folietee Conjuratio Jo. Lud. Fiefci ap.
Graev. Thef. hlal. i. 883.

") It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at the age of

eighteen, composed a hiltory of this conspiracy, containing
such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his enter-
prize , that it is not surprising, that a minister, so jealous
and discerning as Richelieu, should be led, by the perusal of
it, to predift the turbulent and dangerous spirit of that
young Ecclesiastic. Mem. de Retz, torn. i. p. 13.

The Emperor alarmed at this conspiracy.

After taking the necessary precautions for

preventing the flame, which was now so hap-
pily extinguished, from breaking out anew,
the first care of the senate was to fend an am-
baflador to the Emperor, to give him a par-
ticular detail of what had happened, and to
beg his assistance towards the redu&ion of
M1rontobbio, a strong fort on the hereditary
eflate of the Fiefchi, in which Jerome had shut
himrfelf up. Charles was no lets alarmed than
astonished at an event so strange and unexpeFt-
ed. He could not believe that Fiefco, how
bold or adventurous soever, durst have attempt-
ed such an enterprize, but on foreign suggestion,
and from the hope of foreign aid. Being in-
formed that tlie Duke of Parma was well ac-
quainted with the plan of the conspirators, he
immediately supposed that the Pope could not
be ignorant of a measure, which his son had
countenanced. Proceeding from this to a far-
ther conjechure, which Paul's cautious maxims
of policy in -other instances rendered extremely
probable, he concluded, that the French King
must have known and approved of the design;
and he began to apprehend that this spark
might again kindle the flame of war which
had raged so long in Italy.

Suspends his operations in Germany.

As he had drained his Italian territories of

troops on account of the German war, he was
altogether unprovided for resisting any hostile
attack in that country; and on the first ap-
pearance of danger, he must have detached
thither the greatest part of his forces for its de-
fence. In this situation of affairs, it would
have been altogether imprudent in the Emperor
to have advanced in person against the Ele&or,
until he should learn with some degree of cer-
tainty whether such a scene were not about to
open in Italy, as might put it out of his power
to keep the field with an army fufficient to
oppose him.

# BOOK IX. Francis jealous of the Emperor's power and success.

THE

HIS T 0 R Y

OF THE

R E I G N

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.

Francis jealous of the Ermperor's power and fucces.

THE Emperor's dread of the hostile intentions
of the Pope and French King did not proceed
from any imaginary or ill-grounded suspicion.
Paul had already given the strongest proofs both
of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could not
hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip of so long
continuance, would behold the great advantages
which he had gained over the confederate Pro-
teflants, without feeling his ancient emulation
revive. He was not deceived in this conjeture.
Francis had observed the rapid progress of his
arms with deep concern, and though hitherto
prevented, by circumstances which have been
mentioned, from interposing in order to check

I

them. be vwas now convinced that, if he did
not make some extraordinary and timely effort,
Charles must acquire fach a degree of power 4
would enable him to give law to the reft of
Eulrope. This apprehension, which did not
take its rife from the envy of rivalfhip alone,
but was entertained by the wisest politicians of
the age, suggested various expedients which
might serve to retard the course of the Em-
peror's vi&ories, and to form by degrees such
a combination against him as might put a stop
to his dangerous career.

Negociates with the Protefrants ;

With this view, Francis inftru&ed his

emissaries in Germany to employ all their ad-
dress in order to revive the courage of the
confederates, and to prevent them from fab-
mitting to the Emperor. He made liberal of-
fers of his assistance to the Ele&or and Land-
grave, whom he knew to be the most zealous
as well as the most powerful of the whole bo-
dy; he used every argument, and proposed
every advantage which could either confirm
their dread of the Emperor's designs, or de-
termine them not to imitate the inconsiderate
credulity of their associates, in giving up their
religi.on and liberties to his disposal.

with SoJ yman:

While he took this step towards continuing

Wte civil war which raged in Germany, he en-
deavoured likewise to stir up foreign enemies
against the Emperor. He solicited Solyman to
seize this favourable opportunity of invading
Hungary, which had been drained of all the
troops necessary for its defence, in order to
form the army against the confederates of
Smalkalde.

with the Pope and Venetians;

He exhorted the Pope to repair, by a vi-

gorous nd seasonable effort, the error of which
he had been guilty in contributing to raise the
Emperor to fiuch a formidable height of power.
Finding Paul, both from the consciousness of
his own mistake, and his dread of its confe-
quences, abundantly disposed to listen to his
exhortations, he availed himself of this favour-
-able disposition which the Pontif began to
discover, as an argument to gain the Venetians.
He endeavoured to convince them that no-
thing could save Italy, and even Europe, from
oppression and servitude, but their joining with
the Pope and him, in giving the first beginning
to a general confederacy, in order to humble
that ambitious potentate, whom they had all
equal reason to dread.

with the -:ir:gs of Denmark and Englaro

Having set on foot these negociations in

the southern courts, he turned his attentionu
next towards those in the north of Europe. As
the King of Denmark had partic.ular reasons to
be offended with the Emperor, Francis imagin-
ed that he would not be backward to approve
of the league which he had projected; and left
considerations of caution or pruden-ce should re-
st-rain him from joining in it, he attempted to
overcome there, by offering him the voang
Queen of Scots in marriage to his son. a) As
the miriifers who governed England in the name
of Edward V-I had openly declared them-
selves converts to the opinions of the Reformers,
as soon as it became safe nnon Henrv's death
to lay aside that difgnife which his unforgiving
bigotry had forced them to aiuiame, Francis
flattered himself that their zeal would not allow
them to remain ina&ive fpefrators of the over-
throw and deftru&iion of those who profeffed
the fame faith wvith themselves. He hoped,
that nothwithfranding the struggles of fa&ion
incident to a minority, and the profpecr of an
approaching rupture with the Soots, he might
prevail on them likewise to take part in the
cormmon cause. b)

&) \eremD, de Ric:e: . 1. 6:;c. 636

While Francis employed such variety of

expedients, and exerted himself with such ex-
traordinary a&ivity, to rouse the different states
of Europe against his rival, he did not negledf
what depended on himself alone. He levied
troops in all parts of his dominions; he colle&ed
military stores; he contra&ed with the Swiss
cantons for a considerable body of men; he put
his finances in admirable order ; he remitted
considerable sums to the Ele&or and Landgrave;
and took all the other steps necessary towards
commencing hostilities, on the shortest warning,
and with the greatest vigour. c)

The Emperor greatly alarmed.

Operations so complicated, and which re-

quired the putting so many instruments in mo-
tion, did not escape the Emperor's observation.
He was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in
the several courts of Europe, as well as of his
domeftick preparations ; and sensible how fatal
an interruption a foreign war would prove to
his designs in Germany, he trembled at the pro-
fpet of that event. The danger, however,
appeared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and well-direted ambi-
tion of Solyman, and that he always chose the
fcafon for beginning his military enterprises

with

) Merm. de R:ibD., i. 393.

with prudence equal to the valour with which
he conducted them. The Pope, as he had good
reason to believe, wanted not pretexts to jiftify
a rupture, nor inclination to begin hostilities.
He had already made some difcoverv of his
sentiments, by expressing a joy altogether un-
becoming the head of the church , upon receiv-
ing an account of the advantage which the
EleEtor of Saxony had gained over Albert of
Brandenburg ; and as he was now secure of
finding in the French King, an ally of fufficient
power to support him, he was at no pains to
conceal the violence and extent of his enmity. d)
The Venetiars, Charles was well assured, had
long observed the growth of his power with
jealoufv, which, added to the folicitations and
promises of France , might at last quicken their
flow counsels., and overcome their natural cau-
tion. The Danes and Enrlifh, it was evid-ent,
had both peculiar reason to be disgusted. as
well as strong motives to act against him. But
above all. be dreaded the active emulation of
Francis hiimielf. whom he considered as the foul
and mover of any confederacy that could be
formed against him; and, as that Monarch had
afforded protection to Verrina, who failed direEtly
to Marseilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's
conspiracy. Charles expe&ted every moment the

d) Mem. de Ribier, tomr. , 63,

Hist. of Charl. V. Vol. III. E e

commenceraeft of tbhofe hostile operations in
Italy, of which be conceived the infurre~ion in
Genoa to have been only the prelude.

Entertains hope from the declining state of Franciss

health.

But while he remained in this state of faf-

pence and solicitude, there was one circumstance
which afforded him some profpe& of escaping
the danger. The French King's health began
to decline. A disease, the effe& of his intem-
perance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure,
preyed gradually on his constitution. The pre-
parations for war, as well as the negociations
in the different courts, began to languish, to-
gether with the Monarch who gave ifirit to
both. The Genoese , during that interval ,
(March. I547.) reduced Montobbio, took Jerome
Fiefco prisoner, and putting him to death, toge-
ther with his chief adherents, extinguished all
remains of the conspiracy. Several of the Im-
perial cities in Germany, despairing of timely
assistance from France, submitted to the Empe-
ror. Even the Landgrave seemed disposed to
abandon the Ele&or, and to bring matters to a
speedy accommodation , on such terms as he
cotuld obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited
with impatience the issue of a diftempcr, which
was to decide whether he must relinquish all
other schemes, in order to prepare for resisting
a combination of the greater part of Europe

againA him, or whether he might proceed to
invade Saxony, without interruption or fear of
danger.

Death of Francis, and refief&ione on his charaEter and

rivalfhip with Charies.

The good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that some historians have called
it the Star of the House of Auntria , did not
de ert him on this occasion. Francis died at
Rambouillet, on the last day of March in the
f-fty-third year of his age, and the thirty - third
of his reign. During twenty-eight years of
that time, an avowed rivalfrip fabfitPed between
him and the Emperor, which inv:oved not only
their own dominions, but the greater part oi
Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent
animosity , and drawn out to a greater length
t'han had been known in any former pernocL
1Many circumiances contributed to 1oth. T1.eir
animosity was founded in opofition of interpft ,
heightened by personal emulation . snf ex-
afperated not o(,ny by rnutnal iri-ries, ,nu by
reciprocal insults. At the fam' time, w-*Pver
advantage one seemed to prrTet Crv-R'= ,_rin-
Tig the afcendantr, w-as v-"nn-ral -. -9,red
by some favourable circuA-marrce rpernia tno *be
other. The Emperor's domirions were of great
extent, the French King's l~v more corn,-r;
Francis governed his kincdom witrh abro'ne
power ; that of Charles was limited , but he

Ee 2

supplied the want of authority by address; the
troops of the former were more impetuous and
enterprising; those of the latter better difciplin-
ed, and more patient of fatigue. The talents
and abilities of the two Monarchs were as dif-
ferent as the advantages which they pofieffed,
and contributed no less to prolong the contest
between them. Francis took his resolutions
suddenly, prosecuted them at first with warmth,
and puthed themni into execution with a most
adventurous iourage; but being destitute of the
perseverance necessary to surmount difficulties ,
he often abandoned his designs, or relaxed the
vigourt of purfiiit from impatience, and some-
times frotn levity. Charles deliberated long,
and deternmie'd tvith coolhefs; but having once
fixed his plat , he adhered to it with inflexible
obftirracy, and 'neither danger nor discourage-
ment could tutrn him aside from the execution
of it. The success of their enterprizes was as
different as their charaters , and was uniformly
influenced by them. Francis, by his impetuous
a&ivity, often disconcerted the Emperor's best
laid schemes ; Charles , by a more calm but
steady prosecution of his designs, checked the
rapidity of his rival's career, and baffled or re-
pulsed his most vigorous efforts. The former,
at the opening of a war or of a compaign, broke
in upon his enemy with the violence of a tor-
rent, and carriedl all before him ; the latrer,
waiting until he law the force of his rival begin

to abate. recovered in the end not only all
that he had loft, bur made new acquifirions.
Few of the French M'Jnarch's attempts towards
conquefi: whatever promising aspect they might
wear at first, were conducted ro an happy ifue;
many of the Emperor's enterprizes, even after
they appeared defperare and impra&icable, ter-
minated in the mcft prosperous manner. Francis
was dazzled wkith the splendour of an under-
takin: ; Charles was allared by the profpent
of its rarring to his advantage.

The degree, however, of their compara-

tive merit and reputation has not been fixed
either by a frrie fcrati-v into their abilities for
government. or by an impavrtial confidera:ion of
the grearnefs and success of their undertakings;
and Francis is one of those Monarchs w-ho oc-
cupies a higher rank in the temple of Fame,
than either his talents or performances entitle
him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed to
many diferent circumfrances. The fuperioriry
which Charles acquired tby the vitory of Pavia,
and which from that period he preserved through
the remainder of his reignr, was to manifest,
that Francis's struggle againfr his exorbitant and
rrowinrj dorminnion was viewed by most o0 the
other powers. not only with the pa-rtai-y
which naturally arises for those. who gaa:r-'y
maintain an unequal correftr but with the fa-
your due to one who was reiKf ing a co 'n- r.n
enemy, and endeavouring to let bourd- to

:

enemy

Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
ehara&ers of Princes, too especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their
qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the
many errors conspicuous in his foreign policy
and domeftick, administration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, generous, He pofleffed
dignity without pride ; affability free from mean-
ness; and courtesy exempt from deceit. All
who had access to him, and no man of merit
was ever denied that privilege, refpe&ted and
loved him. Captivated with his personal quali-
ties, his fubjets forgot his defects as a Mo-
oarch, and admiring him as the most accom-
plifhed and amiable gentleman in his dominions,
they hardly murmured at afts of male-adminif-
tration, which, in a Prince of less engaging
dispositions, would have been deemed unpar-
donable. This admiration , however, must have
been temporary only, and would have died
away, with the courtiers who bestowed it; the
illusion arising from his private virtues muff
have ceased, and posterity would have judged
of his publick conduft with its usual impartia-
lity; but another circumstance prevented this,
qnd his name hath been transmitted to posterity
with increasing reputation. Science and the
arts had, at that time, made little progress in
France. They were just beginning to advance
beyond the limits of Italy, where they had re-

vived, and which had hitherto been their only
feat. Francis took them immediately under his
protertion, and vied with Leo hirmelf, in the
zeal and muanificence with which he encouraged
them. He invited learned men to his court, he
conversed with them familiarly, he employed
them in business, he raised them to offices of
dignity, and honoured them with his confidence.
That race of men, not more prone to complain
when denied the refpe& to which they fancy
themselves entitled, than apt to.bepleafed when
treated with the diftin&ion which they confider
as their due, thought they co.uld not exceed in
gratitude to sauch a benefactor, and strained their
invention , and employed all their ingenuity in
panegyrick. Succeeding authors, warmed with
their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted
their encomiums, and refined upon them. The
appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred a-mong
historians; and they seem to have regarded it as
a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defedts. Thus Francis, notwith-
standing his inferior abilities, and want of fuc-
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of Charles.
The virtues which he potfeffed as a man, hath.
entitled him to greater admiration and praise,
than have been bestowed upon the extensive ge-
nius and fortunate arts of a more capable, but
less amiable rival.

Effe&s of Francis's death.

By- his death a considerable change was

made in the state of Europe. Charles, grown
old in the arts of government and command,
had now to contend only with younger Mo-
narchs, who could not be regarded as an equal
match for him, who had flood the encounter
with Henry VIII. and Francis I. and come off
with honour in all those different contests. By
this event, he was eased of all his disquietude,
and was happy to find that he might begin
with safety those operations against the Ele&tor
of Saxony, which he had hitherto been obliged
to suspend. He knew the abilities of Henry II.
who had just mounted the throne of France, to
be greatly inferior to those of his father, and
foresaw that he would be so much occupied for
some time in displacing the late King's ministers,
whom he hated, and in gratifying the ambi-
tious demands of his own favourites, that he
had nothing to dread, either from his personal
efforts, or from any confederacy which this
unexperienced Prince could form.

Charles marches against the Eletor of Saxony.

But as it was uncertain how long fnch an

interval of security might continue, Charles
determined inflantly to improve it: and as soon
as he heard of Francis's demise, he begun his
march (April 13. 1547.) from Egra on the bor-
ders of Bohamia. But the de'arture of the pa-

p?1 rooips, t(! gE U~er wn~i ft~e :efrear of teg

fleir'r gs:~. h:id n( m;cf dmr~icihfer Ibis ariy,
thn~t fmte~r tl cl,~W::I.6 rmrir wereT aflf he cOuiS-
aflerrduiel. Y-ijl tLI:~ ?r~colrfi'dera~,~e fLodv be ft~:
c~ur or 2fn zlsed~ri ri. the ew. r'T ~e wich~it wi.
to cdecide wh~at ce~-ee- uT au~r~-orirv- be anas~ i
TcfftT~f~ 1Fron tr~t neirlod in Germany-: bL: as

Sriancifz an~d Thuir, r e dCd no:. ir~ Arf

m~ to theni. ccrrri: n2~ucri rothe Giez2iAot oi

cha~nCe: aria even~ WM?-l_ 10;- frnJ frceheh
rafaic'n to entrzr~alr_ mefL mnc~: far~ngine Impeft :
facr:Vs. The Ee~rnrr 3: ~ trtw. had ;cvied
aDn arirv- F--~~re ad funeiorT in nuni!eP; but rei~iber
~e e~r~erierice and difcipflirr of h~i~ troops, co
the abil~ideE of hi~ olffiers, wxere to ~E COma-
pared~ with those o~f the Enipfrclr. he Ele.-
ror. bef~des. had al~ready b~een ~Ui1~f of anE eT-
~re. wh~ich depri~ved h~im of il;: the advan~.ge
w~~Lhic be~s mii4h~t have~s derl~eC from~ hir furre-
ric~rr~v :n numner. a~nt was~ a;ore 1I c~Pie: tO
hav-e orca~fioned h~i~ rin. I'e~ of kreepin~
his fo~rces un~Tjfed. be detachesd orne great body~

tcv.~ard~ tb-c fror:ers f Bo ni~ rdrt

~~la::> :e his 3nnrJ3Con wkb~'r the~ matecontPS enlf of
that k~ingdom. arid cantoned a cor.~derab~l e par:
of wa:~a rema~re&lrt  d-ieTrent p~nh~es o~'Saon~v,
wh~ere he exrie~re the Emrrper-or woult4d m3ake
the frr imprelt or. vaTixasv inmn~n g thart zbe{T

rendered renabie ~ar~~inf: ar Peflel-T.

Progress of his arms.

The Emperor entered the southern frontier

of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfter.
The folly of the measure which the Eleftor had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted
in that town surrendering without resistance;
and those in all the other places between that
and the Elbe, either imitated their example,
or fled as the Imperialists approached. Charles,
that they might not recover from the panick
with which they seemed to be struck, advanced
without losing a moment. The Eleftor, who
had fixed his head-quarters at Meissen, conti-
nued in his wonted state of flutuation and un-
certainty. He even became more undetermined,
in proportion as the danger drew near, and call-
ed for prompt and decisive resolutions. Some-
times he a&ed, as if he had resolved to defend
the banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a
battle with the enemy, as soon as the detach-
ments which he had called in were able to join
him. At other times, he abandoned this as
rash and perilous, seeming to adopt the more
prudent counsels of those who advised him to
endeavour at protra&ing the war, and for that
end to retire under the fortifications of.Wittem-
berg, where the Imperialists could not attack
him without manifest disadvantage, and where
he might wait, in safety, for the succours
which he expe&ed from Mecklenburgh, Pome.
rania, and the Protestant cities on the Baltic.

Without fixing upon either of there plans, he
broke down the bridge at Meissen, and march-
ed along the east bank of the Elbe to Muhl-
berg. There he deliberated anew, and, after
much hesitation, adopted one of these middle
schemes, which are always acceptable to feeble
minds incapable of deciding. He left a detach-
ment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperialifrs , if
they f.ould attempt to pass at that place, and
advancing a few miles with his main body,
encamped there in expeEration of the event,
according to which he proposed to regulate his
fubfeq uent motions.

Passes the Elne.

Charles, meanwhile, pushing forward in-

ceffantly, arrived the evening of the twenty-
third of April on the banks of the Elbe, oppo-
site to Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was
three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet
in depth, its current rapid, and the bank pof-
sessed by the Saxons was higher than that which
he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all
these obstacles, he called together his general
officers, and, without asking their opinions,
communicated to them his intention of attempt-
ing next morning to force his paflage over the
river, and to attack tbe enemy wherever he
could come up with them. They all exprefed
their atniifhment at such a bold refolotion ;
and even the Duke of Alva. though naturally
daring and impetuous, and Maurice of Saxonv

notwithstanding his impatience to crush his rival
the Ele&or, remonstrated earnestly against it.
But the Emperor confiding in his own judg-
ment or good fortune, paid no regard to their
arguments, and gave the orders necessary for
executing his design.

Early in the morning, a body of Spanish

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incessant fire upon the enemy. The
long heavy muskets used in that age, did ex-
ecution on the opposite bank, and many of the
soldiers, hurried on by a martial ardor in order
to get nearer the enemy, rushed into the stream,
and advancing breaft-high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effe&. Under
cover of their fire a bridge of boats was begun
to be laid for the infantry; and a peasant hav-
ing undertaken to condu& the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well
acquainted, they also were put in motion. The
Saxons posted in Muhlberg endeavoured to
obftru&t there operations, by a brisk fire from
a battery which they had erected; but as thick
fog covered all the low grounds upon the river,
they could not take aim with any certainty,
and the Imperialists fuffered very little; at the
fame time the Saxons being much'galled by the
Spaniards and Italians, they set on fire some
boats which had been colle&ed near the village,
and prepared to retire. The Imperialists per-
ceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers instantly stript

themselves, and holding their swords with their
teeth, swam across the river pu' to flight fach
of the Saxons as ventured to oppose them, saved
from the flames as many boa's as were faffi-
clent to complete their own bridge, and by this
spirited and fuccefsful aErion, encouraged their
companions no less than they intimidated the
enenI.

By this time, the cavalry, each trooper

having a foot soldier behind him , began to en-
ter the river, the light horse marching in the
front. Followed by the men ar arms, whom the
Emperor led in person, mounted on a Spanish
horse. dreiTed in a sumptuous habit, and car-
rying a javelin in his hand. Such a numerous
body struggling through a great river, in which,
according to the directions of their guide, they
w-ere obliged to make several turns, sometimes
treading on a frm bortonm, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions , whom they
left behind a fpectacie eqaally magnificent
and inrerefring. d) Their courage. at las:. far-
mounted every obfracle, no man betraying any
f-rmptom of fear. when the Emperor fbared in
the danger no less than the meanest foidier.
The moment that they reached the opposite fide,
Charles, witrhout x-aitin: trhe arrival of the reft
of the infantry , advanced towardsd the Saxons
with the troops which had paifed along wv-:i

d A il . ll a.

him, who, flushed with their good fortune,
and despising an enemy ivho had negle&ted to
oppose them when it might have been done with
fudh advatitage, .made rio account of their fupe-
tior numbers, and marched on as to a certain
vi&ory.

IIl condut of the Elector.

Dutring all these operations, which necef-

farily confimed much time, the Elefor re-
mained ina&ive in his camp; and from an in-
fatuatiodi which appears'to be so amazing, that
the best ihformed hiltorians impute it to the
treachdrous arts of his generals who deceived
him by fialfe iritelligeinci, he would not believe
that 'the :Emperor had passed the river, orcould
be fd near at hand. e) Being convinced, at
1at, 'orf his fatal mistake, by the concurring
teftfiiony of eye-witnesses, he gave orders for
retreating towards Wittemberg. But a German
arrtly, encumbered, as usual, with baggage
and artillery, could hot 'be put suddenly in mo-
tion. They had just begun to march when the
light troops of the enemy came in view,
and the Ele&or saw an engagement to be
rinavoidable.

e) Camerar. ap. Frcher. iii, 495. Stray, corp. hilt. Germ.

1047. 1o4p.

Battle of Mulhauren.

As he was no lefsAold in acrton than irre-

solute in council, he made the difpoftion for
battle with the greatest presence of mind , and
in the most proper manner; taking advantage of
a great forest to cover his wings , so as to pre-
vent his being furrounde4 by the enemy's ca-
valry, which were far more numerous than lis
own. The Emperor, likewise, ranged his men
in order as they came up, and riding along the
ranks , exhorted them with few but efficacious
words to do their duty. It was with a very
dliferent spirit that the two armies dvianced to
the charge. As the day, which had hi-herto
been dark and cloudy, happened to clear up at
that moment, this aocidental circumstance made
an imprefiion on the different pa]rties c-rrefpond-
ing to the tone of their minds; the Sax'onS,
surprised and difheartened, felt pain at being
e xpofed faily ro the view of the eemay; tre
Imperialists, being now secure that the Prote1f--
ant forces could not escape from them , re-
joiced at the return of fin-fiine, as a certain
presage of vi&ory. The shock of btrtle would
not have been long doubtfal if t~e perfonmf
courage which the Elector displayed, together
with the a&tivkv which he exerted from the
moment that the approach of the enemy render-
ed an engagement certain, and cut off a I pof-
fibility of hefication, had not revived in some
degree the fpirir of his troops. They repuIlfed

the Hungarian lighthorfe who began the attack,
and received with firmnef the men at arms
who next advanced to the charge; but as there
were the flower of the Imperial army, were
bonimande'd by experienced officers, and fought
utnder theEmperor's ey'e, the Saxons soon began
to give way, and the light troops rallying at
the fame time' and falling on their flanks, the
flight became geieral.

The Eletior defeated, and taken prifoiner.

A, fmalt body of chosen soldiers , among

whom the EeFtor had fought in person, still
continued to defendt themselves, and endeavour-
ed to save their master by retiring into the forest;
but being surrounded on every fide, the Elec-
tor, wounded 'in the face, exhausted with fa-
tigue, and perceiving all resistance to be vain,
surrendered himfeif a prisoner. He was con-
du&ed immediately towards the Emperor, whom
he found juit returned from the pursuit, standing
on the field of battle in the full exultation of
success., and receiving the congratulations of his
officers , upon this complete victory obtained
by his. valour and condu&. Even in such an
unfortunate and humbling situation, the Elec-
tor's behaviour was equally magnanimous and
decent.

His

His narib reiepoion by the Emperor.

Sensible of his condition, he approached

his conqueror without any of the fullemnefs or
pride which 'would have been improper in a
captive; and conscious of his owsa dignity, he
descended to no mean fabmiiion. unbecoming
the high fration which he held among the Ger-
man Princes. ,, The fortune of war. " said he,
., has made me your prisoner, most gracious Em-
peror. and I hope to be treated. " -- Here,
Charles harfhiy interrupted him : ,, And am I
then, at last, acknowledged to be Emperor ?
Charies of Gbentr was the only tite you lately
allowed me. You fnall be treated as von de-
ferre. " At these w-ords he tarned from him
abruptly -with an haughty air. To this cruel re-
puife thbe King of the Romans added reproaches
in his own name , ufng exprefiions still more
ungenerous and insulting. The Eletor made no
reply; bur, w\ith an unaltered countenance ,
which discovered neither afronifhment nor de-
jec&ion . accompanied the Spanish soldiers ap-
pointed to guard him. f)

Cr.arei'; p aores after his vLEaorv.

This decisive vitory cost the Imperialists

only fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons

f) Sieic, tun. 402. Tnuan. 136. Harreninus de BeiW G&r-

maL,. Fr. Scard. n\u . i: 3. r refnrD:. PunBa liter-.
ib:d. p. 50.- P. Heurer Rer. Auffr lit xif c. i3. r =$4

Hilf. of Ciarl . Nw. \~u. I. F f

were killed, chiefly in the purfuiit, and a greater
number taken prisoners. About four hundred
kept. in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg,
together with the ele&oral Prince , who had
likewise beep wounded in the a&ion. After
resting two days in the field of battle, partly
to refresh his army, and partly to receive the
deputies of the adjacent towns, which were
impatient to secure his proteftion by submitting
to his will the Emperor began to move to-
wards Wittenmberg, that he might terminate the
war at once , by the redu&tion of that city.
The unfortunate Eletor was carried along in a
fort of triun~ yi 4pd exposed every where, as
a captive, -to his own fubje&s ; a fpeRacle ex-
tremnely afflili-g to them who both honoured
and loved him; though the infuilt was so far
from fiubduing his firm (pirit, that it did not
even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and com-
pofure of his mind.

Invests Wittemberg,

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age,

of the ele&oral branch of the Saxon family, was
one of the strongest cities in Germany, and
could not be taken, if properly defended, with-
qpt great difjiculty, the Emperor mtirched thither
with the utmost dispatch, hoping that while the
confternriation occasioned by his vi&tory was still
recent, the inhabitants might imitate the example
of their countrymen, and submit to his power,

as loon as he appeared before their walls. Bat
Sybilla of Cleves, the Ele&or's wife, a woman
no less difingiaiTed by her abilities than her
virtue, instead of abandoning herself to tears
and lamentation upon her hufnand's misfortune,
endeavoured bv her example as well as exhor-
tations, to animate the citizens. She inspired
them with fach resolution, that, when fummoan-
ed to surrender, they returned a vigorous
answer. warning the Emperor to behave to-
wards their sovereign with the refpeEt due to his
rank. as they were determined to treat Albert
of Brandenburg, who was friE ia prisoner, pre-
cifely in the fame manner -ht he treated him.
The spirit of the inhabitants, no less than the
strength of the cirty, seemed now to, render a
siege in form necefary. After such a signal
vicrorv it would have been disgraceful not to
have undertaken it, though at the fame time
the Emperor was defeitate of every thing requi-
ite for carryin- g it on. But Maurice removed all
dificulries. by engaging to furniTh proviiions,
artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever
eLse should be needed. Trafring to this. Char-
les gave orders to open the rrenches before the
town. It quickly appeared, that Maarice's
eagerners to reduce the capital of those domi-
nions, which he expected as his reward for
taking arms against his kinsman, and deferring
the Protestant cause, had led him to promise
what exceeded his power to perform. A barter-

ik  2

ing train was, ihdeed, carried safely down the
Elbe from Dresden to Wittemberg; but as Mau-
'rice had not fufficient force to preserve a secure
comtluntication between his territories and the
camp of the besiegers, Count Mansfeldt , who
commanded a body of electoral troops , destroy-
ed a convoy of provisions and military stores,
and-difperfed-a band of pioneers destined for the
fervite of the Imperialists. This put a stop to
the progress of the siege , and convinced the
Emperor, that as he could not rely on Mau-
rice's promtifes , recourse ought to be had to
some more expeditious as well as more certain
method of gettig 'poffeffion of the town.

The Emperor's ungenerous treatment of the Ele&or.

The unfortunate Eleftor was in his hands,

And Charles was ungenerous and hard - hearted
enough to take advantage of this, in order to
make an experiment whether he might not bring
about his design, by working upon the tender-
ness of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety
of children towards their parent. With this
view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to
open the gates, letting her know that if she again
refused to comply, the Eleftor Chould answer
with his head for het obstinacy. To convince
her that this was not an empty threat, he brought
his prisoner to an immediate trial. The pro-
ceedings against him were as irregular as the
stratagem was barbarous. Instead of consulting

the Aates of fbe Empire, or remitting the canfe
to any court, which. aceordhnr to the German
conftirnution. wrnght have }egalHv taken cogm-
zance of the Eletor'-s crime. he fubjeted the
greateri P-rince in the Empire to the jnrifdiftion
of a court-martial, composed of Spanish and
Italian officers, and in which the unrelenting
Duke oef Alva, a ft inirrument for any ac& of
violence. presided. This frrang'e tribunal found-
ed its charge ( May Ic. 354'.) upon the ban
of the Empire w-hich had teen issued apainR
the prisoner. a sentence pronounced by the
sole aurtherirv of the Emperor, and defitute
of every legal formalitr wvhich could render it
valid; but prefaming hbim to be thereby mani-
feivly comnrited of treason and rebeHior, the
court- martial condemned him to fuffer death

by being beheaded.

The Eieho:  rnnanamnimv.

This decree was ir-rrmaed to the Eletotr

wvile amufnr himfe'f in plyvirg a: Chefs wiri
Emneft of Brurfwick his fellow-priforer. He
paused for a mnomerr:. thoun h w:hbou: disco-
vering atr fv-nmpom either of fu-rrize or terror;
and after -takin noric? of h-e irre.'ulari-- as
well as in;africe of the Emne-ror's proceedinrs:
.. It is eafv. continued he, to comnrebherd h:
scheme, I must die . because Wirremberg '",
not surrender; and I fnali Iy dovu-w rry :'e
with pleasure . if. by th: facrice, I can 'r~e

serve. the.dignity.of mny house, and transmit to
mypofterity the inheritance which belongs to
them. Would to God, that this sentence may
not asse&s my wife and children more than it
intimidates me! and that they, for the fake of
adding a few days to a life already too long,
may not renounce honours and territories which
they were born to possess! " g) He then turn-
ed to his antagonist, whom he challenged to
continue the game. He played with his usual
attention and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest,
expressed all the fatisfadtion which is common-
ly felt on gaining such vif&ories. After this
he withdrew to his own apartment, that he
might employ the reft of his time in such reli-
gious exercises as were proper in his situation. h)

The distress of his family.

It was not with the fame indifference, or

composure, that the account of the Eletor's
danger was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla,
who had supported with such undaunted forti-
tude her hufband's misfortunes, while the
imagined that they could reach no farther than
tb diminish his power or territories, felt all
her resolution fail as soon as his life was threa-
tened. Solicitous to save that, the despised
every other consideration; and was willing to

g) Thuan. i. 142.
h) Struvii corpus, 1050o.

I

anake any facrifioe, in order to appease an in-
cenfed conqu eror. At the fame time, the Duke
of Cleves, the Ele&or of BraIienIbuig , and
Maurice, to none of whom Charie3 had conm-
munmeated the true motives of his violent pro-
ceedings against the Elector, interceded warmly
with him to spare his life. The .irfr was
prompted to do so merely y cormpafiion for
his sifter. and regard for his brother-in-h' w:
te two others dreaded the univeriai reprach
that the- wouin incur. if, after having boafred
so often of the ample fec-rity which the Em-
peror had promnfed them with refpe& to their
religion. the rfi effeEt of their nnion with
him fnould be the public execution of a Prince,
who rwas inifiv held in reverence as the mofr
zealous prore&or of the Proreftant canfe. Man-
rice, in particular, foresaw that he mufr be-
come the obje of deteftarion to the Saxons,
and could never hcrpe to govern them with
tranqniliitr. if he were considered by them as
aecesfarv to the death of his nearefr kinsman,
in order trat he might obtain pofifeoa of his

dominion s.

His -rea.- a ::i. Cna:ier , by whici. :- f"rrenders :h.  Etezra:f.

While tnev. from foch vrioiS motiver,

foi'cited Charles. with the renft earndeft imnor-
nnimtv, not to execute the fenenrce, Syhbifl .
and his children, conin-'ed the Eie~or. i-v etr-
trfes as weil as messengers. to craune a: ,o

concession -that would extricate him out of the
present danger, and deliver them from their
fears and anguish on his account. The Em-
peror, preceiving that the expedient which he
had tried began to produce the effe& that he
intended, fell by degrees from his former ri-
gour, and allowed, himself to soften into pro-
mises of: clemency and forgiveness, if the
Eledtor would shew himself worthy of his fa-
vour, by submitting to reasonable terms. The
Eleftor, on whom the consideration of what
he might fuffer himself had made no impression,
was melted by the tears of a wife whom he
loved, and could not resist the intreaties of his
family. In compliance with their repeated so-
licitations, he agreed ( May r1. 1547.) to
articles oT accommodation, which he would
otherwise have rejeAed with disdain. The
chief of them were, that he should resign the
Ele&oral dignity, as well for himself as for
his posterity, into the Emperor's hands, to be
disposed of entirely at his pleasure; that he
should instantly put the Imperial troops in pof-
feflion of the cities of Wittemberg and Gotha;
that he should set Albert of Brandenburg at
liberty without ransom; that he Chould submit
to the decrees of the Imperial chamber, and
acquiesce in whatever reformation the Emperor
should make in the constitution of that court;
that he should renounce all leagues against the..

-

Emperor or King of the Romans, and enter

into no alliance for the future, in ,which they
were not comprehended. In re~tun for tbefe
important contcefiios,. the Emperor not only
promised to spa~re Lis life, bitr to fettle on him
and his pofteritv the ciry -of Gotha and its ter-
ritories, together withe an. annual peniion of
fifty thousand florin,. pavable ont of the re-
venues of the elecrorate; and likewise to grant
him a fum in reaCrv nronev to be applied to-
wards the dijcharge of his debts.

and re-.ais :~.7 prifne'er.

Even these articles of grace were clogged

-itrh the mor-rijin conditdon of his remaini:g
the Emperor's prihoner d-uiing the ref t i .is
life. i) To the whole, Charles had fubjoined ,
that he fhoiild fubmitr o the -decrees of the Pope
and council with regard to the controverted
poinrs in religion; but the ilecfor, though he
had been persuaded to sacrifice all the o$lje&s
wvhich men commonly hold to be the dearest
and mnoft valuable, w 'as inflexble wi:h regard
to this point; and neither threats nor ir.rea:ies
could prevail to make him renounce what be
deemed to -be rruth, or persuade him t&o n in
oppoiition to the dicrates of his con.science.

iaurice put in pDoeffion of toe EteEtoral doammious.

As soon as the Saxcm garrison marched ont

of Wittemberg . the Emrperor fulilled his en-

i) Sie

. 4 i. . 14

. D,. Mont. Corps Dipla.

"v, .. II, 53-'

gagements to- Murice; and in -eward for his
merit in having deserted the Protef~ant cause,
and. having coptributed with fu~ fuecefs to-
wards, the dissolution of the Smalkaldick league,
be ,gave him poffefioa of that city, together
with all the other towns in the ele&orate. It was
not without- reluatance, however, that he made
such a sacrifice; the extraordinary success of
his arms had begun to operate, in its usual
manner, upon his ambitious mind, suggesting
new and vast proje&s for the aggrandizement
of his family, towards the accomplishment of
which the retaining of Saxony would have been
of the utmost consequence. But as this scheme
was not then ripe for execution, he durst not
yet venture to disclose it; nor would it have
been either safe or prudent to have offended
Mauri~e, at that jun&ure, by such a manifest
violation of all.the promises, which had seduced
him' to abandon his natural allies.

Negociations with the Landgrave.

The Landgrave, Maurice's father-in- law,

was still in arms; and though now left alone
to maintain the Protestant cause was neither a
feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions
were of considerable extent; his fubje&ts ani-
mated- with zeal for the Reformation; and if
he could have held the Imperialists at bay- for a
short time, he had much to hope from a party
whose strength was ftillunbroken, whose union

as well as vigour might return, and -which had
reason to depend., with certainty, on being
effe&ually supported by th- King of France.
The Landgrave thought not of any thing so
bold or adventurous; but being seized with the
fame consternation which had taken poffeffion
of his associates, he was intent, only, how
-to procure favourable terms from the Emperor,
whom he viewed as a conqueror, to whose
will there was a necessity of submitting. Mau-
rice encouraged this tame and pacifick ipirit,
by magnifying, on the one hand, the Emperor's
power; by boasting, on the other, of his own
interest with his victorioas ally; awd by repre-
fenting the advantageou's conditions which he
could not fail of obtaining by his intercession
for a friend, whom he was so solicitous to save.
Sometimes the Landgrave was induced to place
such unbounded confidence in his promises, that
be was impatient to bring matters to a final ac-
commodation. On other occafi.ns, the Empe-
ror's exhorbitant ambition, refrrained neither by
the fcraples of decency, nor the maxims of jus-
tice, together with the recent and shocking proof
which he had given of this in his treatment of the
EleEtor of Saxony, ca-me so full into his thoughts,
and made fach a lively imprefiion on them, that
he broke off abruptly the negociations which he
had begun; seeming to be convinced that it was
more prudent to depend for safety on his own
arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity.

But this bold. refoIution , which despair had
suggested to an impatient spirit, fretted by dif-
appointments, was not of long continuance.
Upon a more deliberate survey of the enemy's
power., as well as his own weakness, his-
doubts and fears returned upon him, and to-
gether with them the spirit of negociating, and
the desire of accommodation.

The conditions prescribed by the Emperor.

Maurioe, and the Ele&tr of Brandenburg,

afted as Mediators between him and the Em-
peror; and after all that the former had vaunted
of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the
Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The arti-
cles with regard to his renouncing the league
of Smalkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's
authority, and submitting to the decrees of the
Imperial chamber, were the fame which had
been imposed on the Eleftor of Saxony. Be-
sides these, he ,was required to surrender his
person and territories to the Emperor; to im-
plore for pardon on his knees; to pay an hun-
dred and fifty thousand crowns towards defray-
ing the expences of the war; to demolish the
fortifications of all the towns in his dominions
except one; to oblige the garrison which he
placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the
Emperor; to allow- a free passage through his
territories to the Imperial troops as often as it
shall be demanded ; to deliver up all his artil-

fery and amanmition to the Enperor; to set at
liberty . without ranfomr, Henry of Brun fwick.
together with the other prisoners wvhom he
had taken during the war; and reither to tafke
arms himself, nor to permit any of his iubjets
to serve, against the Emperor or his allies for
the future. k)

To whicL he fubmirn.

The Landgrave ratified these articles. though

rithb the utmost relunftance, as they contained
no ftipnlation with regard to the marnner in
-which he was to be treated, and left him en-
tirely at the Emperor's merry. Neceifty , how--
ever, compelled him to give his ascent. Charles,
who had afumned the hanghtv and imperious
tone of a conqueror, ever fice the rednution
of Saxorv. insisted on uncondirional fubmiifon,
and wvould permit iothing to be added to the
terms which be had prescribed. that could in
any degree limit the fulness of his power, or
restrain him from behaving as he saw mee:
towards a Prince -whom he regarded as abfolu-
telv ar his disposal. But though he w-ould not
vouchsafe to negociate -ith the Landgrave. on
such a footing of equality, as to fnffer any ar-
ticle to be inserted amonr those which he had
diftated to him, that could be corfidered as a
formal fripulation for the fecmrity and freed-om

I. Siec Ar TnTI&a Ii C

of his person; he, or his ministers in his name,
gave the Ele&or of Brandenburg and Maaurice
such full fatisfa&ion with regard to this point,
that they assured the.Landgrave, that Charles
would behave to him in the fame way as he
had done to the Duke of Wurtemberg, and
would allow him, whenever he had made his
submission, to return to his own territories.
Upon finding the Landgrave to be still poffeffed
with his former- suspicions of the Emperor's
intentions, and unwilling to trust verbal or am-
biguous declarations, in a matter of such essen-
tial concern as his own liberty, they sent him
a bond signed by them both, containing the
most solemn obligations, that if any violence
whatsoever was offered to his person, during
his interview with the Emperor, they would
inflantly surrender themselves to his sons, and
remain in their hands to be treated by them
in the fame manner as the Emperor should treat
him. 1)

He repairs to the Imperial court.

This, together with the indispensable obli-

gation of performing what was contained in the
articles of which he had accepted, removed his
doubts and scruples, or made it necessary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to
the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a

I) Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv, p. Ii. 356,

circumstance occurred which revived his fufpi-
cions and increased his fears. .Ji t as he was
about -to enter the chamber of presence, in order
to make his publick fnbmifiion to the Emperor,
a copy of the articles which he had approved of
was put into his hands,5 in order that be mifhr
ratify them anew. Upon pernfig them. he
perceived that the Imperial minifrers had added
two new articles; one importing, that if ary dif-
pute fbonld arise concerning the meaning of the
former conditions , the Emperor should have the
right of putting 'what interpretation upon them
he thought most reasonable; the other, tiat the
Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly to the
deciions of the council of Trent. This unworthy
artifice, calculated to surprise him into an ap-
probation of articles, to which he had not the
most difrant idea of assenting, by prepofiag them
to him at a time when his mind was engrossed
and difquieted with the tboughts of that humbling
ceremony which he had to perform , filled the
Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly
out into all those violent exprefions of rage to
which his temper was prone. With some diffi-
culty, the Eiet&or of Brandenburg and Maurice
prevailed at length on the Emperors miniiers
to drop the former article as uijuft, and to ex-
plain the latter in such a manner. that he could
agree to it, without opealy renounci'g the Pro-
teftant religion.

The manner it which the Emperor receiivei him.

This obstacle being firmounted, the Land-

grave was impatient to finish a ceremony which,
how: mortifying soever, had been declared ne-
ceffary towards his obtaining pardon. The Em-
peror was seated on a magnificent throne, with
all the ensigns of his dignity, farroauded by a
numerous train of the: Princes of the Empire,
among whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately
the Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a fad-
den reverse of fortune, a spectator of his humi-
liation. The Landgrave was introduced with
great solemnity, and ' advancing towards the
throne, fell upon his knees. His chancellor,
who walked behind him, immediately read, by
his mafter's command, a paper which contained
an humble confelfion of the crime whereof he
had been guilty; an acknowledgment that he
thad merited on that account the most severe
punishment; an absolute resignation of himself
and his dominions to be disposed of at the Em-
peror's pleasure; a fubmniflive petition for par-
don, his hopes of which were founded entirely
on the Emperor's clemency; and it conclude
with promises of behaving, for the future, like
a fubjeft , whose principles of loyalty and obe-
dience would be confirmed, and would even
derive new force from sentiments of gratitute
which must hereafter fill and animate his heart.
While the chancellor was reading this abjedr

de-

Beclaration, the eyes of all the fpeators were
fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could
behold a Prince, so powerful as well as high-
spirited, suing for mercy in the pofinre of a
supplicant, without being touched with com-
miferadon . and perceiving serious refle&tions
arise in their minds upon the inftabilitv and
emptiners of human grandeur. The Emperor
viewed the whole tranfa&tion with an haughty
unfeeling cornpofure: and preserving a pro-
found silence himfeif. made a sign to one ofhis
secretaries to read his anf'wer; the tenor of
which was: That though he might have jnftry
inflicred on him the grievous punishment which
his crimes deserved, ye: prompted by his own
generosity moved by the folicitations of feveral'
Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and in-
fluenced by his penitential acknowledgments,
he would not deal with him according to the
rigour of jufrice . and would fubje& him to no
penalty that wa= nrot fpicified in the articles
which he had already subscribed. The moment
the secretary had finished, Charles turned away
abruptly, without deigning to give the unhappy
fuppiiant any sign of compaflion or reconcile-
rnent. He did not even desire him to rife from
his knees: which the Landgrave having ven-
tured to do unbidden, advanced towards the
Emperor with an intention to kiss his hand,
flattering himfeif, that his guil being now
fully expiated, he might presume to take that

HifL of Charl, V-. \-ol III G

liberty. But the Elector of Brandenburg, per-
ceiving that this familiarity would be offenfive
to the Emperorj interposed, and desired the
Landgrave to go along wi.th him and Maurice
to the Duke of Alva's apartments in the castle.

tie is detained a irifoner;

He was. received and entertained by that

nobleman with the refpec and courtesy due to
such a gueit But after supper, while he was
engaged in play, the Duke took the Eletbr
and Maurice aside , and communicated to them,
the Emperor's orders, that the Landgrave muf't
remain a prisoner in that place under the cuf-
tody of a Spanish guard. As they had not he-
therto entertained the most distant suspicion of
the Emperor's sincerity or re&itude of inten-
tion, their surprise was excefflve, and their in-
dlignation not inferior to it, on discovering how
greatly they had been deceived themselves, and
how infamously abused, in having been made
the instruments of deceiving and ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to
arguments; and to intreaties, in order to save
themselves firom that disgrace, and to extricate
him out of the wretched situation into which he
had been betrayed by too great confidence in
them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflex-
ible, and pleaded the necessity of executing the
Emperor's commands. By this time it grew
late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing

of what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in
vhich he was entangled. prepared for depart-
ing, when the fatal orders were intimated to
him. He was struck dumb at sift with afto-
rrifhment, bIt after being fiient a few moments,
he broke out into all the violent exprefilons
which horror, at injustice accompanied with
fraud, naruraUy suggests, He complained, he
expoftalated, he exclaimed ; sometimes inveigh-
ing against the Emperor's artifices as nnworthy
of a great and generous Prince; sometimes cen-
furing the creduliry of his friends in trnfting to
Charles's insidious promises; sometimes charging
them with meanness in frooping to lend their
aiftiance towards the execution of fach a per-
fdiious and difnonourable scheme ; and in the
end he required them to remember their enga-
gements to his children, and ii-fr:anta to fulfil
them. They, after giving wva for a little to
the torrent of his paJions, fc;iemnly aferred
their own innocence and upright intention in-
the whole transaction, and encouraged him to
hope. that, as soon as thbey saw the Emperor,
they would obtain redress of an injury , which
affected their own honour, no less than it did
his liberty. At the fame time, in order to
Ioothe his rage and impatience, Maurice re-
mained with him during the night, in the apart-
ment where he was confined, m)

G -rg

,' .;-,c 4^5 ua~a . :r IA? $:-ev. COrl Hilt Ge.=m i; ?w;'r

The Ele&or of Brandenbu.rg hnd Maurice s.ilt in vaini foi

his liberty.

Next morning, the Elefor and Maurice ap-

plied jointly to the Emperor, repreferiting the
infamy to whidh they would be exposed through-
out Germany if the Landgrave were detained
in cfiftody; that they would not have adrifed;
rior would he himself have contented to an in-
terview, if they had fufpe&ed that the loss of
his liberty tras to be the consequence of his
submission, that they were bound to procure
His release; having plighted their fiitli to that
effe&, and engaged their own persons as sure-
fies for his. Charles lifleried to their earnest
remonftrances with the utmost coolness. As
he noiw fiood no longer in need of their fervi-
ces, they had the mortification to find that
their former obfequiopifnefs was forgotten, and
little regard paid to their intercession. He was
ignorant, he told them, of their particular or
private tranfa&ions with the Landgrave, nor
Was his conduat to be regulated by there;
though he knew well what he himfelfhad pro-
ritifed, which was not, that the Landgrave should
be exempt from all restraint, but that he should
rnot be kept a prisoner during life. *) Having

") According to several historians of great name, the Empe-

ror, in his treaty with the Landgrave, flipulated that he
would not detain him in any prifion. But in excuting the
deed which was written in the German tongue, the Im-
perial mniiffers fraudulently substituted the word ewviger,
ilnfea4d f einiger, and thus the treaty , in place of a pro-

laid this with a peremptory and decisive ,tone,
be put an end to the conference; and they
feeiug no probability, at that time, of making
any impression upon the Emperor, who seemed
to have taken this resolution deliberately, and
to be obstinately bent on adhering to it, were
obliged to acquaint the unfortunate priioner
with the ill success of their endeavours in his
behalf. The difrppointment threw him into a
neew and more violent transport of rage, so that
to prevent his proceeding to some desperate ex-
tremity, the Eleetor and Maurice promised that
they would nor quit the Emperor, until, by
the frequency and fervour of their importunity,
they had extorted his consent to set him free.
They accordingly renewed their folicitations
a feti' days afterwards, but found Charles more
haughty and intracable than before , and were

mr:fe that be ihouid nor: be detained ir ary p-rinr . arvrra.n-
ed on)v an engagemenr tia: be rhouid no: be derta:ner.
in perperual imprisonment. But aurhnrs, eminen! frcr i: -
torical kn'c.'.ledtge aro crnical acrurac- . have ca' e :I
cietieon the -rutkh of this common fro-. The Fier.-e ct
Sieidan wi-h regard to it, as v eu as its nc,: bemin rr:e'-
:ioneD in the vari:us rmemro-as at m: e rc ,,:r i':
concerning :he Lanarave's imprvifinment:, rea:'y fa"r
this opinion. But as feve'a', bok? w-h'h coItain

- e ":-

formarion necffiary rc -arrs di : :r'..:f ..:u: -i: : -v
racy , are vrtten in the Germanr. ancL;a&e . nich -
not underfrand . 1 canna: preCendOi a aquire into rh:.- iTar-
reT \\i:h :he fame precfit .,

,, i.ee v:; 1 have e:i' -.

voutred to fertle iorne rhbe- :.,r-rcverred tas hi.w h r here
occured in the c ourie o: :hs -.,ftry. See Strr'. .r

to.5:. Moftn eia's Ecc~ e. n.:.;. vr>, i:,- . 1' . 1It

, En

._

Ed ion

warned that if they touched again upon a sub-
je&t so disagreeable, and with regard to which
he had determined to hear nothing farther, he
would instantly give orders to convey the pri-
Loner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the Land-
grave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to serve
him, they not only defifted, but left the court,
and as they did not chufe to meet the first
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning
the cause of their departure, they informed him
of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him
to fulfil all that he had promised to the Em-
peror, as the most certain means of procuring
a speedy reIeafe.

His impatience under restraint.

Whatever violent emotions their abandon-

ing his cause in this manner occasioned , the
Landgrave's impatience to recover liberty made
him follow their advice, He paid the fum
which had been imposed on him, ordered his
fortrefles to be razed, and renounced all alli-
ances which could give offence. This prompt
compliance with the will of the conqueror pro-
duced no effe&. He was frill guarded with the
fame vigilant severity; and being carried about,
together with the degraded Ele&tor of Saxony,
wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and
his triumph was each day renewed. The for-
titude as well as equanimity, with which the
Ele&or bore these repeated insults, were not

more remarkable than the Lan dgrave's fretfu)-
ness and imparience. His a2cive imipeTuonD
mnind could ill brook refraint ; and refieEion
upon the shameful artifices by which he had
been decoyed into that iituadon, as well as in-

4,

dignation at the injustice witih which he was
fill detained in it , drove him often to the
wvildefT exceies of palion.

-Infe :rgu of: trf miperori  txafn~i m Gernmar'y.

The people of the different cities, to vwhom

Charles thus w-anton]y expofee there iliufmriou
prisoners as a pubUick fpefEacle , ~ere sensibly
touched -irth such an inful: offered to the Ger-
inanick body. ar.ri nurmured loudyv a: tism in-
decent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of comipaint . and
fnch as =affered them more nearil. Charles
proceeded TO rdd oppression to infauh. and ar-
rogating to himself al the righ:s of a concueror,
exercised them vwitih the urmot rigcour,. e
ordered his troops to seize the ariliery arn
milirarv frores belonging to such as had been
meembers of the Smalkaidick league, anrd naving
cc.lle6ed ruwards of fvle hundred pieces c.f
cannon . a grear number in thar age. be ser:
pzar of them into the Low LCountres, part ir:c
Italv . and par: ir'ro Spain . ir order to i;r:Zc
-v this means the famne us nis :uccefs, arc ::...:
th'wev rrigh serve as mounuen-r c his h'r.e
fnbdued a mation. hihber:c ceemed i-vir-Ir.-t

He then levied , by his Cole authority, large
sums, as well upon those who had served him
with fidelity during the war, as upon such as
had been in arms against him; upon the former,
as their contingent towards a war, which, hav-
ing been undertaken, as he pretended, for the
common benefit, ought to be carried on at the
common charge; upon the latter, as a fine by
way of punishment for their rebellion. By these
exations h"e amassed above'one'million fix hun-
dred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared
prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so ge-
neral was the consternation which had seized
the Germans upon his rapid success, and such
their dread of his viaorious troops, that all
implicitly obeyed his commands; though , at
the fame time, these extraordinary stretches of
power greatly alarmed a people jealous of their
privileges, and habituated, during several ages,
to confider the Imperial authority as neither
extensive nor formidable. This discontent and
resentment, how induffrioufly soever they con-
cealed them, became universal; and the more
these passions were restrained and kept down
for the present, the more likely were they to
burit out Loon with additional violence.

Ferdinand's encroachments on the liberties of his Bohemian

fubije&s.

While Charles gave law to the Germans

like a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his

subjects in Bohemia with faill greater rigour.
That kingdpm poise Ted privileges and imm uni-
ties as extenfire as those of any naijin in w#-ich
the feudal inftiturions were established. The
prerogative of their Kings was ws xtremely limit-
ed, and thie crown itself ele&ive. Ferdinand,
when placed on the throne, had cocnfrmed their
liberties with every solemnity prescribed by
their exceffve folicirude for the fecuriry of a
conftirutioin of government to which they were
extremelv arrached. He soon began, however.
to be weary of a jurifdifrion so much circum-
fcribed, and to defpiie a sceptre whicn be could
not transmit to his pofreriry

" and norwithfrand-

ing ail his former engagements , he attempted
to overturn the confrirtation from its founda-
tions , that infread of an elerive kingdom he
might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians
w-ere too high-fpirited tamely to relinqulifh
privileges which they Ld long enljoyed. At the
fame time, many of them havirng embraced the
d o&rines of the Reformers, -te feeds of w\hich
john Huss and Jerome of Prague had pianted in
their country about the beginning of the preced-
ing century, the desire of acquiring religious
iibertv mingled irfelf wirh their zeal for their
civil rights ; and these two kindred pafiions
heightening. as usual. each other's force, pre-
cipitated them immediare:y ir.co violent mea-
faures. They had no: only refused to serve rteh
sovereign against the confederares of Smrrlalde,

but having entered into a close alliance with
the Eletot of Saxony, they had bound them-
selves by a solemn association, to defend their
ancient constitution; and to persist, until they
should obtain additional grants as they thought
receffary towards perfefting the present model
of their government, or rendering it pmore per-
manent. They-chofe Caspar Pflug, a pobleman
of diftin&tion, to be their general

, and raised

an army of thirty thousand men to enforce
their petitions. But either from the weakness
of their leader , or from the diffentions in a
great unwieldy body, which, having united
hastily, was not thoroughly compa&ted, or from
'fome other unknown cause, the subsequent ope-
rations of the Bohemians bore no proportion to
the zeal and ardour with which they took their
first resolutions. They fuffered themselves to be
amused so long with negociations and overtures
of different kinds, that before they could enter
Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg was fought,
the Ele&tor deprived of his dignity and terri-
tories, the Landgrave confined to close custody,
and the league of Smalkalde entirely dissipated.
The fame dread of the Emperor's power which
had seized the reft of the Germans , reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached
with a body of Imperial troops, they instantly
dispersed, thinking of nothing but how to atone
for their past guilt, and to acquire some hope
of forgiveness , by a prompt submission. But

Yerdinand , who entered his dominions full of
that implacable refenrment v. hich inflames Mo-
narchs whose authority has been despised, was
not to be mollifed by the te repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious fubjets to their
duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intrrearie
and tearrs of the citizens of Prague, who ap-
peared before him in the pofrure of fuppliants,
and impiored for mercy. The sentence which
he pronounced againfr them was rigorous to
extremity ; he abolished many of their privi-
leges, he abridged orhers, and newmodelJed
the rcnftitution according to his pleasure. He
condemned to death many of those who had
been most aEive in forming the Tate association.
ag-ainst him. anid punished frill a greater number
with confcation of their good . or perpetual
banishment. lHe obliged ali his fubjeks , of
ever~- conditionr. to give up their arms to be
deposited in forts where he planted garrisons ,
and after difarning his people. he loaded them
w-irh new and exorbitant taxes. anus, by an
ill-conduned and unfaccefsfal effort to extend
their priviieges, The Bohemians not only enlarg-
ed the sphere of the royal prerogative , when
they intended to have circumicribed it. but they
aimoft annihiilaed those liberries which they
aimed at eftablifning on a broader and more fe-
cure foundiaon. r)

O. Sie:c. ac L c. Ta L

- T o Strus.

Co-r :.

Diet held at Augsburg,

The Emperor, having now humbled, and,

as he imagined, fiubduied the independent and
flubborn spirit of the Germans )by the terror of
arms and the rigour of punishment, held a diet
at Augsburg, in order to compose finally the
controversies with regard to religion , which
had so long disturbed the Empire. He durst
not, however, trust the determination of a
matter so interesting to the free fuffrage of the
Germans, broken as their minds now were to
fgbje&ion. He entered the city at the head of
his Spanish troops, and assigned them quarters
there. The reft of his soldiers he cantoned in
the adjacent villages; so that the members of
the diet, while they carried on their delibera-
tions, were surrounded by the fame army
which had overcome their countrymen. Im-
mediately after his publick entry, Charles gave
a proof of the violence with which he intended
to proceed. He took poffeflion by force of the
cathedral, tggether with one of the principal
churches ; and his priests having, by various
ceremonies, purified them from the pollution
with which they supposed the unhallowed mi-
niftrations of the Protestants to have defiled
them, they re-established with great pomp the
rites of the Romish worship. o)

o) Steid. 435. 437.

;ZL.e nEmpeTr exThort them to fuibn*i' to tGenra

Council.

The concourse of members ro tis; d;e* wai

e xtraordinary ; the importarne iof rie affairs cor-
cerning whficb it was to deliberate, added to
the fear of glving offence to the Emperor by an
absence w-hich lay open to mifcon1tru&ionu.
brought togerther almoit all the Princes. nobles.
and representatives of citeEs who had right to
ft in that aJ'embly. The Emperor, ir the
speech with vwhich be opened the meeting , car-
ed their attention immediately to that poiL:,
which seemed chierfv to merit it. saving mea-
tioned the fatal effe&s of the religious diitefn-
tions which had arisen in Germarv, and takei
notice of his own unwearied endeavonrs tb pro-
cure a general council, rwhich alone could pro-
vide a remedy adeqnate to those evils , he ex-
io:lored them to recognise its authority , and to
frand to the award of an aiTenibv

, to which

they had originally appealed , as having the
sole right of judgment in the cafe.

Various revolutions z tne councnt..

Bat the council, to which Charles wif'Led

them to refer all their controversies, h ad. by
this time undergone a violent change. The
fear and jealousy, with which the Emperor's
first fuccefies against the confederates of Smal-
kalde lad inspired the Pope, continued to in-

--e-e, Not satisfied -ith attempting z o re.-rd

the progrefs.of the Imperial arms, by the fud.
den recal of his troops, Paul began to confider
the. Emperor as an enemy, the weight of whose
power he must toon feel, and against whom he
could not be too hasty in taking precautions.
He foresaw thai the immediate ffe&e of the
Emnperor's acquiring .bfolute power in Germany,
would be to rtnder hitt entirely master of all
the deciflo~s obf the council, if it should con-
tinue to meet in oTrent. It was dangerous to
allow a Monarch, so ambitious, to get the
comtmaind of this formidable engine, which he
might employ at pleasure to limit or to over-
turn the papal authority. As the only method
of preventing this, he determined to translate
the copncil to forne city more immediately un-
der his own jurfdi&ion. , and at a greater dif-
tance from the terror of the Enperor's arms,
or the reach of his influence, An incident for-
turiately occurred, which gave this measure the
appearance of'being necessary. One or two of
the father's of the council, together with some
of their domefticks, happening to die suddenly,
the physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or
fuborted by the Pope's legates, pronounced the
distemper to be infeftious and pestilential.

Translated from Trent to Bologna.

Some of the.prelates, ftrnck with a panick,

retired; others were impatient to be gone; and
after a short consultation , the council was

translated (March Iit. t547.) to Bologna, a
city fubjeft to the Pope. All the bifnops in the.
Imperial interest Warmly opposed this resolution,
as taken without necessity, and founded on
false or frivolous prktexts, All the Spani'h pre-,
lates, and most of the Neapolitan, by the Em-
peror's express command, remained at Trent;
the reft, to the number of thirty-four, accomn-
panying the legates to Bologna. Thus a schism
commenced in that Very assembly,. which had
been called to heal the divisions of Chriftendoni;
the fathers of Bologna inveighed against thafe
who staid at Trent, as contumacious and re-
gardlefs of the Pope's authority ; while the other
accused them of being to far intimidated by the
fears of imaginary danger, as to remove to a
place where their consultations could prove of
hio service towards re-establishing peace and or-
der in Germany, p)

Sytiptomns of disgust between the Pope and Emperor.

The Etiperor, at the fame time, employed

all his interest to procure the return of the
council to Trent. But Paul, who highly ap-
plauded his own sagacity in having taken a
step which put it out of Charles's power to ac-
quire the direction of that affetnbly, paid no
regard to a request, the obje&t of which was
so extremely obvious. The ftumnter was con-

p) F. Paul, 248, &c.

fi6med in firutlefs negociati:os with refpe&t to
this poitit; the impbrtunity of the one and obfti-
nacy of the other daily increasing. At last an
event happened which widenied the tbreach irre-
parably, and rendered the Pope utterly averse
from listening tb any proposal that cAme from
the Emperor. Charles as has been already
obfervd;b had so violently exasperated Peter Le-
wis Farnbfe, the Pope's sorn, by refusing to
grant him the investiture of Parma and Placen-
tia, that he hiad watched ever ftnce that time
with all the vigilarnie of resentment for an op-
portuhity of revenging that injury. He bad en-
deavoured to precipitate .his father into open
hotHilities'ag:iirft the Emperor, and had ear-
ieftlv solicited the -King of France to invade
Italy; His hatred and resentment extended to
all thOse vhotrf h. knew that the Efnperor fa-
voured; he persecuted Gonzaga; governor of
Milan, with ill offices, and had encouraged
Fiefco in his attempt upon the life of Andrew
Doria, because both Gonzaga and Doria pof-
sessed a great degree of the Emperor's esteem
and conrfidence. .His malevolence and secret
intrigues were not unknown to the Emperor.
who could not be more desirous to take ven-
geance on hini, than Gonzaga and Doria were,
to be employed as his instruments in infliding
it. Farnese, by the profligacy of his life, and
by enormities of every kind, equal to thoSe
committed by the worst tyrants who have dif-

graced

graced human nature, had rendered himfeli so
odious, that ther thought any violence rwhat-
ever might be attempted agaLnft him. They
soon found among his own fafjects, persons
who were eager, and even deemed it merito-
rious. to lend their hands in fach a service. As
he. animated with the jealousy -which ufnally
poefTes petty sovereigns , had employed all
the cruielty and fraud, whereby they endeavour
to fopply their defea of power, in order to
humble and extirpate the nobility fabje& to his
government, five noblemen of the grearefi dif-
tincrion in Placentia, combined to avenge the
injuries, which they tbemfeives had fufered ,
as weli as tbhofe~ -which he had offered to their
order. They formed rzeir plan in conjaci-on
with Gonzaga; bur i: remainhs uncerain whe-
ther re originally fuggefrea the scheme to them,
or only approved of w-har -~hey proposed, and
co-operated in carrying ir on. They concerted
all the prevlous fieps with such forefighr, con-
duaEed their intrigues with such secrecy, and
difplavea fach courage in the execution of their
deign . that it may be ranked among the most
audacious deeds of mat nature mentioned in
Miftory.

Th~ aLE.U a:; L of: the Pone .-.

One body of the conspirators surprised, a;

mid-dayv. (Sept. I0. I54-.) the gLtev of :he
ciradel of Placent.l wnere farnese reiided, over-

Hist. of Ch-rl N

- o:. II1 H n

powered his guards, and murdered him. An-
bther party of them made themselves masters of
the town and called upon their fellow-citizens
to take arms, in order to reaffuine their liberty.
The multitude ran towards the citadel, from
wvhich three great guns, a signal concerted with
Gonzaga, had been fired; and before they could
guess the cause or the authors of the tumult,
they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant hanging
by the heels from one of the windows of the
citadel. But so universally detestable had he
become, that not one expressed any sentiment
bs concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or
discovered the least indignation at this ignomi-
hious treatment of a sovereign Prince. The
exultation at the success of thie conspiracy was
general, and all applauded the a~tors in it, as
the deliverers of their country. The body was
tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the ci-
tadel, and exposed to the infu!ts of the rabble;
the reft of the citizens returned to their usual
tccupations, as if nothing extraordinary had
happened.

The Imperial troops take pofi'efiou of Pacentia.

Before next morning, a body of troops ar-

tiving from the frontiers of the Milanese, where
they had been posted in expectation of the event,
took poffeffion of the city in thh Emperor's
name, and reinstated the inhabitants in the pof-
fetion of their ancient privileges. Parnr a,

w-nich the ItnrPeriaiifc a7:imuted Iikewf7e +c'

~uT~i~. an~ -fared bxf rhc vi~riincC anti rie-

1kvr of th-e Offi~CerS whom~ Iarme2. ha& 1inu-uift~d
w-ith the command, of the ~ra-rrik~t. The death
of a ion4 w~horm. norw-itnftan~ciing iis im~fam~enn
v-ices 4 Pau~l lov~ed ~-with an excess of razren'ta1
tendernelfs. ovetwte-iemed him~ wTh- ~the deepest
affbi~-Cuon arjd r~se bK~; of i" cfrv of nchn Confef-
quncae as Piace~ni~ -. g6ear~Iy emmrt~ered his

furw. le accr~nfeo G~orza~a. n7 tfl D

tory. o: itavsing conrmrt~iet a errn-r ~nrar. in
orcer toprepare the w Fii;fo r a~n u~Iiju ufurpa-
tion. cr 1rTrmeuia~e:v o-rmattded of. -ne EmPe-
ron r i~aci.saiOn ftr bom_: for tbe folrmer. Ps- Thje
au~;rlzr~eLr &: G~tzn2~l Co7 :rr; iasr4 by tnr-ie
retfnirru:ior of Plar::e_, ro nii OC

tavio.IU F

al cwne Lu Ch~ar1:efs who.7

r~au~cr tnan cr.it a prisze c~i ~i1Zfl v-i122. w~sas

~-ilin-~rco: on<~ to expc, e _r.;mir-- Tio Sbe im-

hai U;v;-L an o~r'pninfTiTv. oi ~e1Z;n2 i:. XZL2 to
beanT Irim- LDXrr o:17f oetucr s wlia-
I~T.w o: me irzserizan~c, wr_cr~iT Pf~r~TreE tO~ rA~Jh

kieeDpofftii~on of tne ci:?-, to~-emner wrn~s i

-' - --. . -2t,` .

-'-- - -- .L .J&r~L . ~ :

The Pope courts the aiiiance of the Frencn King and the

, enetians.

This resolution flowing from an ambition

so rapacious, as to be ieftrained by no confi-
deration either of decency or justice, tranfport'
ed the Pope so far beyoind his usual modera-
tion and caution, that he was eager to take
arms against the Emperor, in order to be aveng-
ed on the muderers of his ton, and to recover
the inheritance wrested from his family. Con-
fcious, however, of his own inability to con-
tend with such an enemy, he warmly solicited
the French King and the republick of Venice
to join in an offenfive league against Charles.
But Henry was intent at that time on other
obje&s. His ancient allies the Scots, having
been defeated by the Engliflh in one of the
greatest battles ever fought between these two
rival nations, he was about to fend a numerous
body of veteran troops into that country, as well
to preserve it from being conquered, as to gain
the acquisition of a new kingdom to the French
monarchy, by marrying his son the Dauphin
to the young Queen of Scotland. An under-
taking accompanied with such manifest advan-
tages, the success of which appeared to be so
certain, was not to be relinquished for the remote
profpe& of benefit from an alliance depending
upon the precarious life of a Pope of fourscore,
who had nothing at heart but the gratification
of his own private resentment. Instead, there-

fore. of ramnin headiong into the aTliance pr?-
posed Henry amused the Pope with such gie-
neral profeffions and promises , as might keep
1him from any thoughts of endeavouring to ac-
commodate his differences with the Emperor,
but at the fame avoided any fnch engagement
as might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himfflf, or precipitate him into a
war for which he was not prepared. The Ven4-
tians. though much alarmed at feeing Placenria
in the hands of the Imperialifs, imitated the
w-ary condut of the French King, as it nearly
refeTmbled the fpiri: with which they them-
selves ufuaPy carried on their negociations. r)

The dEi.- .if Augiirg peririon for the retu-n of the cou&-

ci. tc Tren:.

Bun, rthough he Pope found that it was

not in his power to kindle immediate_'v the fLa-
mes of w\ar, be mi no forger the injuries.
which he was obliged for the prefetn:rc endure ;
refentmnen: fertled deeper in his mind . and be-
came more rancorous in proportion as he fe"
the dirctulrv of rartfying it. It was, -while
these fendments of enmir\- were ir rf:" force .
and the desire of vengeance at is 7-hr . rhnr
the diet of Augsburg, by :he Emnveror'- c rtr-
mand. petitioned the Pr'e, _*= te name o- Jb

Y- eem. de tibier, i . ". '

- . :

:

. ,:?'. .'

V'ei e2, =19. 2^3 Tnuar-. l.,.

whole Germanick body, to enjoin the prelates
who had retired to Bologna to return again to
Trent, and to renew their deliberations in that
place. Charles had been at great pains in bring-
ing the members to join in this request. Hav-
ing observed a considerable variety offentiments
among the. Protestants with respect to the sub-
mission which he had required to the decrees
of the council, some of them being altogether
intra.&able, while others were ready to acknow-
ledgei its right of jurifdition upon certain con-
ditions, he employed all his address in order
to gain or to divide them. He threatened and
overawed the Ele&or Palatine, a weak Prince,
and obnoxious to vengeance on account of the
afliftance which he had given to the confederates
of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring liberty
for the Landgrave, together with the formal
confirmation of his own ele&oral dignity, over-
came Maurice's scruples, or prevented him from
opposing what he knew would be agreeable to
the Emperor. The Eletor of Brandenburg,
less influenced by religious zeal than any Prince,
of that age, was easily induced to imitate their
example, in assenting to all that the Emperor
required. The deputies of the cities remained
still to be brought over. They were more tena-
cious of their principles, and though every
thing that could operate either on their hopes
or fears was tried, the utmost that they would
promise was, to acknowledge the jurifdi&ion of

zrie coancil, if efc~cuaz p~ru~-1llon were Irtaa
fr feuin o ~Le~ ci~ris Of a~i par~ies re~t a.C-
ce>~ to r~a: Je~tmb~v, wk-r; e~ilre ~t tr, i dc~--

t~ate~ an~ ali pCiL~LS in c~Tiz1?uverjcwee e

cic~r accortzg :c' fcri~jmre and Pe tfa-e o

L2C ~irnkve c~rch Bat wei th~e ii~semnr~raL
cx~i~zailn ths :arar~n wa;i pre'~fnfe' d (Uct~

9. '54T-) t~r tnie Emp~eror. ne ren~rnr~e to pia:

ou:r reac~rg meri ipaw;. wr taking anx- notice ~
mel cor~diUO~-s on wnic they ~Ead ka~fd d htt
iferned to r3iaiLe it for ~7rantE~i that~ teie hac
camr: Lied xxumrr ixs uetnan& aiA$ gavei ftriamts c;
thne ee~pu:;e&- 'r :- iri full ard inrrersf~erv fut-~

1de~is ,rj - - -~e -a ~s-rt tr- - -

~e~r~ i3 hlot tr~p o ~fe mml- rig r~:. 3L:~r

~~nomd remtrr~~- Lfl$er m~is n~ar~ of am-ny "XL T

r3a\- :o cJLKL si at e:Iiari, Gr"I * fza mU

of theccr9i Lr5aru- 1 -- -

arFmen rcerre x-.: --

C, -.

to Trent. But the Pope, from the fatisfa&ion
of mortifying the Emperor, as well as from
his own aversion to what was demanded, re-
solved, without hesitation, that his petition
should be reje&ed; though, in order to avoid
the imputation of being influenced wholly by
resentment, he had the address to throw it
upon the -fathers at Bologna, to put a direat
negative upon the request. He referred to their
consideration the petition of the diet, and they,
ready to confirm by their assent whatever the
legates were pleased to ditate, declared (Dec.
Qo. 1547.) that the council could not, in con-
Iiftenee with its dignity, -return to Trent, un-
less the prelates who, by remaining there, had
discovered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair
to Bologna, and join their brethren; and that,
even after their jun&ion, the council could not
renew its consultations with any profpe& of
benefit to the church, if the Germans did not
prove their intention of obeying its future de-
crees to be sincere, by yielding immediate
obedience to those which it had already past. t)

The Emperor protests agaiiift the council of Bologna.

This answer was communicated to the Em-

peror by the Pope, who at the fame time ex-
borted him to comply with demands which ap-
peared to be so reasonable. But Charles was

.) F, Patl, 250. Pallav. Ii. 49.

ibetter acquainted with the duptlcirv of the
Pope's character thEr to be deceived by such a
gross artifice ; he krnew that the prelates of
Bologmn durf utter no fenrimeer bur what Paul
inspired : and, therefore. overlocking them as
Imere infTrumnents in the hand of anorTher . he
considered their repyi as a full difco'-erv of the
Pope's intentions. As he could no longer hope
to acquir- fIch an ascendant in the council as
to render it fubfervienr to his ow-n plan. he
saw ir to be neceffarv that Paul should not have
5r in his power to turn agairf him the authoriTy
of so venerable an afiembly. In order to prevent
this, he fenr (January r6. 15S4.) two Spanifi:
lawy.ers to Bologna. whbo, in the presence of
the legatres, protefrted : That the trranfatioi of
the council to that place had beer unnecefary .
and founded on false or frivolous pretexts: :t ar
while it continued to meer there . ir onghr to
be deemed an unii-fnl and fc~ifmzaticai con-
verricle; that all its dec~fons ourgh: of conrfe
to be he3d as null and invalid ; and th.at as the
Pope , together with the corrupt eccleziaficks
depended on him. had abandored the care of
tl.e church, the Emperor. as its proteEtor.

ounld employ all the power wrhich God had
commitred to him. ir order to preferre it fror
those calamities with which it was threatened.
A few days after, (January 23. 1548.) the Tm-
Derial ambassador at Rome demanded an audience
Ds the Pope, and in presence of al the Cardi-

nals , as well as foreign ministers, protested
against the proceedings of the prelates at Bo-
SJogna , in terms equally harsh and difrefpe&c-
ful. u)

The Emperor prepares a fyflern, to serve as a rul.

of faith in Germany.

It was not long before Charles proceeded

to carry these threats, which greatly alarmed
both the Pope and council at Bologna , into
execution. He let the diet know the ill success
of his endeavours to procure a favourable anfxver
to. their petition , and that the Pope, equally
regardless of their entreaties, and of his fervi-
ces to the church, had refused to gratify them
by allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom
of debate and judgment, was not to be given
up, the profpeft of it was, at present, distant
and uncertain; that, in the mean time, Ger-
rrany was torn- in pieces by religious diffen-
fEcns, the purity of the faith corrupted, and
the minds of the people difquieted with a mul-
tiplicity of new opinions and controversies for-
merly unknown among Christians; that, moved
by the duty which he owed to them as their
sovereign, and to the Church as its prote&or,
he had employed some divines, of known abi-

u) F. Paul, 264. Pallav. 51. Sleid. 446. Goldalti Contic.

Imperial. i. 561.

i~ieis an~d ie~arnlmg. to prepate a, ~~;-mi d
trine , to W~i~icn aJ: if;aiat~ Cof)7I, unul a
council, iuecn as rr-~ev v~i.uIe : ~li . be~id~
cowLocared. T~his ~?~~ fxl\ei~i wa Ciii~i

cae ~c PEThg.

lticking, and ASFricJia. of wSn~-rti :n~ tw~e irmerar
w-ere dign-iarks in tne RorLifI cnurCL, qlu 1JL~
mariiatle for the~ir pacificit and; ii~eaiir~~ ;iD-lrM;
rtiv iax'~ was~ a Pfro~if~anr zi-i~ne. Ir~Tf r-~e~zeci. no
w~ithout _reason, ofE a~i ng ,rsfe~ ga7e byDie
and pro~rnifes to _lTa or mleG. nfis parrya
on ttus occailn, i. me alrnies T~) ~iCeS &~ to1e
diet of RCarifmcin in mce vs~c:r oiie tnouliifan li-;e
~iLrnCreo and fourr~v-crE  in rmer to reC{)nI~fef

yle ~~t-el~ a-zres. ierv~n as rtoc :&rct

the nrrefnr workT. Butl2 as- ri~a Emmqlerc~r- 5-L
ziotn was5 muicn aimedlf~ ~C2 :2:: :i~el
ne found it no Io~ner ntece~ac~J 3~ ~~~~ ZLC
Protestan~t w'ith tue a~f~e o~-lc~ar-- asi a: ::1a:
juncture, tnEl uoaemlons 12s :nef~r iav'Ou1r we:C
not nowac i It~3fe:&u. ~,7 CIQ~ :lev e{eflT tO
points of ibo much c~cnIcquLnc~-. Tmt treau~

*1 ="- ~ -

contained a co~mme:Tf ivi~enz i-

..: -rtr~ c*ulV

of trie RomEifn cniiircmr. tO. espre~~ec.
the mo~fi part, in tu3e ~fcrfrei wards.. or iD ~ir:~-
rural phfrafes. or ui W7~3Th ii i~

Lo f arhigilnir v.

Ev-ery do~rine. bowe. r ea\c ~Forev
wsas retaineld * a-na aji tnt tiZ~S . whiOci rue
Proreftan ts con demn ed as ~i-reniocs of men
Ilntroduc~ed into the wnrl'hiD c;: .~~ . wC~ere CD-~
!o~ned. VI-iit r~egrd to tW&r 3oL2$ onk~T. ^otn

relaxation of their rigour was granted, and some
latitude in pra&ice admitted. Such ecclefiafticks
as had married, and would not put away their
wives, were allowed, nevertheless, to perform
all the funftions of their sacred office; and those
provinces which had been accustomed to partake
of the cup, as well as of the bread in the fa-
crament of the Lord's Supper, were still in-
dulged the privilege of receiving both. Even
these were declared to be conceflions for the
fake of peace, and granted only for a season,
in compliance with the weakness or prejudices
of their countrymen. x)

This which was carled the Interim he lays before the diet,

May 15. 1548.

This system of do&rine, known afterwards

by the name of the Interim, because it con-
tained temporary regulations, which were to
continue no longer in force than until a free
general council could be held, the Emperor
presented to the diet, with a pompous decla-
ration of his flncere intention to reestablish
tranquillity and order in the church, as well as
of his hopes that their adopting there regulations
would contribute greatly to bring about that de-
firable event. It was read in presence, accord-
Ing to form. As soon as it was finished, the
archbishop of Mentz, president of the elec-

x) F. Paul, 270o. Pallav. ii. 6o. Sleid. 453. 457. Stryv.

Corp. 1054. Goldaft. Conftit. Imper. i. 518.

toral college, rose up hastily , and having
thanked the Emperor for his unwearied and
pious endeavours in order to restore peace to
the church, he, in name of the diet, signified
their approbation of the system of d ;orine which
he had prepared, together with their refoiation
of conforming to it in every particuIar. The
whole assembly was amazed at a declaration io
unprecedented and unconfritutional , as wvel as
at the Elecor's presumption in pretending to
deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point
which had not hitherto been the fubje& of con-
ftiration or debate.

an, exrorts thei: approbanoLt of it.

tut- not one member had the courage to

contradit wthat the Eleftor had said: some being
everaw ed by fear , others remaining silent
through complaisance. The Emperor held the
archbifbop's declaration to be a full confritu-
tiona] ratification of tbe Interim, and prepared
"to enforce the observance of it, as a decree os
the Empire. y)

KNew and frure.Lei, faituu:ations ic: the Landgrave .s lerry

During this diet. the wvife and children

of the Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice
of Saxonv, endeavoured to interefr the mem-
bers in behalf of that unhappy Prince, who fdil

': Slei& 4' ; F Pau. :3 . F Pahi'a

hlnguifhed in confinement. Bat Charles, who
di' riot chufe to be brought under the necessity
of 'eje&ing any request that came from such a
tefdetable body, in order to prevent their re-
preientations, laid before the diet an account
of his tratfaftions with the Landgrave, together
wIth the motives which had at first induced him
to detain that Prince in custody, and which
tendered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep
him still under restraint. It was no easy mat-
ter to give any good reason for an asion, in-
capable of being jnftified. But he thought the
most frivolous pretexts might be produced in an
assembly willing to be deceived, and afraid of
nothing so much as to discover that it saw his
condiUQ in its true colours. His account ds his
own oconduft was accordingly admitted to be
fully fatisfaftory, and after some feeble intrea-
ties that he would extend his clemency to his
unfortunate prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns
Twere no more mentioned. z)

In order to counterbalance the unfavourable

impression which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his resentment, invested Mlau-
rice in the ele&oral dignity, with all the legal
formalities. The ceremony was performed,
with extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so

) l51eid. 441

tcrr~ was2 kept a priboner. tna: ~e Could. vrIew it
fCI~rr~ ~iF winckrws.6~ Ereri t> i'1- d o

ev-es that w~-.-- hEi b~eh~d a ~ropo~~
receivilng tbo~e e~if~gns of di~.rJTv of whichdk hfe
had heen 1trpedr. with o-t lte~r~l~ oner _Es

~ zne~r u ~eco~lr~i the fmrkune wcri<Th L~1Eha~

preere d all~'" crE~e C~itIarr:zel .

TL r-

te E=Fp:-M 2 ~ -d:i- ---

ft- ~ chr.es. when ~:i!i CC re ~d <

fa-;~rf t~

::! f~fZ T

Te P-c:f3ait ccnd-~irn-

Thv:~re th t: t- The

Papf. mrvr~ Tig L.--

h; a

a wcr

whkh.

r o

;PrLI T I.TIcrira e

than to inffru&t the ignorant I or to reclaim such
as were enemies to the truth. While the Lu-
theran divines fiercely attacked it, on one hand,
the general of the Dominicans with no less
vehefnence impugned it bh the other. But at
Rome, as soon as the contents of the Interim
came to be known , the indignation of the cour-
tiers and ecclefiafticks rose to the greatest
height. They exclaimed aga.inst the Emperbr's
profane encroachment on the sacerdotal func-
tion, in presuming, with the eoncurrence of an
assembly of laymen, to define articles of faith,
and to regulate modes of worship. They com-
pared this rash deed to that of Uzzah, who,
with an unhailowed hand, had touched the
ark of God; or to the bold attempts of those
Emperors , who had rendered their memory
detestable, by endeavouring to model the Chris-
tian chlrch according to their pleasure. They
even aff'eted to find out a refemblarice be-
tween the Emperor's condu& and that of Henry
VIIt. and expressed their fear of his imitating
the example of that apostate, by ufurping the
title as well as jurifdi&ion belonging to the
head of the church. All, therefore, contended
With one voice, that as the foundations of ec-
cleflaftical authority were now shaken, and the
whole fabrick ready t6 be overturned by a new
enemy, some powerful method of defence muaf
be provided, and a vigorous resistance must be

made,

made, at the beginning, before he grew too
formidable to be opposed.

The feninnen.s of the Pope with regard to It.

The Pope, whose judgment was improved

by longer experience in great tranfations, as
well as by a more extensive observation of ha-
man affairs, viewed the matter with more acute
dirernment, and derived comfort from the very
circamftance which filled them with apprehension.
He was aftonifned, that a Prince of fach fupe-
rior fagaciry as the Emperor, should be so in-
toxicated with a single viacory, as to imagine
that he migit give law to mankind, and decide
even in those matters, with regard to which
they are most inipatien- of dominion. He saw
that, by joining any one of the contending par-
ties in Germany, Charles might hare had it in
his power to have opprefTed the other, but that
the prefamption of faccefs had now inspired
him with the vain thought of his being able to
domineer over both. He foretold that a system
which all attacked. and none defended, could
not be of long duration; and that, for his rea-
son. there was no need of his interposing in
order to hafren its fall; for as soon as the power-
fal hand which now upheld it was withdrawn,
it would fink of its own accord and be forgotten
for ever. b)

' S-ec i ct F Pau,, -.. :.7 Pai i. , 64.

ift. of Chrl, - VoIIL, T

lL.

T.he Emperor enforces compliance with the Interim.
The Emperor, fond of his own plan, ad-

hered to his resolution of carryir g it in:o full
execution. But though the Elefcor Palatine,
the Eleao:r of Brandenburg, and l9aurice , in-
fluenced by the fame cenfideralions as fornier y
seemed ready to yield inmplicit obcdience to
whatev'er he fbould enjoin . he met nr t every
where with. a like obfcquiou.s ftbmiffion. John
Marquis of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he
had taken part with great zeal in the war against
the confederates of Smalkalde, refused to re-
nounce doftrines which he held to be facrcd;
and reminding the Emperor of the repeated pro-
minifes which he had given his Protestant allies
of allowing them the free exercise of their re-
ligion, he claimed, in consequence of these, to
be exempted from receiving the Interim. Some
other Princes, also, ventured to mention the
fame feruples, and to plead the fame indulgence.
But on this, as on other trying occasions, the
firmness of the Ele&or of Saxony was most
diftingtufhed, and merited the highest praise.
Charles, well knowing the authority of his
example with all the Protestant party, laboured
with the utmfoft earnestness, to gain his appro-
bation of the Interim, and by employing some-
times prom ifes of setting him at liberty, some-
times threats of treating him with greater
harshness, attempted alternately to work upon
his hopes and his fears. But he was alike re-

gardiefs of both. After havirg declared his
ixed belief in the do6trires of the Reforma-
tion: ,, I cannot ncow said he. in my old age,
abandon the principles, for wvhich I eary con-
tended: nor. in order to procure freedom during
a few declining vears, wT'rl I betray that ood
cause, on account cf wl'ch I have fufered to
much. and am fil wi-lin_ to fuffer. Be-rer
for me to enjov, 5n iis fcl:,ude, the esteem
of virruous men. together with :ne approbatiron
of mrv own conscience, than to retarr into the
world.. wirh the imputation and guir of apof-
tac-, to disgrace and enrr-irrer th>e remainder
of rmy days.

" By this magnanimous refoludon,

re fIr hZs counrrvmer a Darrern of concuct. so
ver" dineren: frcom za: wvhich :re Lmteror
wvifhed him to -hve ex ired to

r :er . ai :

arew upon him fre a -s s e .

The rigour of his cc n mrr enr was increared
the number of his ser: an:s afrided ; the Lu-
theran clerg-vmen. ow-o hadc hi:bero been per-
nirtted to arre:C him. were cn-rimed ; and even
the b:,r s of cevonn . hich hic heer hij
chief consolation d:'ing a tedaic us irr. -ror.meI.t,
were taker ifrm him. c) T~e Langrvave of
Hefe . his comparnLion in friso ure . did nat
mainza:n the fame corn:arcv. Hiis -par:ice and
i.rtir-nde were borh so much exhaaited tv the

length of his confinement , that , willing to
purchase freedom at any price , he wrote to
the Emperor, offering not only to approve of
the, Interim , but to yield an unreserved sub-
miflion to his will in every other particular.
But Charles, who knew that whatever course
the Landgrave might hold, neither his example
nor authority would prevail on his children or
fubje&s to receive the Interim, paid no regard
to his offers. He was kept confined as ftri&ly
as ever; and while he fuffered the cruel morti-
fication of having his condut set in contrait to
that of the Ele&or, he derived not the smallest
benefit from the mean step which exposed him
to such deferred censure. d)

The free cities ftruggie agaihft receiving the Irterint.

But it was in the Imperial cities that Char.

les met with the most violent oppolition to the
Interim; These small commonwealths , the
citizens of which were accustomed to liberty
and independence, had embraced the dof&rines
of the Reformation when first published, with
remarkable eagerness; the bold spirit of inno-
vation being peculiarly suited to the genius of
free government. Among them, the Protestant
teachers had made the gteateft number of pro-
felytes. The most eminent divines of the party
were fettled there as pastors. By having the

d) Sleid, 464,

diretion of the schools and other seminaries of
learning, they had trained up disciples, as well
inftraiced in the articles of their faith, as zeal-
ous to defend them. Such persons were not to
be guided by example, or fxaved by authority ;
but having been taught to examine and to de-
cide in mat:ers of controverfvy, thought that
they were both qualified and entitled to judge
for them eives. As soon as the contents of
the Interim were known , they , with one
voice, joined in refusing to admit it. Augf-
burg , Ulm, Srrafburg. Constance , Bremen ,
Magd-eburg, together wirh many other towns
of less note , prefened remonfrrances to the
Emperor , ferr:ng forth the i:rreguar and un-
constitutional manner in which the Intrerim had
been enafted, and beseeching him not to offer
such violence to their consciences, as to require
their atTent to a form of doftrine and w-or"nip,
which appeared to them repugnant to rthe ex-
press precepts of the divine law. Bur Charles
having prevailed on so many Princes of the
Empire to approve of his new model. was not
much moved by the representations of those
cities , which . how for-midable soever they
might have proved, if thev could have been
formed into one body, lay 1o remote from each
other, that it was eafv to cprefs them fepa-
rately, before it was pol~.e for therni to nrit e.

Compelled by violence to submit.

In order to accomplish this, the Emperor

saw it to be requisite that his measures should
be vigorous, and executed with such rapidity
as to allow no time for consulting any common
plan of opposition. Having laid down this
maxim as the rule of his proceedings, his first
attempt was upon the city ofAugfburg, which,
though overawed by the presence of the Spanish
troops, he knew to be as much diffatisfied with
the Interim as any in the Empire. He ordered
one body of these troops to seize the gates; he
polled the reft in different quarters of the city ;
and assembling (Aug. 3. 1548.) all the burgef-
fes in the town, he, by his sole absolute autho-
rity, published a decree abolishing their present
form of government, dissolving all their corpo-
rations and fraternities, and nominating a small
number of persons, in whom he vefied for the
future the right of administration. Each of the
persons, thus chosen, took an oath to observe
the Interim. An aEt of power , so unprece-
dented as well as arbitrary, which excluded the
body of the inhabitants from any share in the
government of their own community, and sub-
jested them to men who had no other merit
than their servile devotion to the Emperor's
will, gave general disgust; but as they durif
not venture upon resistance, they were obliged.
to submit in silence. e) From Augsburg , in

e) Sleid. 469.

wh~ich he left a g~arrison. be proceeded to ~turn,
alnd new~mr~deling jts gr~verirn~enrI with t~e fa-~irn~
v-ioe-.t h~al~d. he %sized fLChi of tbeir pas~Tors as
re~feid to subscribe rbt- I~terirn , commsit~ted
them to, pri~i . a~d at h-~s dep~arture carries
them along wrin I? in chr ns. f)B- is

the ir>,,,erm j.' :w'i ,i te Tm4l~ prwe-fa1 :>~-~f lr-

t~V a-i~ rd th rrT v-atfch

wir- 'iecd. ard C~zarv :ow -;5-zr"~_ ~
thiemee frrr~~t t!a :evee . filc

-ifL -

C1

L~eceiPzr tJ cam - J}W? '

Thisob ~ri~irn e 7cxw'~edt the -t r: C~LjLCK- C': .2?

too S~trcC~ ~- o _ ,rr

- ~r~_rL

tnei Germansc~- 2 a:~t!;- ~rmer- naf :C;-:xeTr :2

make fthem~' cLnor IQS TJ7i~f t' ie e:: a
Jawif asws a~-- :mjn:~ irer:
from p mn.Trreveesac?~

thoIe ceerxs o:l iJ7T w: P
Iteri e:~~d w~: jia

bTeirT ednCv. as lv r:e c.>i:

popish service with contempt or horror; and in
most places the Romish ecclefiafticks, who re-
turned to take poffeffion of their churches,
could hardly be prote&ed from insult, or their
miniftratiQns from interruption. Thus, not-
withstanding the apparent compliance of so
many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed
to freedom, submitted with relu&ance to the
power which now oppressed them. Their un-
derftanding as well as inclination revolted against
the do&rines and rites imposed on them; and
though, for the present, they concealed their
indignation and resentment, it was evident that
there paflons could not always be kept under
restraint, but would break out at last in effects
proportional to their violence. g)

The Pope diffmiffes the council assembled at Bologna.

Charles, meanwhile, highly pleased with

having bended the stubborn spirit of the Ger-
mans to such general submission, departed for
the Low Countries, fully determined to compel
the cities, which still flood out, to receive the
Interim. He carried his two prisoners the Elec-
tor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse along with
him, either because he durst not leave them be-
hind him in Germany, or because he wished to

g) Mem. de Ribier. ii. sI8. Sleid. 491.

give his countrymen the Flemings this ilhftrious
proof of the faccefs of his arms, and the extent
of his power. Before Charles arrived at Bruf-
fels. ( Sept. I-,. i48.) he was informed that
the Pope's legates at Bologna had difmiTed the
council by an indefnite prorogation, and that
the prelates assembled there had returned to
their refpeftive counrries. Neceflirv had driven
the Pope into this meafnre. By the secession
of those who had voted againfi the tranilation,
together with the departure of others, who
grew weary of conldmirng in a place where they
were not fuffered to proceed to bufmefs, so
few and such inconsiderable members remained,
that the pompous appellation of a General Coun-
cil could not, wirh decency, be bestowed any
longer upon them. Paul had no choice but ro
dissolve an assembly which was become the ob-
je& of contempt, and exhibired to all Chrifren-
dom a most glaring proof of the impotence of
the Romish See. But unavoidable as the measure
was, it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted,
and had the appearance of wikhdrawing the re-
mnedy , at the very time when those for whose
recovery it was provided , were prevailed on to
acknowledge its virtue, and to make trial of
its efficacy. Charles did nor fail to put this con-
ftruEtion on his condunt; and by an artful com-
parison of his own efforts to suppress here v ,
with Paul's fcandalons inartention to a point so
essential, he endeavoured to render the Pontif

odious to all zealous Catholicks. At the fame
time, he commanded the prelates of his faf&ion
to remain at Trent, that the Council might
still appear to have a being, and might be ready,
whenever it was thought expedient to resume
its deliberations for the good of the church. h)

The Emperor receives his son Philip in the Low Countries.

The motive of Charles's journey to the Low

Countries, beside gratifying his favourite pas-
sion of travelling from one part of his domini-
ons to another, was to receive Philip his only
son, who was now in the twenty-firft year of
his age, and whom he had called thither, not
only that he might be recognized by the States
of the Netherlands as heir-apparent, but in
order to facilitate the execution of a vast scheme,
the obje& of which, and the reception it met
with, shall be hereafter explained. Philip,
having left the government of Spain to Maxi-
milian, Ferdinand's eldest son, to whom the
Emperor had given the Princess Mary his
daughter in marriage, embarked for Italy, at-
tended by a numerous retinue of Spanish no-
bles. i) The squadron which escorted him, was
commanded by Andrew Doria, who, notwith-
standing his advanced age, insisted on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty

h) Pallav. 'p. II. 72.

i) 'Ochoaa -Carolea, 362.

to the son. which he had often discharged to-
wards the father. He landed safely (Nov. 25.
I5-8.) at Genoa; from thence he went to
IMlilan, and proceedirng through Germany, ar-
rived (April 1. I549.) at the imperial court in
Brussels. The States of Brabanr, in the first
place. and those of the other pro4inces in their
order, acknowledge his right of fucceflicx in
common form, and be rook the cufromary oath
to preserve all their privileges inviolate. k) In
all the towns of the Low Counrries through
which Philip pa!ed.. he was received a-ith ex-
traordinary pomp. Nothing that could express
the refpeEt of the people, or contribute to his
amusement was neglecred ; pageants, tourna-
ments. and publick fpectacies of every kind
were exhibited with that expensive rnmanifi-
cence which commercial nations d-isplay-, when,
on any ,occasion, they depart from their ufaal
maxims of frugality. But amidif there scenes
of fefrivitv and pleasure. Philip's natural feve-
rirv of temper was discernible. Youth itself
could nor render him agreeable , nor his being
a candidate for power form him to courtesy.
He maintained a haughr reserve in his beha-
viour, and discovered fch manifest partiality
towards his Spanish attencants, together with
such an avowed preference to the manners of
their country, as highly difgufied the Flemings,

k) Hare: anna., Braba": b5:

an4 gave rife to that antipathy, which after-
wards occasioned the revolution so fatal to him
in that part of his dominions. 1)

Charles was long detained in the Nether-

lands by a violent attack of the gout, which
returned upon him Co frequently, and with fach
increasing violence, that it had broken, to a
great degree, the vigour of his constitution. He
nevertheless did not flaken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
burg, after a long struggle, found it necessary
to give obedience; those of Constance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were com-
pelled by force not only to conform to the In.
terim, but to renounce their privileges as a free
city, to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke
of Austria, and, as his vassals, to admit an
Austrian governor and garrison. m) Magdeburg,
Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck were the
only Imperial cities of note that still continued
refractory.

1) Mem. de Ribier, ii. q9. L'Evefque Mrem. de Card. Gran-

velle, i, etx.

m) Sleid. 474. 49Lo

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
