THE
H I

STOR

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR

VO L. III.

A

Y
CHARLES

V.

THE
H I

STORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

V.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

iV"

PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH,
and HISTO RIOGRAPHER to His MA j E S T Y

for SCOTLAND.

VO L. III.

D U BLI N:
Printed for W. and W. SMITH, A. LEATHLEY, G.

FAULKNER, S. POWELL, P. WILSON, J. EXSHAW,
H.SAUNDERS, W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER,
L. FLIN, B. GRIERSON, E. LYNCH, D. CHAM-
RERLAINE, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, jun. J. WILLIAMS,
J. MITCHELL, W. COLLES, J. MILLIKEN, C. ING-
HAM, and J. PORTER. M,DCC,LXX.

# BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REI G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.

T H E calamities which the Emperor sus- Boo. vn.
sered in his unfortunate enterprize a 154~.
gainft Algiers were great; and the ac- Renewal of

count of these, which augmented in proportion hF°'rtiesb
as it spread at a greater distance from. the scene hi. motives
of his disasters, encouraged Francis to begin hof- so t
tilities, on which he had been for rome time re-
solved. But he did not think it prudent, to pro-
duce as the motives of this resolution, either his
ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the
E peror's difingenuity in violati g his repeated
promises with regard to the reititution of that
country. The former might have been a good

A 3 reafori

Bo" V1. reason againit concluding the truce of Nice, but

,54,. was none for breaking it; the latter could not be

urged without exposing his own credulity as much
as the Emperor's want of integrity. A violent
and unwarrantable aEtion of one of the Impe-
rial generals furnished him with a reafbn to jufti-
fy his taking arms, which was of greater weight
than either of there, and such as would have rouz-
ed him, if he had been as desirous of peace, as
he was eager for war. Francis, by signing the
treaty of truce at Nice, without consulting Soly-
man, gave (as he foresaw) great offence to that
haughty Monarch, who confidered an alliance
with him as an honour of which a Christian
prince had cause to be proud. The French King's
friendly interview with the Emperor in Provence,
followed by such extraordinary appearances of
union and confidence as accompanied Charles's
reception in France, induced the Sultan to fufpeEt
that the two rivals had at last forgotten their an-
cient enmity, in order that they might form such
a general confederacy against the Ottoman power,
as had been long wished for in Christendom and
often attempted in vain. Charles with his usual
art, endeavoured to confirm and strengthen there
suspicions, by inftruting his emiflaries at Con-
flantinople as well as in those courts with which
Solyman held any intelligence, to represent the
concord between him and Francis to be so entire,
that their sentiments, views and pursuits, would
be the fame for the future a. It was not with-
out difficulty that Francis effaced these im-
preflions; but the address of Rincon, the French
ambassador at the Porte, together with the ma-
nifeft advantage of carrying on hostilities againfl
the house of Autiria in concert with France,

% Mer. de Ribier. tom. z, p. 5cz.

~',. % . aprevailed
aóa

prevailed at length on the Sultan to enter into a Boo, VII.
closer conjunction with Francis than ever, Rin-154
con returned into France, in order to c'mmuni-
cate to his mailer a scheme of the Sultan's for
gaining the concurrence of the Venetians in
their operations against the common enemy.
Solyman having lately concluded a peace with
that republic, to which the mediation of Francis,
and the good offices of Rincon had greatly con-
tributed, thought it not impossible to allure the
senate by such advantages, as, together with the
example of the French Monarch, might over-Themurder
balance any scruples arising either from decency baffradr his,
or caution that could operate on the other fide. pretext for
Francis warmly approving of this measure, dif- his
patched Rincon back to Conflantinople, and di-
reting him to go by Venice along with Fergofo a
Genoese exile whom he appointed his ambassador
to that republic, empowered them to negociate
the matter with the senate, to whom Solyman
had sent an envoy for the fame purpofeb. The
marquis del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, an
officer of great abilities, but capable of attempt-
ing and executing the most atrocious actions, got
intelligence of the motions and defination of
there ambassadors. As he knew how much his
master wished to discover the intentions of the
French King, and of what consequence it was to
retard the execution of his measures, he employ-
ed some soldiers belonging to the garrison of Pa-
via to lie in wait for Rincon and Fergofo as they
failed down the Po, who murdered them and molt
of their attendants and seized their papers. Up-
on receiving an account of this barbarous outrage,
committed, during the subsistence of truce, against
persons held sacred by the most uncivilized nati-
ons, F1rancis's grief for the unhappy fate of two

b HiR. de Venet. de Purata, iv. z25.

7

servants
A4

B0" Vat. servants whom he loved and trusted, his uneafi-

e. ness at the interruption of his schemes by their

death, and every other paflion were swallowed up
and loft in the indignation which this insult on
the honour of his crown excited. He exclaimed
loudly against Guafto, who, having drawn upon
himself all the infamy of assassination without
making any discovery of importance, as the am-
bafladors had left their inftrudions and other pa-
pers of consequence behind them, now boldly
denied his being accessary in any wife to the
crime. He sent an ambassador to the Emperor
to demand suitable reparation for an indignity,
which no prince, how inconsiderable soever or
pusillanimous, could tamely endure: And when
Charles, impatient at that time to set out on his
African expedition, endeavoured to put him off
with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the
courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness
of the injury, the spirit of moderation with
which he had applied for redress, and the ini-
quity of the Emperor in disregarding this just
request.

NOTWITHST A NDI NG the confidence with which
Guafto asserted his own innocence, the accufati-
ons of the French gained greater credit than all
his protestations; and Bellay, the French com-
mander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by
his industry and address, such a minute detail of
the tranfadions, with the teffimony of so ma-
ny of the parties concerned, as amounted almost
to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In con-
fequeice of this opinion of the publick, confirm-
ed by such firong evidence, Francis's complaints
were universally allowed to be well founded, and
the steps he took towards renewing hostilities

were

were ascribed not merely to ambition or resent- Boor Vl.
ment, but to the unavoidable necessity of vindi- '1"'.J
eating the honour of his crown e.

BUT howjuft soever Francis might effeem his

own cause, he did not trutt so much to that, as to
neglect the proper precautions for gaining other
allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he might
counterbalance the Emperor's superior power.
But his negociations to this effect were attend-
ed with very little success. Henry VIII. more
and more bent upon schemes against Scotland,
which he knew would at once dissolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part
with the Emperor than to contribute in any de-
gree towards favouring the operations against
him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient
system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwith-
Itanding Solyman's solicitations, imitated the
Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with
the religious liberty which they enjoyed, found
it more their interest to gratify than to irritate
the Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, who on this occasion were firfi drawn in
to interest themselves in the quarrels of the more
potent Monarchs of the south, and the duke of
Cleves, who had a dispute with the Emperor
about the pofeffion of Gueldres, were the only
confederates Francis secured. But the domini-
nions of the two former lay at such a distance,
and the power of the latter was To inconsiderable,
that he gained little by their alliance.

FRANCIS, however, supplied all defects by his Frandis's
own activity. Being afflicted at this time with a iidretryin

for ow.
Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hill. lib. 40. s68.

distemper,

9

BooK VIi. diflemper, the effect of his irregular pleasures,

arrnd which prevented his pursuing them with
the fame licentious indulgence, he applied to
bufinels with more than his usual industry. The
fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary
attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
dissatisfied with the ministers whom he had hi-
therto employed. This accidental peevishness of
temper being sharpened by refle&ting on the false
steps into which he had lately been betrayed, and
the insults to which he had been exposed, some of
those in whom he had hitherto placed the greatest
confidence felt the effects of this change in his
temper, and were deprived of their offices. At
last he disgraced Montmorency himself, who had
long directed affairs as well civil as military with
all the authority of a minister no less beloved
than trusted by his master; and Francis being
fond of shewing that the fall of such a powerful
favourite did not affect the vigour and prudence of
his administration, this was a new motive to re-
double his diligence in preparing to open the war
by ofme splendid and extraordinary effort.

Ile'bin'gs FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field five
five armies armies. One to at in Luxembburg under the duke
s',he of Orleans, accompanied by the duke of Lorraine

as his instruCtor in the art of war. Another com-
manded by the dauphin marched towards the
frontiers of Spain. A third'led by Van Roffem
the marshal of Gueldres, and composed chiefly of
the troops of Cleves, had Brabant allotted for the
theatre of its operations. A tifurth, of which the
duke of Vendome was general, hovered on the bor-
ders of Slanders. The last, confifingof the forces
cantoned in Piedmont, was defined for the admi-
ral Annibaut. The dauphin and his brother were
appointed to command where the chief exertion
was intended, and the greatest honour tobe reaped;

the
10

the army of the former amounted to forty thou- Boo° VII.
sand, that of the latter to thirty thousand men. 154.
Nothing appears more surprising than that Francis
did not pour with there numerous and irrrefiftible
armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
the objet of his wishes as well as enterprizes,
and that he should choose rather toturn almost
his whole firength into another direction, and
towards new conquests. But the remembrance
of the disasters which he had met with in his
former expeditions into Italy, together with the
difficulty of supporting a war carried on at such
a distance from his own dominions, had gradu-
ally abated his violent inclination to obtain foot-
ing in that country, and made him willing to try
the fortune of his arms in another quarter. At
the fame time he expected to make such a power-
ful impression on the frontier of Spain, where
there were few towns of any firength, and no ar-
my assembled to oppose him, as might enable
him to recover possession of the county of Rou-
fillon lately dismembered from the French crown,
before Charles could bring into the field any force
able to obltrut his progress. The necessity of
supporting his ally the duke of Cleves, and the
hope of drawing a considerable body of soldiers
out of Germany by his means, determined him
to aCt with vigour in the Low-Countries.

THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened June.

the campaign much about the fame time, the ratihon'.
former laying siege to Perpignan the capital of
Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
The duke of Orleans pushed his operations with
the greatest rapidity and success, one town falling
after another, until no place in that large dutchy
remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville.
Nor could he have failed of over-running the ad-

jacent

ir

BooK vlT.jacent provinces with the fame ease, if he had

;s4: not voluntarily flopt ihort in this career of vito-

ry. But a report prevailing that the Emperor had
determined to hazard a battle in order to save
Perpignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by
youthful ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy
of his brother, whom he both envied and hated,
abandoned his own conquests, and hastened to-
wards Roufillon in order to divide with him the
glory of the vietory.

ON his departure tome of his troops were dif-

banded, others deserted their colours, and the reft,
cantoned in the towns which he had taken, re-
mained inactive. By this conduct, which leaves
a dishonourable imputation either on his under-
standing or his heart, or on both, he not only re-
nounced whatever he could have hoped from such
a promising opening of the campaign, but gave
the enemy an opportunity of recovering, before
the end of summer, all the conquells which he had
gained. On the Spanish frontier, the Emperor
was not so inconsiderate as to venture on a battle,
the lois of which might have endangered his
kingdom. Perpignan, though poorly fortified,
and briskly attacked, having been largely iupplied
with ammunition and provisions by the vigilance
of Doriad, was defended so long and to vigorously
by the duke of Alva, the perlevering obstinacy
of whole temper fitted him admirably for such
service, that at last the French, after a siege of
three months, wailed by diseases, repulled in
several aliaults, and clefpaiiing of success, relin-
quifhed the undertaking, and retired into their
own country . Thus all Francis's mighty pre-
parations, either from some defect in his own

d Sigonii Vita A. Doria;, p. 191. e Sandov. Hist. tomr
iI. 3 Is.

condu&,

conduct, or from the superior power and pru- B " VI.
sdence of his rival, produced no effects that bore ,54.
any proportion to his expence and efforts, or such
; as gratified, in any degree, his own hopes, or an-
fwered the expectation of Europe. The only solid
advantage of the campaign was the acquisition of
a few towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained
rather by stratagem and address, than by the
force of his armss.

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though p,;43.

both considerably exhausted by such great but in- on, for ao0-
decisive efforts, discovering no abatement of their th'r""a

paign.

mutual animosity, employed all their attention,
tried every expedient, and turned themselves to-
wards every quarter, in order to acquire new al-
lies, together with such a reinforcement of ifrength
as would give them the superiority in the ensuing
campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the ter-
ror and resentment of the Spaniards, upon the
sudden invasion of their country, prevailed on the
Cortes of the several kingdoms to grant him Cub-
sidies with a more liberal hand than usual. At the
fame time, he borrowed a large fum from John
King of Portugal, putting him in poffeflion by
way of security for his being repayed, of the
Molucca isles in the East Indies, with the gainful
commerce of precious spices, which that equtef-
tered corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied
with this, he negociated a marriage between Phi-
lip his only Ton, now in his fixtccnth year, and
Mary daughter of that Monarch, with awhomn her
father, the most opulent prince in Eutope, gave
a large dower; and having likewile perluaded the
Cortes of Arragon and Valencia to leccgnize Phi-

f Sandov. Hist. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, &c. Fcrrcr. 9. 23.

lip

Boo_ vI. lip as the heir of these crowns, he obtained from

.them the donative usual on such occafionsg. These

extraordinary supplies enabled him to make such
additions to his forces in Spain, that he could de-
tach a great body into the Low-Countries, and yet
reserve as many as were sufficient for the defence
of the kingdom. Having thus provided for the
security of Spain, and committed the government
May. of it to his son, he failed for Italy, in his way to

Germany. But how attentive soever to raise the
funds for carrying on the war, or eager to grasp
at any new expedient for that purpose, he was not
so inconsiderate as to accept of the overture which
Paul, knowing his necefities, artfully threw out
to him. That ambitious Pontiff, no less fagaci-
ous to discern, than watchful to seize opportuni-
ties of aggrandizing his family, solicited him to
grant OAavio his grand-child, whom the Empe-
ror had admitted to the honour of being his son-
in-law, the investiture of the dutchy of Milan, in
return for which he promised such a vast fum of
money as would have gone far towards supplying
his present exigencies. But Charles, as well from
unwillingness to alienate a province of so much
value, as from disgust at the Pope, who had hi-
therto refused to join in the war against Francis,
rejected the proposal. His dilfatisfadion with
Paul at that juncture was so great, that he even
refused to approve his alienating Parma and Pla-
centia from the patrimony of St. Peter, and set-
tling them on his own son and grandson as a fief
to be held of the Holy fee. As no other expe-
dient for raising money among the Italian ltates
remained, he consented to withdraw the garrisons
which he had hitherto kept in the citadels of Flo-
rence and Leghorn, in consideration for which,

Ferrcras, 9. 238. z41. Jovii Hist. lib. 42. 298.6.

he
I4

he received a large present from Cosmo de Medi- oo~ v_;
ci, who by this means secured his own indepen- 1543
dance, and got pofTeflion of two forts, which were
justly called the fetters of Tuscany h.

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned The Empe-

his whole attention towards raising the fums ne- rr' iegso
ceffary for defraying the expences of the year, had with Henry
not been negligent of objecs more distant, though vil.
no less important, and had concluded a league
offensive and defensive with Henry VIII. from
which he derived, in the end, greater advantage
than from all his other preparations. Several
flight circumstances, which have already been
mentioned, had begun to alienate the affections
of that Monarch from Francis his present ally,
and new incidents of greater moment had occur-
red to increase his disgust and animosity. Henry, Henry'E
desirous of establishing an uniformity in religion rupturewith
in Great Britain, as well as fond of making pro- s.otlan
felytes to his own opinions, had formed a scheme
of persuading his nephew the King of Scotland
to renounce the Pope's supremacy, and to adopt
the fame system of reformation which he had in-
troduced into England. This measure he purfied
with his usual eagerness and impetuosity, making
such advantageous overtures to James, whom he
confidered as not over-fcrupuloufly attached to any
religious tenets, that he scarce doubted of success.
His propositions were accordingly received in such
a manner that he flattered himself with having
gained his point. But the Scottish ecclesiastics,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the confe-
quence of the King's union witl England; and

h Adriani Ifltoria i. 195. Sleid. 312. Jovii Hil. lib. 43.
p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

the

Boor VI1. the partizans of France, no less convinced that it

-T^3 would put an end to the influence of that crown

upon the publick councils of Scotland, combined
together, and by their insinuations defeated Henry's
scheme at the very moment when he expected it
to have taken effect. Too haughty to brook filch
a disappointment, which he imputed as much to
the arts of the French as to the levity of the Scot-
tifh Monarch, he took arms againit Scotland,
threatening to subdue the kingdom, since he could
not gain the friendship of its King. At the fame
time, his resentment at Francis quickened his
negociations with the Emperor, an alliance with
whom he was now as forward to accept as the
other could be to offer it. During this war with
Scotland, and before the conclusion of his nego-
ciations with Charles, James V. died, leaving his
crown to Mary, his only daughter, an infant a few
days old Upon this event, Henry altered at once
his whole system with regard to Scotland, and
abandoning all thoughts of conquering it, aimed
at what was more advantageous as well as practi-
cable, an union with that kingdom by a marriage
between Edward his only son, and the young
Qieen. But here, too, he apprehended a vigorous
opposition from the French faction in Scotland,
which began to bestir itself in order to thwart the
measure. The necessity of crushing this party
among the Scots, and of preventing Francis from
furnilhing them with any effectual aid, confirmed
Hcnry's resolution of breaking with France, and
pullted him on to put a finishing hand to the
ireaty of confederacy with the Emperor.

Lrn.:ruL.l v IN this league were contained first of all, arti-

,. ,ii- clcs for securing their future amity and mutual
tw,.en ( dence ; then were enumerated the demands
til;, 'ilny. which they were refpecively to make upon Fran-

cis;

cis; and the plan of their proceedings was fixed, Boot vi.
if he should refuse to grant them fatisfadion. They 45
agreed to require, that Francis should not only re-
nounce his alliance with Solyman, which had been
the source of infinite calamities to Christendom,
but also that he should make reparation for the da-
mages which that unnatural union had occasioned;
that he should restore Burgundy to the Emperor;
that he flhould desist immediately from hotilities,
and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common
enemy of theChriftian faith; and that he should im-
mediately pay the fums due to Henry, or put rome
towns in his hands as security to that effe&. If,
within forty days, he did not comply with these
demands, they then engaged to invade France
each with twenty thousand foot, and five thousand
horse, and not to lay down their arms until they
had recovered Burgundy, together with the towns
on the Somme, for the Emperor, and Normandy
and Guienne, or even the whole realm of France,
for Henry i. Their heralds, accordingly, set out
with there haughty requisitions but not being per-
mitted. to enter France, could not perform their
commiflion, and the two Monarchs held themselves
fully entitled to execute whatever was stipulated
in their treaty.

FR ANCIS on his part was no les diligent in pre- Francis's

paring for the approadcing campaign. Having ,,'gthsyon
early observed the fymptpms of Heory's difgul man.
and alienation, and finding all his endeavours to
tooth and reconcile him ineffecual, he knew his
temper too well pot to expect that open hostilities
would quickly follow upon this cessation of frieid-
Ihip. For this reason he redoubled his endeavours
to obtain from Solyman such aid as might coun-
terbalance the great acceflion of trength which the

I Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. 238.

13
VOL. III,

B

Emperor

D°°' YEVImperor would receive by his alliance with Eng-

^543' lanad. In order to fipply the place of his two ambaf-

fadors murdered by Guafto, he lent as his envoy
first to Venice, and then to Constantinople, Paulin,
a captain of foot, a man of a daring active spirit, and
on account of there qualities thought worthy of this
service, to which he was recommended by Bellay,
who had trained him to the arts of negociation,
and made trial of his talents and address on feve-
ral occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion con-
ceived of his courage and abilities. Hastening to
Contfantinople, without regarding the dangers to
which he was exposed, he urged his master's de-
mands with such boldness, and availed himself of
every circumstance with such dexterity, that he re-
moved all the Sultan's own difficulties. He filen-
ced likewise some of the Bassas, who either swayed
by opinion, or having been gained by the Emperor,
whose emissaries had made their way even into that
court, had declared in the Divan against aAing in
concert with France k. At last he obtained orders
for Barbarossa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to
regulate all his operations by the directions of the
French King. Francis was not equally successful
in his attempts to gain the princes of the Empire.
The extraordinary rigour with which he thought it
necefary to punith such of his fubjets as had em-
braced the protestant opinions, in order to give
some notable evidence of his own zeal for the Ca-
tholick faith, and to wipe off the imputations to
which he was liable from his confederacy with the
Turks, placed an insuperable barrier between him
and such of the Germans as interest and inclinati-
on would have prompted most readily to join him 1.
His chief advantage, however, over the Emperor

k Sandov. Hillor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hilt. lib. 41. 285,
&c. 300, &c. Brantome. ' Seck. lib. iii. 403.

he

he derived on this, as on other occasions, from the Boo' Vi
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the 1543.
extent of the royal authority in France, which ex-
empted him from all the delays and disappoint-
ments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies
provide for the expences of government by occa-
fional and frugal subsidies. Hence his domeftick
preparations were always carried on with vigour,
and rapidity, while those of the Emperor, unless
when quickened by some foreign supply, or some
temporary expedient, were to the last degree flow
and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to op- 9reration

in the Low-

pose him, Francis took the field in the Low-Coun- Countries.
tries, againit which he turned the whole weight of
the war. He made himself master of Landrecy,
which he determined to keep as the key to the
whole province of Hainault; and ordered it to be
fortified with great care. Turning from thence to
the right, he entered the dutchy of Luxembourg,
and found it in the fame defenceleis state as in the
former year. Meanwhile, the Emperor, having
drawn together an army composed of all the diffe-
rent nations subject to his government, entered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had
vowed to inflict exemplary vengeance. This prince,
whose conduct and situation were similar to that
of Robert de la Mark, in the first war between
Charles and Francis, resembled him likewisE in
his fate. Unable with his feeble army, to face the
Emperor, who advanced at the head of forty-four
thousand men, he retired at his approach; and
the Imperialists being at liberty to ac as they
pleated, immediately invested Duren. That The tEmpe-
town, though gallantly defended, was won by rafter of
assault, all the inhabitants put to the sword, and the Dutchy
the place itself reduced to ashes. This dreadful f 14v^

B 2 example

I5

Q VII. example of severity struck the people of the coun-

,_ try with such general terror, that all the other

towns, even such as were capable of resistance, sent
their keys to the Emperor; and before a body of
French detached to his afliftance could come up,
the Duke himself was obliged to make his sub-
mission to Charles in the most abject manner. Be-
ing admitted into the Imperial pretence, he kneel-
ed together with eight of his principal fubjeets,
and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed him
to remain in that ignominious posture, and eying
him with an haughty and implacable look, with-
out deigning to answer a single word, remitted
him to his ministers. The conditions, however,
which they prescribed, were not so rigorous as he
had reason to have expeEted after such a reception.

Septem- He was obliged to renounce his alliance with
ber 7' France and Denmark; to resign all his preterfion.

to the Dutchy of Gueldres; to enter into perpe-
tual amity with the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans. In return for which all his hereditary do-
minions were restored, except two towns which
the Emperor kept as pledges of his fidelity during
the continuance of the war, and he was re-inflated
in his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of
his reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of
the daughters of his brother Ferdinand '.

Befeges HAVING thus chastised the presumption of the
Landrecy. Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies from

Francis, and added to his dominions in the Low-
Countries a considerable province which lay con-
tiguous to them, Charles advanced towards Hai-
nault, and laid siege to Landrecy. There, as the

= Harai. Annal. Brabant, t. 1. 628. Recueil des Traitex,
.t, If. 4a6.

firil

first fruits of his alliance with Henry, he was joit- B60o VII.
ed by fix thousand Englith under Sir John Wallop. "~,4,3
The garrison, consisting of veteran troops com-
manded by de la Lande and Deffe, two officers of
reputation, made a vigorous resistance. Francis
approached with all his forces to relieve the place;
Charles covered the siege; both were determined
to hazard an engagement; and all Europe expect-
ed to fee this contest, which had continued so
long, decided at last by a battle between two great
armies led by them in person. But the ground
which separated their two camps was such, as put
the disadvantage manifestly on his fide who should
venture to attack, and neither of them chose to
run that rifque: amidst a variety of movements,
in order to draw the enemy into this snare, or to
avoid it themselves, Francis, with admirable con-
du&t, and equal good fortune, threw first a supply
of fresh troops, and then a convoy of provisions
into the town, so that the Emperor, despairing of
success, withdrew into winter quarters ", in order
to preserve his army from being entirely ruined by
the rigour of the season,

MEANWHILE, Solyman fulfilled his engage- November.

ments to the French King with great punctuality. Soym in-
He himself, marched into Hungary with a nurne- gry.
rous army, and as the princes of the Empire made
no great effort to save a country which Charles, by
employing his whole force against Francis, seemed
willing to sacrifice, there was no appearance of any
body of troops to oppose his progress. He befieg-
ed one after another, Quinque Ecclefiae, Alba and
Gran, the three most considerable towns in the
kingdom, of which Ferdinand kept poffeflion. The
first was taken by storm; the other two furren-

Bellay, 40o, &c.

B 3 dered;

Boo V"I.derd ; and the whole kingdom, a small corner ex-/

43. cepted, was fubje&ed to the Turkish yoke °. About

Barbarofa's the fame time, Barbarossa failed with a fleet of an
defent on
Itay.n hundred and ten gallies, and coatling along the

.shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio,
which he plundered and burnt; and advancing
from thence to the mouth of the Tiber, he ftopt
there to water. The citizens of Rome, ignorant
of his destination, and filled with terror, began to
fly with such general precipitation, that the city
would have been left deserted, if they had not re-
fumed courage upon letters from Polin the French
envoy, alluring them that no violence or injury
would be offered by the Turks to any slate in al-
liance with the King his master . From Ostia,
Barbarossa failed to Marseilles, and being joined by
the French fleet with a body of land forces on
board under the Count d'Enguien, a gallant young
prince of the house of Bourbon, they directed their
course towards Nice, the sole retreat of the unfor-
tunate Duke of Savoy. There to the astonishment
August 1o. and scandal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France,

and Crescent of Mahomet, appeared in conjundiou
against the fortress on which the cross of Savoy
was displayed. The town, however, was bravely
defended againit their combined force by Mont-
fort, a Savoyard gentleman, who flood a general
aflault, and repulsed the enemy with great loss,
before he retired into the castle. That fort situated
upon a rock, on which the artillery made no im-
pression, and which could not be undermihed,
he held out so long, that Doria had time to ap-
proach with his fleet, and the marquis del Guafto
Septcm- to march with a body of troops from Milan. Up-

on intelligence of this, the French and Turks raif-
ed the siege : and Francis had not even the con-

° Ifuanhaff. Hiftor. Hung. 1. 1;. 167.
P Jvii Hist. 1 43. 301, &c. Pallavic. 160.
(Guichenon hilloiiedcSavoye, t. i. p. 65 1. Bellay, 425, &c.

folation
18

folation of success, to render the infamy, which Booo VII.
he drew on himself by calling in such an auxilia-
ry, more tolerable.

FROM the small progress of either party during Prepti.
this campaign, it was obvious to what a lengthon& for

Inew Csllk

the war might be drawn out between two princes, p»ign.
whose power was so equally balanced, and who
by their own talents or activity, could so vary and
multiply their resources. The trial they had now
made of each others strength might have taught
them the imprudence of persisting in a war, where-
in there was greater appearance of their distressing
their own dominions than of conquering those of
their adversary, and should have disposed both to
wish for peace. If Charles and Francis had been
influenced by considerations of interest or prudence
alone, this, without doubt must have been the
manner in which they would have reasoned; but
the personal animosity, which mingled itself in
all their quarrels, had grown to be so violent and
implacable, that for the pleasure of gratifying it,
they disregarded every thing else; and were infi-
nitely more solicitous how to hurt their enemy,
than how to secure what would be of advantage
to themselves. No sooner then did the season force
them to suspend hostilities, than, without paying
any attention to the Pope's repeated endeavours or
paternal exhortations to re-establish peace, they
began to provide for the operations of the next
year with new vigour, and an activity increasing
with their hatred. Charles turned his chief atten-
tion towards gaining the princes of the Empire,
and endeavouring to rouze the formidable but
unweildy strength of the Germanick body against
Francis. In order to understand the propriety A^ffair of
of the steps which he took for that purpose, it Gernnny.

B 4 is

19

BooK VII. is ecefsary to review the chief tranfationsin that

country since the diet of Ratisbon in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty one.

Maurice of MUCH about the time that afrembly broke up,
saxoy f- Maurice succeeded his father Henry in the go-
ceeds his fA-
th[ verment of that part of Saxony which belonged

to the Albertine branch of the Saxon family,
This young prince, then only in his twentieth year,
had, even at that early period, begun to discover
the great talents which qualified him for acting
such a distinguished part in the affairs of Germa-
ny. As Coon as he entered upon the administration
he lruck out into fiich a new and singular path,
as shewed that he aimed, from the beginning, at

The views something great and uncommon. Though zeal-
of this d oufly attached to the Protestant opinions both
young from education and principle, he refused to accede

Prince to the league of Smalkalde, being determined, as

he said, to maintain the purity of religion which
was the original object of that confederacy, but
not to entangle himself in the political interests or
combinations to which it had given rife. At the
fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles
and the confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiving
which of them was most likely to prevail in the
contest, instead of that jealouiy and distrust which
the other Protestants exprefled of all the Empe-
ror's designs, he affected to place in him an un-
bounded confidence; and courted his favour with
the utmost afliduity. When the other Protestants,
in the year fifteen hundred and forty two, either
declined aflifting Ferdinand in Hungary, or afford-
ed him reluctant and feeble aid, Maurice march-
ed thither in person, and rendered him(elf con-
fpicuous by his zeal and courage. From the fame
motive, he had led to the Emperor's afliltance, dur-

ing

ing the former campaign a body of his own troops; BooK V1x.
and the gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in '-.3
all military exercises, together with his intrepidity
which courted and delighted in dangers, did not
distinguish him more in the field, than his great
abilities and insinuating address won upon the Em-
peror's confidence and favourr. While by this
conduct, which appeared extraordinary to those
who held the fame opinions with him concerning
religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the
Emperor, he began to discover rome degree ofjea-
lousy of his cousin the Eleaor of Saxony. This,
which proved in the sequel To fatal to the EleEtor,
had almost occasioned an open rupture between
them; and soon after Maurice's accession to the
government, they both took arms with equal rage,
upon account of a dispute about the right ofjurif-
didion over a paltry town situated on the Mol-
daw. They were prevented, however, from com-
ing to blows by the mediation of the Landgrave
of Hesse, whose daughter Maurice had married,
as well as by the powerful and authoritative ad-
monitions of Luther 9.

MEANWHILE the Pope, though extremely The Pope
irritated at the Emperor's conceflions to the Pro- ProPose to

hold a gene.

teffants in the diet of Ratisbon, was so warmly ral countil
solicited on all hands, by such as were most de- at Tr"nt.
voutly attached to the fee of Rome, no leTs than
by those whose fidelity or designs he fufpedted,
to summon a general council, that he found it
impollible to avoid any longer calling that as-
fembly. The impatience for its meeting, and
the expectations of great effects from its decisions
seemed to grow in proportion to the difficulty of
obtaining it. He itill adhered, however, to his
original resolution of holding it in rome town of

r Sleid. 317. Seek. 1. iii. 371, 386, 4a8.
Sloid. 29z. Seck. 1. iii. 403.

Italy,

21

1ooK VIi. taly, where, by the number of ecclefiafticks, re-

tainers to his court, and depending on his favour,
who could repair to it without difficulty or expence,
he might influence and even direet all its proceed-
ings. This proposition, though often rejected by
the Germans, he inftruted his nuncio to the diet
Marh 3. held at Spires, in the year one thousand five hun-

dred and forty two to renew once more; and if
he found it gave no greater fatisfadion than for-
merly, he empowered him, as a last conceflion,
to propose for the place of meeting, Trent a city
in the Tyrol, subjed to the King of the Rormans,
and situated on the confines between Germany
and Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet, as-
ter giving it as their opinion that the council
might have been held with greater advantage in
Ratisbon, Cologne, or some of the great cities in
the Empire, approved of the place which the Pope
had named. The Protestants unanimously ex-
pressed their diffatisfadion, declaring that they
would pay no regard to a council held without the
precincts of the Empire, called by the Pope's au-
thority, and in which he assumed the right of pre-
fiding t.
M.. '1, THE Pope, without taking any notice of their

Snn's objctions, published the bull of intimation, nam-
,1 1. lat. ed three cardinals to preside as his legates, and ap-

pointed them to repair to Trent before the first of
November, the day he had fixed for opening the
council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a
council as sincerely as he pretended, he would not
have pitched on such an improper time for calling it.
Inflead of that general union and tranquillity, with-
out which the deliberations of a council could nei-
ther be conducted with security, nor attended with

t Sleki. 291. Seck. 1. iii. 283.

authority,

authority, such a fierce war was jufl kindled be-B°° v;T
tween the Emperor and Francis, as rendered it 1543
impossible for the ecclefiafticks from many parts
of Europe to resort thither in safety. The legates,
accordingly, remained several months at Trent
without any persons appearing, except a few pre-
lates from the ecclesiastical itate: upon which the oliged to
Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and contempt crarogueit.
which this drew upon him from the enemies of
the church, recalled them and prorogued the
council .

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the Papal fee, The Ernpe-

at the very time that the German Protestants the Proef
took every occasion of p uring contempt upon it, nt'.
the Emperor and King of the Romans found it
necessary not only to connive at their conduct, but
to court their favour by repeated acs of indul-
gence. In the fame diet of Spires, wherein they
had protested in the most difrefpelfill terms
againit assembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand
who depended on their aid for the defence of Hun-
gary, not only permitted that proteltation to be
inserted in the records of the diet, but renewed
in their favour all the Emperor's conceftions at
Ratiibon, adding to them whatever they could
demand for their farther security. Among other
particulars, he granted a suspension of a decree
of the Imperial chamber againit the city of Gof-
lar, one of thole which had entered into the league
of Smalkalde, on account of its having seized the
ecclesiastical revenues within its domains, and en-
joined Henry duke of Brunswick to desist from
his attempts to carry that decree into execution.
i But Henry, a furious bigot, and no less obstinate

than rash in all his undertakings, continuing to

' F. Paul, p. 97. Sleid. 296.

difquict

BooK v1. ctifquiet the people of Goflar by his incursions,
'- ' the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse,
Tlhtir 3igo- that they might not susser any member of the

° Smalkaldick body to be opprefied, assembled their

forces, declared war in form against Henry, and
in the space of a few weeks stript him intirely of
his dominions, and drove him as a wretched ex-
ile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this at of vengeance, no less severe than sudden,
they filled all Germany with dread of their pow-
er, and the confederates of Smalkalde appeared,
by this first effort of their arms, to be as prompt
as capable to protect those who had joined their
association x.

EMBOLDENED by so many concessions in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their opi-
nions daily made, the princes of the league of
Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the Im-
perial chamber, and declined its jurisdiction for
the future, because that court had not been visited
or reformed according to the decree of Ratisbon,
and continued to discover a most indecent partia-
lity in all its proceedings. Not long after this,
they ventured a ftep farther, and protesting against
the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg, which

, ,3 provided for the defence of Hungary, refused to
;,4. furnish their contingent for that purpose, unless

the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full fe-
curity granted them in every point with regard to
religion Y.

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants

had proceeded, and fich their confidence in their
544.

1 Sleid. 296. Commemoratio fuccinea caufarum Belli,

&c. a Sialcadicis contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iildem edita ap.
Scardium. Tom. ii. 307.

y Sleid. 304, 307. Seck. . iii. 404, 416.

own

own power, when the Emperor returned from the Boo Vll
Low-Countries, to hold a diet, which he had fum- ,4.
;oned to meet at Spires. The refpee due to the
Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs
which were to be laid before it, rendered this as-
fembly extremely full. All the Electors, a great
number of princes ecclesiastical and secular, with
the deputies of most of the cities were present.
Charles Coon perceived that this was not a time to
offend the jealous spirit of the Protestants, by as-
ierting in any high tone the authority and doc-
trines of the church, or by abridging in the small-
eft article, the liberty which they now enjoyed;
but that, on the contrary, if he expected any sup-
port from them, or wished to preserve Germany
from intestine disorders while he was engaged in
a foreign war, he must tooth them by new con-
ceflions, and a more ample extension of their re-
ligious privileges. He began, accordingly, with
courting the Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse, the heads of the Protefant party, and
by giving up some things in their favour, and
granting liberal promires with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition
on their part. Having ascertained this capital The Empe-
point, he then ventured to address the diet with 'ts "'ia
greater freedom. He began by representing his .ait,,
own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to
two things most essential to Christendom, the pro-
curing of a general council in order to compote
the religious dissensions which had unhappily
arisen in Germany, and the providing Come proper
means for checking the formidable progress of
the Turkish arms. But that his pious endeavours
had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable
ambition of the French King, who having wan-
tonly kindled the flame of war in Europe, which
had been so lately extinguished by the truce of
Nice, rendered it impoflible for the fathers of the

church

Boo F vI. disquiet the people of Goflar by his incursions,
'-v * the Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse,
T'hlei.io- that they might not susser any member of the
rdou pro- Smalkaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their

forces, declared war in form against Henry, and
in the space of a few weeks stript him intirely of
his dominions, and drove him as a wretched ex-
ile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this act of vengeance, no less revere than sudden,
they filled all Germany with dread of their pow-
er, and the confederates of Smalkalde appeared,
by this firit effort of their arms, to be as prompt
as capable to protect those who had joined their
association x.

EMBOLDENED by so many concessions in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their opi-
nions daily made, the princes of the league of
Smalkalde took a solemn protest againit the Im-
perial chamber, and declined its jurisdiction for
the future, because that court had not been visited
or reformed according to the decree of Ratisbon,
and continued to discover a most indecent partia-
lity in all its proceedings. Not long after this,
they ventured a ftep farther, and protesting against
the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg, which

,, provided for the defence of Hungary, refused to
c ,. furnish their contingent for that purpose, unless

the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full fe-
curity granted them in every point with regard to
religion Y.

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants

IY;' at had proceeded, and fich their confidence in their
A544.

z Sleid. 296. Commemoratio fuccin6ta caufarum Belli,

&c. a Smalcadicis contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edita; ap.
Scardium. Tom. ii. 307.

Y Sleid. 304, 307. Seeck. i. iii. 404, 416.

OWIl

own power, when the Emperor returned from the Roo v.
Low-Countries, to hold a diet, which he had fum- ,544.
moned to meet at Spires. The refpet due to the
Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs
which were to be laid before it, rendered this as-
fembly extremely full. All the EleEtors, a great
number of princes ecclesiastical and secular, with
the deputies of most of the cities were present.
Charles soon perceived that this was not a time to
offend the jealous spirit of the Protestants, by as-
serting in any high tone the authority and doc-
trines of the church, or by abridging in the small-
eft article, the liberty which they now enjoyed;
but that, on the contrary, if he expected any sup-
port from them, or wished to preserve Germany
from intestine disorders while he was engaged in
a foreign war, he must tooth them by new con-
ceflions, and a more ample extension of their re-
ligious privileges. He began, accordingly, with
courting the Eleator of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hefle, the heads of the Protestant party, and
by giving up some things in their favour, and
granting liberal promises with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition
on their part. Having ascertained this capital TheEpe-
point, he then ventured to address the diet with it Ialicd'
greater freedom. He began by representing his tlill
own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to France
two things most essential to Christendom, the pro-
curing of a general council in order to compote
the religious dissensions which had unhappily
arisen in Germany, and the providing some proper
means for checking the formidable progress of
the Turkilh arms. But that his pious endeavours
had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable
ambition of the French King, who having wan-
tonly kindled the flame of war in Europe, which
had been so lately extinguished by the truce of
Nice, rendered it impossible for the fathers of the

church

0oo V1,. church to afremble in council, or to deliberate

544 with security; and obliged him to employ those

forces in his own defence, which with greater satis-
faftion to himself, as well as more honour to Chris-
tendom, he would have turned against the Infidels.
That Francis not thinking it enough to have called
him off from opposing the Infidels, had, with un-
exampled impiety, invited them into the heart of
Christendom, and joining his arms to theirs, had
openly attacked the Duke of Savoy, a member of
the Empire. That Barbarossa's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the return
of spring to carry terror and desolation to the coast
of some Christian fate. That in such a situation
it was folly to think of distant expeditions against
the Turk, or of marching to oppose his armies in
Hungary, while such a powerful ally received him
into the centre of Europe, and gave him footing
there. That prudence dictated to oppose, first of
all, the nearest and most imminent danger, and by
humbling the power of France, to deprive Soly-
man of the advantages, which he derived from
the unnatural confederacy formed between him
and a Monarch, who still arrogated the name of
Most Christian. That, in truth, a war against the
French King and the Sultan ought to be confidered
as the fame thing; and that every advantage gain-
ed over the former, was a severe and sensible blow
to the latter. That, therefore, he now demanded
their aid against Francis, not merely as an enemy
of the Germanick body, or of him who was its
head, but as an avowed ally of the Infidels, and
a publick enemy to the Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent

invective of the Emperor, the King of the Ro-
mans stood up, and related the rapid conquests of
the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he said, by
the fatal necelity imposed on his brother of em-

ploying
26

ploying his arms against France; and the ambaf-
fadors of Savoy gave a detail of Barbarossa's ope- ,544.
rations at Nice, and of the ravages which he had
committed on that coast. All there, added to
the general indignation which Francis's unprece-
dented union with the Turks excited in Europe,
made such an impression on the diet as the Em-
peror wished, and disposed most of the members
to grant him such effectual aid as he had de-
manded. The ambassadors Francis had efnt to
explain the motives of his conduct, were not per-
mitted to enter the bounds of the Empire; and
the apology which they published for their maf-
ter, vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by
examples drawn from scripture, and the pracice
of Chriflian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced against him to
such a degree, as to be incapable of allowing
their proper weight to any arguments in his be-
half.

SUCH being the favourable disposition of the EHivRt

concefflons

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could i order to
now obftrut his gaining all that he aimed at, but gain the
the fears and jealousies of the Proteflants, which
he determined to quiet, by granting every thing,
that the utmost solicitude of there paflions could
desire for the security of their religion. With
this view, he consented to a recess, whereby all
the rigorous edids hitherto issued against the Pro-
teflants were suspended; a council either general
or national to be assembled in Germany was de-
clared necefrary in order to re-eftablifl peace
in the church ; until one of there ihould be held,
(which the Emperor undertook to bring about
as soon as possible) the free and public exer-
cil' of the Protestant religion was authorized;
the Imperial chamber was to give no molefla-

tion

1ooK v". tion to the Proteflants; and when the term, for

w154 ich the present judges in that court were eleEt-
ed, should expire, persons duly qualified were
then to be admitted as members, without any

And grant- diftinftion on account of religion. In return for
d by the there extraordinary acts of indulgence, the Protef-

tants concurred, with the other members of the
diet, in declaring war against Francis in the name
of the Empire; in voting the Emperor a body of
twenty-four thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, to be maintained at the publick expence
for fix months, and to be employed againif
France; and at the fame time the diet imposed a
poll-tax to be levied throughout all Germany on
every person without exception, for the support
of the war against the Turks.

Charles's CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention
neghction- to the minute and intricate detail of particulars
mark and necefiary towards conducting the deliberations of
England. a numerous and divided assembly to such a fuc-

cefsful period, negociated a separate peace with
the King of Denmark, who, though he had hither-
to performed nothing considerable in consequence
of his alliance with Francis, had it in his power,
however, to make a formidable diversion in favour
of that monarch z. At the fame time, le did not
negled proper applications to the King of Eng-
land, in order to rouze him to more vigorous es-
forts against their common enemy. Little, in-
deed, was wanting to accomplish this; for such
events had happened in Scotland as inflamed
Henry to the most violent pitch of resentment
againif Francis. Having concluded with the par-
liament of Scotland a treaty of marriage between

Z Dumont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p. ii. p. Z74.

his
28

his son and their young Queen, by which he reck- Bool Vii.
oned himself secure of effecting the union of the s544
two kingdoms, which had been long desired, and
often attempted without success by his predecef-
fors, Mary of Guise the Queen mother, cardinal
Beatoun, and other partizars of France, found
means not only to break off the match, but to
alienate the Scottish nation entirely from the friend-
ship of England, and to strengthen its ancient at-
tachment to France. Henry, however, did not
abandon an object of so much importance. As
the humbling of Francis, besides the pleafilre of
taking revenge upon an enemy who had difap-
pointed a favourite measure, appeared the most
effectual method of bringing the Scots to accept
once more of the treaty which they had rejected,
he was so fond of this scheme, that he was ready
to second whatever the Emperor could propose to
be attempted against that monarch. The plan,
accordingly, which they concerted, was such as,
if it had been punctually executed, must have
ruined France in the first place, and would have
augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's power
and territories as might in the end have proved fa-
tal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed to
invade France each with an army of twenty-five
thousand men, and, without losing time in be-
sieging the frontier towns, to advance directly to-
wards the interior provinces, and to join their
forces near Paris .

MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in opposition The French

to all the enemies that Charles was mustering fid inied.
against him. Solyman was the only ally who had mot.
not deserted him ; but the afliftance he received
from him had rendered him so odious to all Chris-

a Herbert 245. Bellay, 448.

c

tendom,
VOL. IlI.

^ ot I. tendom, that he resolved rather to forego all the
1544, advantages of his friendihip, than to become, on

that account, the objeE of general horror and de-
tefiation. For this reason, he difmifled Barba-
roffa as soon as winter was over, who after rava-
ging the coasts of Naples and Tuscany returned
to Constantinople. As Francis could not hope to
equal the forces of his rival, he endeavoured to
supply that defect by dispatch, which was more in
his power, and to get the start of him in taking

Invef ca- the field. Early in the spring the count d'En-
rignan. guien invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont,

which the marquis de Guafto the Imperial gene-
ral having furprized the former year confidered as
of so much importance, that he had fortified it at
great expence. The count pushed the siege with
such vigour, that Guafto, fond of his own con-
quef, and feeing no other way of saving it from
falling into the hands of the French, resolved to

The Impe- hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began
arh to le- his march from Milan for this purpose, and as he
lieve it. was at no pains to conceal his intention, it was

soon known in the French camp. Enguien, a gal-
lant and enterprizing young man, wished paflion-
ately to try the fortune of a battle; his troops de-
lired it with no lets ardour; but the peremptory
injunction of the King, not to venture a general
engagement, flowing from a prudent attention to
the present situation of affairs, as well as from the
remembrance of former disasters, tied up his
hands. Unwilling, however, to abandon Carig-
nan, when it was just ready to yield, ana eager
to distinguish his command by some memorable
acion, he dispatched Monluc to court in order to
lay before the King the advantages of fighting
the enemy, and the hopes which he had of victo-
ry. The King referred the matter to the coun-
cil; all the ministers declared, one after another,
against fighting, and supported their sentiments

by

by reasons extremely plausible. While they were Bo VI.
delivering their opinions, Monluc, who was per- ,I44.
mitted to be present, discovered such visible and
extravagant symptoms of impatience to speak, as
well as such diffatisfaaion with what he heard,
that Francis, diverted with his appearance, called
on him to declare what he could offer in reply to
sentiments which seemed to be as just as they were
general. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but spirited
soldier, and of known courage, represented the
good condition of the troops, their eagerness to
meet the enemy in the field, their confidence in
their officers, together with the everlasting infamy
which the declining of a battle would bring on
the French arms; and urged his arguments with
such lively impetuosity, and such a flow of milita-
ry eloquence, as gained over to his opinion, not
only the King, naturally fond of daring ations,
but several of the council. Francis catching the
fame enthusiasm which had animated his troops,
suddenly itarted up, and having lifted his hands
to heaven, and implored the divine protection and
aid, he then addressed himself to Monluc, " Go,
fays he, return to Piedmont, and fight in the name
of God b."

No sooner was it known that the King had Battle ,o

given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists, than cols.
such was the martial ardour of the gallant and
high spirited gentlemen of that age, that the
court was quite deserted, every person desirous of
reputation, or capable of service, hurrying to Pi-
edmont in order to share, as volunteers, in the
danger and glory of the action. Encouraged by
the arrival of so many brave officers, Enguien im-
mediately prepared for battle, nor did Guafto de-

b Memoires de Monluc.

C 2 dine

Boo vnll. clhe the combat. The number of cavalry was

v-544 almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded

the French by at least ten thousand men. They
April i . met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which afford-

ed to neither any advantage of ground, and both
had full time to form their army in proper order.
The shock was fiuch as might have been expected
between veteran troops, violent and obitinate. The
French cavalry running to the charge with their
usual vivacity bore down every thing that oppo-
fed them, but on the other hand, the fteddy and
disciplined valour of the Spanish infantry having
forced the body which they encountered to give
way, victory remained in suspense, ready to de-
clare for which ever general could make the belt
ife of that critical moment. Guafto, engaged in
that part of his army which was thrown into dif-
order, and afraid of falling into the hands of the
French, whose vengeance he dreaded on account
of the murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his
presence of mind, and forgot to order a large bo-
dy of reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with
admirable courage and equal conduct, supported,
at the head of his gens d'armcs, such of his bat-
talions as began to yield; and at the fame time
he ordered the Swiss in his service, who had been
vidorious wherever they fought, to fall upon the
Spaniards. This motion proved decisive. All
that followed was confusion and slaughter. The
marquis de Guafto wounded in the thigh, escaped
only by the swiftness of his horse. The vitory
of the French was complete, ten thousand of the
Imperialists being slain, and a considerable num-
ber, with all their tents, baggage and artillery,
taken. On the part of the conquerors, theirjoy
was without allay, a few only being killed, and
among these no officer of diftintion '.

c Bellay, 429, &c. Memoires dcMonluc. Jovii hifl
I. 44. p. 327. 6.

THIS

THIS splendid action, besides the reputation Boo' Vii.

.with which it was attended, delivered France from i"4
an imminent danger, as it ruined the army with Effac6ofit.
which Guafto had intended to invade the country
between the Rhofne and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op-
pose his progress. But it was not in Francis's
power to pursue the vi&tory with such vigour as to
reap the advantages which it might have yielded;
for tho' the Milanese remained now almost de-
fenceless; though the inhabitants, who had long
murmured under the rigour of the Imperial go-
vernment, were ready to throw off the yoke;
though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the
King to seize this happy opportunity of recover-
ing a country, the acquisition of which had been
long his favourite object; yet as the Emperor and
King of England were preparing to break in up-
on the opposite frontier of France with such fu-
perior force, it became necessary to sacrifice all
thoughts of conquest to the public safety, and
to recall twelve thousand of Enguien's belt troops
to be employed in defence of the kingdom. En-
guien's fiibfequent operations were, of confe-
quence, so languid and inconsiderable, that the
reduction of Carignan and some other towns in
Piedmont, was all he gained by his great victory
at Cerifoles d.

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the Operations

field, but he appeared, towards the beginning of ountries.
June, at the head of an army more numerous,
and better appointed than any which he had hi-
therto led against France. It amounted almost to
fifty thousand men, and part of it having reduced
Luxemburg and tome other towns in the Ne-

d Bellay, 438, &c.

C 3 therlands,

Boos VII. cline the combat. The number of cavalry was

,-4. almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded

the French by at least ten thousand men. They
April 1. met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which afford-

ed to neither any advantage of ground, and both
had full time to form their army in proper order.
The shock was such as might have been expected
between veteran troops, violent and obstinate. The
French cavalry running to the charge with their
usual vivacity bore down every thing that oppo-
fed them, but on the other hand, the fteddy and
disciplined valour of the Spanish infantry having
forced the body which they encountered to give
way, vitory remained in suspense, ready to de-
clare for which ever general could make the beit
use of that critical moment. Guafto, engaged in
that part of his army which was thrown into dif-
order, and afraid of falling into the hands of the
French, whole vengeance he dreaded on account
of the murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his
pretence of mind, and forgot to order a large bo-
dy of reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with
admirable courage and equal condu&, supported,
at the head of his gens d'armes, such of his bat-
talions as began to yield; and at the fame time
he ordered the Swiss in his service, who had been
viAorious wherever they fought, to fall upon the
Spaniards. This motion proved decisive. All
that followed was confusion and slaughter. The
marquis de Guafto wounded in the thigh, escaped
only by the swiftness of his horse. The vitory
of the French was complete, ten thousand of the
Imperialists being slain, and a considerable num-
ber, with all their tents, baggage and artillery,
taken. On the part of the conquerors, theirjoy
was without allay, a few only being killed, and
among there no officer of diftintion C.

c Bellay, 429, &c. Mcmoires de Monluc. Jovii hi,.
1. 44. p. 327. 6.

THIS

THIS splendid action, besides the reputation Boot VIl.

with which it was attended, delivered France from I'4.
an imminent danger, as it ruined the army with Effeiof it.
which Guaffo had intended to invade the country
between the Rhofne and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op-
pose his progress. But it was not in Francis's
power to pursue the victory with such vigour as to
reap the advantages which it might have yielded;
for tho' the Milanese remained now almost de-
fenceless; though the inhabitants, who had long
murmured under the rigour of the Imperial go-
vernment, were ready to throw off the yoke;
though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the
King to seize this happy opportunity of recover-
ing a country, the acquisition of which had been
long his favourite object; yet as the Emperor and
King of England were preparing to break in up-
on the opposite frontier of France with such fu-
perior force, it became neceflary to sacrifice all
thoughts of conquest to the public safety, and
to recall twelve thousand of Enguien's best troops
to be employed in defence of the kingdom. En-
guien's fiibfequent operations were, of confe-
quence, so languid and inconsiderable, that the
reduction of Carignan and rome other towns in
Piedmont, was all he gained by his great victory
at Cerifoles d.

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the Operations

field, but he appeared, towards the beginning fCountries.
June, at the head of an army more numerous,
and better appointed than any which he had hi-
therto led against France. It amounted almost to
fifty thousand men, and part of it having reduced
Luxemburg and some other towns in the Ne-

d Bellay, 438, &c.

C3

therlands,

oOT. V. therlands, before he himself joined it, he now
,544. marched with the whole towards the frontiers of
June. Champagne. Charles, according to his agree-

ment with the King of England, ought to have
advanced directly towards Paris; and the dauphin,
who commanded the only army to which Francis
trufled for the security of his dominions, was in
no condition to oppose him. But the success with
which the French had defended Provence in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, had
taught them the most effetual method of diftref-
sing an invading enemy. Champagne, a country
abounding more in vines than corn, was incapa-
ble of maintaining a great army, and before the
Emperor's approach, whatever could be of any
use to him had been carried off or destroyed. This
rendered it necessary for him to be master of some
places of strength, in order to secure the convoys
on which alone he now perceived that he must
depend for subsistence; and he found the frontier
towns so ill provided for defence, that he hoped it
would not be a work either of much time or dif-
ficulty to reduce them. Accordingly Ligny and
Commercy, which he first attacked, surrendered

rThel mpe- after a short resistance. He then invested St. Di-
ror invefilts
St. Diicr. sier, which, though it commanded an important
l"'ly 8 pnfs on the Marne, was destitute of every thing

necessary for sustaining a siege. But the count
de Sancerre and M. de la Lande, who had ac-
quired such reputation by the defence of Lan-
drecy, gcneroully threw themselves into the
town, and undertook to hold it out to the last
extremity. The Emperor soon found how ca-
pable they were of making good their promire,
and that he could not expect to take the town
without besieging it in form. This accord-
ingly he undertook; and as it was his nature
never to abandon any enterprize in which he

had

had once engaged, he persisted in it with an in- Boo VZ.
considerate obstinacy. s144

THE King of England's preparations for theHenryVIIl.

inverts Bo-

campaign were compleat long before the Empe- og,.
ror's; but as he did not choose, on the one hand,
to encounter alone the whole power of France,
and was unwilling, on the other, that his troops
should remain una&ive, he took that opportunity
of chastising the Scots, by fending his fleet, to-
gether with a considerable part of his infantry,
under the earl of Hertford, to invade their coun-
try. Hertford executed his commission with vi-
gour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh and Leith,
laid waste the adjacent country, and reimbarked
his men with such dispatch, that they joined their
sovereign soon after his landing in France. When July 14.
Henry arrived in that kingdom, he found the
Emperor engaged in the siege of St. Difier; an
ambassador, however, whom he ient to congra-
tulate the English Monarch on his safe arrival
on the continent, solicited him to march in terms
of the treaty directly to Paris. But Charles had set
his ally such an ill example of fulfilling the conditi-
ons of their confederacy with exacnefs, that Hen-
ry, observing him employ his time and forces in
taking towns for his own behoof, saw no reason
why he should not attempt the reduction of
some places that lay conveniently for himself.
Without paying any regard to the Emperor's re-
monstrances, he immediately invested Bologne,
and commanded the duke of Norfolk to press
the siege of Montreuil, which had been begun
before his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in con-
juntion with some English troops. While Charles
and Henry shewed such attention each to his
own interest, they both neglected the common
cause; and, inRfead of the union and confidence
requisite towards conducting the great plan they

C 4 had

Boo v., had formed, they early discovered a mutual jea-
1544. lousy of each other, which, by degrees, begot

distrust, and ended in open hatred d.

GCllant de. MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied in-
ifer Sr. duftry, drawn together an army capable, as well

from the number as from the valour of the troops,
of making head against the enemy. But the dau-
phin, who flill aded as general, prudently declin-
ing a battle, the loss of which would have endan-
gered the kingdom, satisfied himself with harraf-
sing the Emperor with his light troops, cutting off
his convoys, and laying waste the country around
him. Though extremely distressed by there ope-
rations, Charles itill pressed the siege of St. Di-
sier, which Sancerre defended with aftonilhing for-
titude and condut. He stood repeated assaults,
repulsing the enemy in them all; and undifmay-
ed even by the death of the brave de la Lande,
who was killed by a cannon ball, he continued to
ihew the fame bold countenance and obstinate re-
iblution. At the end of five weeks, he was still
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granvelle's induced him to furren-
der. That crafty politician, having intercepted
the key to the cypher which the duke of Guise
ulied in communicating intelligence to Sancerre,
forged a letter in his name authorizing Sancerre
to capitulate, as the King, though highly satisfied
with his behaviour, thought it imprudent to ha-
zard a battle for his relief. This letter he con-
veyed into the town in a manner which could
raise no suspicion, and the governor fell into the
lhare. Even then, he obtained such honourable
conditions as his gallant defence merited, and
among others a cessation of hostilities for eight

i Herbert.

days, at the expiration of which he bound himself BlooK vi.
to open the gates, if Francis, during that time, did ,4.
not attack the Imperial army, and throw frelh
troops into the town . Thus Sancerre, by de-
taining the emperor so long before an inconfider-
able place, afforded his sovereign full time to as-
femble all his forces, and, what rarely falls to an
officer in such an inferior command, acquired the
glory of having saved his country.

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the Emperor Augut 17.

advanced into the heart of Champagne, but San- rhr pe'e-
cerre's obstinate resistance had damped his sanguine trates into

the heart of

hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led him seriously France.
to reflect on what he might expe& before towns of
greater firength, and defended by more numerous
garrisons. At the fame time, the procuring sub-
fiftence for his army was attended with great dif-
ficulty, which increased in proportion as he with-
drew from his own frontier. He had loft a great
number of his best troops in the siege of St.
Difier, and many fell daily in skirmishes, which
it was not in his power to avoid, though they
wafted his army insensibly, without leading to
any decisive action. The season advanced apace,
and he had not yet the command either of a
sufficient extent of territory, or of any such
considerable town as rendered it safe to winter in
the enemies country. Great arrears too, were
due to his soldiers, who were upon the point of
mutinying for their pay, while he knew not from
what funds to satisfy them. All these confiderati-
ons induced him to lissen to the overtures of peace
which a Spanish Dominican, the confeflor of his
lifter the Queen of France, had secretly made to
his confeiflr, a monk of the fame order. In

Brantome, tom. vi. 489.

consequence

Bor V1. c6nfequence of this, plenipotentiaries were named

1544. on both fides, and began their conferences in

Chaufie, a small villagenear Chalons. At the fame
time, Charles, either from a desire of making one
great final effort against France, or merely to gain
a pretext for deserting his ally and concluding a
separate peace, sent an ambassador formally to re-
quire Henry, according to the stipulation in their
treaty, to advance towards Paris. While he ex-
peced a return from him, and waited the issue of
the conferences at Chaufle, he continued to march
forward, though in the utmost distress from fcarci-
ty of provisions. But at last, by a fortunate mo-
tion on his part, or through iome neglect or trea-
chery on that of the French, he furprized first Es-
pernay and then Chateau Thierry, in both which
were considerable magazines. No sooner was it
known that these towns, the latter of which is not
two days march from Paris, were in the hands of
the enemy, than that great capital, defenceless,
and susceptible of any violent alarm in proportion
to its greatness, was filled with consternation.
The inhabitants, as if the Emperor had been al-
ready at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion
and derpair, many fending their wives and children
down the Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans, and
the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself, more
affliced with this, than with any other event dur-
ing his reign, and sensible as well of the triumph
his rival would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of
the danger to which the kingdom was exposed,
could not refrain, in the first emotion of his fur-
prile and sorrow, from crying out, " How dear, O
my God, do I pay for this crown, which I thought
thou hailt granted me freely f." But recovering in
a moment from this sudden i;lly of peevishness and

B rantoic, ton,. 6. 381.

impatience,

impatience, he devoutly added, " Thy will, how- BooK vmi.
ever, be done;" and proceeded to issue the necef- 544.
fary orders for opposing the enemy with his usual
composure and presence of mind. The dauphin
detached eight thousand men to Paris, which re-
vived the courage of the affrighted citizens; he
threw a strong garrison into Meaux, and by a
forced march got into Ferte, between the Impe-
rialifts and the capital.

UPON this, the Emperor who began again to Obliged to

feel the want of provisions, perceiving that the rtire
dauphin still prudently declined a battle, and not
daring to attack his camp with forces so much
ihattered and reduced by hard service, turned fud-
denly to the right, and began to fall back towards
Soissons. Having about this time received Henry's
answer whereby he refused to abandon the sieges
of Bologne and Montreuil, of both which he ex-
pected every moment to get pofeffion, he thought
himself absolved from all obligations of adhering
to the treaty with him, and at full liberty to con-
fult his own interest in what manner soever he
pleased. He consented therefore, to renew the
conference, which the furprize of Efpernay had
broke off To conclude a peace between two Peace be-
princes, one of whom greatly desired, and the tw,, ,hitn
other greatly needed it, did not require a long concluded at
negociation. It was signed at Crefpy, a small cretpy.
town near Meaux, on the eighteenth of Septem-
ber. The chief articles of it were, That all the
conquests which either party had made since the
truce of Nice shall be restored ; that the Emperor
Ihall give in marriage to the duke of Orleans, ei-
ther his own eldest daughter, or the second daugh -
ter of his brother Ferdinand ; that if he chose to
heftow on him his own daughter, he lhall fettle on
hier all the provinces of the Low-countries, to be

ercted

BooK VI. eret&ed into an independent Rfate, which shall de-
t,154 scend to the male iflue of the marriage; that if

he determined to give his niece, he shall, with
her, grant him the investiture of Milan and its
dependencies; that he shall within four months
declare which of these two princeifes he had pitch-
ed upon, and fulfil the refpedive conditions up-
on the consummation of the marriage, which shall
take place within a year from the date of the
treaty; that as soon as the Duke of Orleans is
put in possession either of the Low-Countries or
of Milan, Francis ihall restore to the Duke of
Savoy all that he now poffefles of his territories,
except Pignerol and Montmilian; that Francis
shall renounce all pretensions to the kingdom of
Naples, or to the sovereignty of Slanders and Ar-
tois, and Charles ihall give up his claim to the
dutchy of Burgundy and county of Charolois;
that Francis shall give no aid to the exiled King
of Navarre; that both Monarchs shall join in ma-
king war upon the Turk, towards which the
King shall furnish, when required by the Emperor
and Empire, fix hundred men at arms, and ten
thousand foot g.

Motivesof BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace
ii. ng arising from the distress of his army through want

of provisions; from the difficulty of retreating out
of France; and the impoflibility of securing win-
ter quarters there; the Emperor was influenced by
other considerations, more distant, indeed, but not
lei's weighty. The Pope was offended to a great
degree, as well at his concellions to the Prmteflanta
in the late diet, as at his consenting to call a coun-
:il, and to admit of public disputations in Ger-

t Rccueil des Traitez, t. i. 227. Belius de caufis Pacij
C;cpi;.,: in *\'i': F.rdit. Lips. 1 7 ,.a

nallny
40

many with a view of determining the doctrines in Boot Vl.
controversy; and confidering both these Rfeps as ,44.
sacrilegious encroachments on the jurisdiction as
well as privileges of the Holy fee, he had addref-
fed to him a remonstrance rather than a letter on
this subjec, written with such acrimony of lan-
guage, and in a stile of such high authority, as dif-
covered more of an intention to draw on a quarrel
than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill humour
was not a little enflamed by the Emperor's league
with Henry, which being contracted with an he-
retic, excommunicated by the apostolic fee, ap-
peared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was not
less dreaded by him, than that of Francis with
Solyman. Paul's son and grandson, highly in-
cenfed at the Emperor for having refused to grati-
fy them with regard to the alienation of Parma
and Placentia, contributed by their infusions to
four and disgust him still more. To all which
was added the powerful operation of the flattery
and promises which Franeis incefrantly employed
to gain him. Though from his desire of main-
taining a neutrality, the Pope had hitherto sup-
pressed his own resentment, had eluded the arti-
sices of his own family, and resifted the folicitati-
ons of the French King, it was not safe to rely
much on the fteddinefs of a man, whom his paili-
ons, his friends, and his interest combined to shake.
The union of the Pope with France, Charles well
knew would instantly expose his dominions in
Italy to be attacked. The Venetians he foresaw,
would probably follow the example of a Pon-
tiff, who was confidered as a model of political
wisdom among the Italians; and thus at ajunc-
ture when he felt himself scarce equal to the bur-
den of the present war, he would be overwhelmed
with the weight of a new confederacy against him h

h F. Paul, too. Pallavic. 163.

At

BooK V1. At the fame time, the Turks, almost unresisted,
'544. made such progress in Hungary, reducing town

after town, that they approached near to the con-
fines of the Austrian provinces '. Above all these,
the extraordinary progress of the Protestant doc-
trines in Germany, and the dangerous combina-
tion into which the Princes of that profeflion had
entered, called for his immediate attention. Al-
most one half of Germany had revolted from the
established church; the fidelity of the reft was
much shaken; the nobility of Austria had demand-
ed of Ferdinand the free exercise of religion k; the
Bohemians, among whom some feeds of the doc-
trines of Huss still remained, openly favoured-the
new opinions; the archbishop of Cologne, with a
zeal rare among ecclefiafticks, had begun the re-
formation of his diocese; nor was it possible, unless
some timely and effectual check were given to the
spirit of innovation, to foresee where it would end.
He himself had been a witness, in the late diet, to
the peremptory and decisive tone which the Pro-
teftants had now afiumed; and had seen how,
from confidence in their number and union, they
had forgotten the humble stile of their first peti-
tions, having grown to such boldness as openly to
despise the Pope, and to ihew no great reverence
for the Imperial dignity itself. If, therefore, he
wiffed to maintain either the ancient religion, or
his own authority, and would not choose to dwin-
dle into a mere nominal head of the Empire, some
vigorous effort was requisite, which could not be
made during a war that required the greatest ex-
ertion of his strength against a foreign and power-
ful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to
peace, he had the address to frame the treaty

i Ifluanhaffii. Hilt. Hung. 177.

k Sleid. 285.
42

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 43

of Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which he Boot Vii.
had in view. By coming to an agreement with ' y
Francis, he took from the Pope all profpeC of ad-
vantage in courting the friendship of that Mo-
narch in preference to his. By the proviso with
regard to a war with the Turks, he not only de-
prived Solyman of a powerful ally, but turned the
arms of that ally against him. By a private arti-
cle, not inserted in the treaty that it might not
t raise any unseasonable alarm, he agreed with Fran-
cis that both ihould exert all their influence and
; power in order to procure a general council, to
assert its authority, and to exterminate the protef-
tant heresy out of their dominions. This cut off
all hopes of assistance which the confederates of
Smalkalde might expeEt from the French King1;
and left their solicitations, or his jealousy of an
ancient rival, ihould hereafter tempt Francis to
forget this engagement, he left him embarrassed
with a war against England, which would put it
out of his power to take any part in the affairs of
X Germany.

H HENRY, possessed at all times with an high idea Warconti-

of his own power and importance, felt, in the most nues be-
sensible manner, the negleft with which the Em- France and
peror had treated him in concluding a separate England.
peace. But the situation of his affairs was such as
somewhat alleviated the mortification which this
occasioned. For though he was obliged to recall
the Duke of Norfolk from the siege of Montreuil,
because the Flemish troops received orders to
retire, Bologne had surrendered before the ne- Septe. '4.
gociations at Crefpy were brought to an issue.
While elated with vanity on account of this con-
quest, and inflamed with indignation agaiaft
the Emperor, the ambassadors whom Francis

Seck, 1. iii. 496.

sent

BooK vTn. tent'to make overtures of peace found him too

1. arrogant to grant what was moderate or equi-

table. His demands were indeed extravagant,
and made in the tone of a conqueror; that Fran-
cis should renounce his alliance with Scotland,
and not only pay up the arrears of former debts,
but reimburse the money which he had expended
in the present war. Francis though sincerely de-
firous of peace, and willing to yield a great deal
in order to obtain it, being now free from the
prefiure of the Imperial arms, rejeEted there igno-
minious propositions with disdain; and Henry
departing for England, hostilities continued be-
tween the two nations m

The dau- THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever
phindiftif- to the people of France, whom it delivered from
the peace of the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into
Crefpy. the heart of the kingdom, was loudly complained

of by the dauphin. He confidered it as a mani-
fest proof of the King his father's extraordinary
partiality towards his younger brother, now Duke
of Orleans, and complained that from his eager-
ness to gain an establishment for a favourite son,
he had sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and
renounced the moit ancient and valuable rights
of the crown. But as he durst not venture to of-
fend the King by refusing to ratify it, though ex-
tremely desirous at the fame time of securing to
himself the privilege of reclaiming what was now
alienated so much to his detriment, he fecretl)
protested, in pretence of some of his adherents,
against the whole tranfadtion; and declared what-
ever he should be obliged to do in order to con-
firm it, null in itcilf, and void of all obligation.
The parliament of Thouloufe, probably by the

' Meni. de Rjbier. t. i. p. j72. Jlcrier t, 244.

infligation

infligation of his partizans, did the fame". But BOOK V.
Francis, highly pleated as well with having deli- ,44.
vered his fubjeds from the miseries of an invasion,
as with the profpet of acquiring an independent
settlement for his son at no greater price than
the renouncing conquests to which he had nojuft
claim; titles which had hitherto proved the source
of expence or disasters to the nation; and rights
grown to be obsolete and of no value; ratified the
treaty with great joy. Charles, within the time
prescribed by the treaty, declared his intention of
giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the
Duke of Orleans, together with the dutchy of
Milan as her dowry ° Every circumstance seem-
ed to promise the continuance of peace. The
Emperor, cruelly affli&ed with the gout, appear-
ed to be in no condition to undertake any enter-
prize where great activity was requisite, or much
fatigue to be endured. He himself felt this, or
wished at least that it should be believed; and
being fp much disabled by this excruciating dif-
temper when a French ambaifador followed him
to Brpfels in order to be present at his ratification
of the treaty of peace, that it was with the utmost
difficulty he signed his name, he observed, that
there was no great danger of his violating these
articles, as a hand that could scarce hold a pen,
was little able to brandish a lance.

THE violence of his disease confined the Em- TheEmper-

peror several months in Brussels, and was the ap- with relp
parent cause of putting off the execution, of the toGermany.
vast schemes which he had formed in order to
humble the Protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For, how

' Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235, 238. 0 Recueil
de Traitez, t. ii. 238.

V 0L. Ill.

D

preva-

Bp0o v'l. prevalent soever the motives were which determi-
'v'4' ned him to undertake this enterprize, the nature

of that great body which he was about to attack,
as well as the situation of his own affairs, made it
neceflary to deliberate long, to proceed with cau-
tion, and not:to throw aside too suddenly the veil
under which he had hitherto concealed his real
Sentiments and schemes. He was sensible that the
Protestants, conscious of their own strength, but
-under continual apprehensions of his designs, had
all'the boldners of a powerful party, and all the
jealousy of a feeble faction; and were no less
quick-fighted to discern the first appearance of
dagger, than ready to take arms in order to repel
it. -' At the'fame time, he continued involved in
a: Turkish war; and though, in order to deliver
tlimfelf from this incumbrance, he had determi-
ned to fend an envoy to the Porte with most ad-
vantageous and even submissive overtures of peace,
the resolutions of that haughty court were so un-
certain, that before these were known it would
have been the height of imprudence to have
kindled the flames of civil war in his own domi-
nions.

I'e Pope UPON this account, he appeared diflatisfied
gnera with a bull iflfied by the Pope immediately after
ouncil to the peace of Crefpy, summoning the council to
rett. assemble at Trent early next spring, and exhcrt-
Novcm. 19. ing all Christian Princes to embrace the opportu-

nity that the present happy interval of tranquillity
afforded them, of fuppreiling those herefies which
threatened to subvert whatever was sacred or ve-
nerable among Christians. But after such a
flight expreflion of dislike as was neceflary in or-
der to cover his designs, he determined to coun-
tenance the council, which might become no in-
confi:erable instrument towards accomplishing his;
projct,;, and therefore not only appointed ambaf-

faldrs
46

fadors to appear there in his name, but ordered Boo" v".
the ecclefiafticks in his dominions to attend at the 544
time prefixed P.

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Im- 154s-

perial diet, after several prorogations, was opened wiet a
at Worms. The Protestants, who enjoyed the Mrcht4.
free exercise of their religion by a very precarious
tenure, having no other security for it than the re-
cess of the last diet, which was to continue in
force only until the meeting of a council, wished
earnefftly to establish that important privilege up-
on some firmer basis, and to hold it by a perpetu-
al not a temporary title. But, inflead of offering
them any additional security, Ferdinand opened
the diet with observing, that there were two points,
chiefly, which required consideration, the profecu-
tion of the war against the Turks, and the state
of religion; that the former was the most urgent,
as Solyman, after conquering the greatest part of
Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the Austrian
provinces; that the Emperor, who, from the be-
ginning of his reign, had neglected no opportu-
nity of annoying this formidable enemy, and with
the hazard of his own person had refitted his at-
tacks, being animated flill with the fame zeal,
had now consented to flop ihort in the career of
his success against France, that, in conjunction
with his ancient rival, he might turn his arms with
greater vigour against the common adversary of
the Christian faith; that it became all the mem-
bers of the Empire to second there pious endea-
vours of its head; that, therefore, they ought,
without delay, to vote him such effectual aid as
both their duty and their interest called upon them
to furnish; that the controversies about religion

P F. Paul, 104.

were

^or. vi. were ft intricate, and of such difficult discussion,

. as to give no hope of its being possible to bring

Fcariand them at present to any final issue; that by perse-
requires the
GCermn toverance and repeated solicitations the Emperor
¢ckzow- had at length prevailed on the Pope to call a coun-
lo. the"il, for which they had so often wished and peti-

tioned; that the time appointed for its meeting
was now come, and both parties ought to wait for
its decrees, and submit to them as the decisions of
the universal church.

THE popish members of the diet received this

declaration with great applause, and signified their
entire acquiescence in every particular which it
contained. The Protestants expressed great fur-
prise at propositions, which were so manifestly re-
pugnant to the recess of the former diet; they
insisted that the questions with regard to religion,
as first in dignity and importance, ought to come
first under deliberation; that alarming as the pro-
grefs of the Turks was to all Germany, the fecu-
ring the free exercise of their religion touched
them till more nearly, nor could they prosecute
a foreign war with spirit, while solicitous and con-
cerned about their domestic tranquillity; that if
the latter were once rendered firm and permanent,
they would concur with their countrymen in push-
ing the former, and yield to none of them in ac-
tivity or zeal. But if the danger from the Turk-
ifh arms was indeed so imminent, as not to admit
of such a delay as would be occasioned by an im-
mediate examination of the controverted points
in religion, they required that a diet should be
intfantly appointed, to which the final settlement
of their religious disputes should be referred; and
that in the mean time the decree of the former
diet concerning religion should be explained in a
point which they deemed essential. By the re-

ceis

cess of Spires it was provided, that they should BOOK Vi.
enjoy unmolested the public exercise of their re- ,4s.
ligion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to filbmit, they be-
gan to fufpe& that their adversaries might take
advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of the
recess, and pretending that the event therein men-
tioned had taken place, might pronounce them to
be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In
order to guard against this interpretation, they re-
newed their former remonstrances against a coun-
cil called to meet without the bounds of the
Empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and
in which he assumed the right of presiding; and
declared that, notwithstanding the convocation of
any such illegal afiembly, they fill held the recess
of the late diet to be in full force.

AT other jun&tures, when the Emperor thought Emperor

it of advantage to tooth and gain the Protestants Wormsst
he had devised expedients for giving them satis-
fation with regard to demands seemingly more
extravagant; but his views at present being very
different, Ferdinand by his command adhered in-
flexibly to his first propositions, and would make
no concessions which had the most remote ten-
dency to throw discredit on the council, or to
weaken its authority. The Protestants, on their
part, were no less inflexible; and after much time
spent in fruitless endeavours to convince each other,
they came to no conclusion. Nor did the presence
of the Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at May 15.
Worms, contribute in any degree to render the
Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced that
they were maintaining the cause of God and of
truth, they shewed themselves superior to the al-
lurements of interest, or the fuggeftos of fear;
and in proportion as the Emperor redoubled his

D3 so-

BOOK vnI. solicitations, or discovered his designs, their bold-

- ness seems to have increased. At last they openly

TheProtctef- declared, that they would not even deign to vin-
laim all dicate their tenets in pretence of a council, aflem-
conneaion bled not to examine, but to condemn them; and
'with the
conhi, of that they would pay no regard to an assembly held
Trent. under the influence of a Pope, who had already

precluded himself from all title to ad as a judge,
by his having stigmatized their opinions with the
name of heresy, and denounced against them the
heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude of his
usurped power, he could inflit q.

Maurice of WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well
Saxony in as firmness, rejeced all intercourse with the coun-
this diet. cil, and refused their assent to the Imperial demands

in refpet to the Turkish war, Maurice of Saxony
alone ihewed an inclination to gratify the Empe-
ror with regard to both. Though he professed
an inviolable regard for the Protestant religion,
he assumed an appearance of moderation peculiar
to himself, by which he confirmed the favourable
sentiments that the Emperor already entertained
of him, and gradually paved the way for executing
the ambitious designs which always occupied his
a&ive and enterprizing mind . His example, how-
ever, had little influence upon such as agreed with
him in their religious opinions; and Charles per-
ceived that he could not hope either to procure
present aid from the Protestants against the Turks,
or to quiet their fears and jealouses on account of
their religion. But as his schemes were not yet
ripe for execution, nor his preparations so far ad-
vanced that he could force their compliance, or
punish their obstinacy, he artfully concealed his own
intentions; and that he might augment their fecu-
Augua 4. rity, he appointed a diet to be held at Ratisbon early

q Sleid. 343, &c. Seck. iii. 543, &c. Thuan. Hiftor.
lib. ii. p. 56. r Seck. iii. 571.

next
50o

next year, in order to adjust what was now left Boor VII.
undetermined; and previous to it, he agreed that 'v'4
a certain number of divines of each party should
meet, in order to confer upon the points in dif-
pute '.

BUT how far soever this appearance of a de- TheProtef-

fire to maintain the present tranquillity might tantpegin
have imposed upon the Protestants, the Emperor the Empe-
was incapable of such uniform and thorough dif-ror.
simulation, as to hide altogether from their view
the dangerous designs which he was meditating
against them. Herman count de Wied, Arch-
bishop and Eledor of Cologne, a prelate confpi-
cuous for his virtue and primitive simplicity of
manners, though not more distinguished for learn-
ing than the other descendants of noble families,
who in that age possessed most of the great bene-
sices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the doctrines of the Reformers, had begun in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-three,
with the assistance of Melanthon and Bucer, to
abolish the ancient superstition in his diocese, and
to introduce in its place the rites established among
the Protestants. But the canons of his cathe-
dral who were not possessed with the fame spirit
of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal the
levelling genius of the new fede would prove to
their dignity and wealth, opposed, from the be-
ginning, this unprecedented enterprize of their
Archbishop with all the zeal flowing from reve-
rence for old inffitutions, heightened by concern
for their own interest. This opposition, which the
Archbishop confidered only as a new argument to
demonstrate the neceflity of a reformation, nei-
ther shook his resolution nor slackened his ardour
in prolecuting his plan. The canons, perceiving
all their endeavours to check his career to be in-

Sleid. 351.
D 4 effectual,

BOOK VII. effectual, solemnly protested against his proceed-

,55 ings, and appealed for redress to the Pope and

Emperor, the former as his ecclesiastical, the lat-
ter as his civil superior. This appeal being laid
before the Emperor, during his residence in
Worms, he took the canons of Cologne under
his immediate protection; enjoined them to pro-
ceed with rigour against all who revolted from
the established church; prohibited the Archbi-
shop to make any innovation in his diocese; and
summoned him to appear at Brussels within thirty
days, to answer the accusations which should be
preferred against him'.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions

againRt the Protestant party, Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpedted of Lutheranifm with unrelent-
ing vigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms, he
silenced the Protestant preachers in that city. He
allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to
call upon him, as he regarded the favour of God,
to exterminate that pestilent heresy. He dif-
patched the embassy, which has been already men-
tioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of peace,
that he might be free from any apprehensions of
danger or interruption from that quarter. Nor
did any of these steps, or their dangerous ten-
dency, escape the jealous observation of the Pro-
teftants, or fail to alarm their fears, and to excite
their solicitude for the safety of their feet.

Death us ME ANW HILE Charles's good fortune which pre-
the Duke of domilated on all occasions over that of his rival

Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty, from
which, with all his sagacity and address, he would

t Siid. 310, 340, 351. Seckend. iii. 443, 553.

have

have found it no easy matter to have difentang- Boo VII.
led himself. Just about the time when the Duke ' '
of Orleans should have received Ferdinand's 54s
daughter in marriage, and together with her the Sept. 8.
pofleflion of the Milanese, he died of a pestilential
fever. By this event, the Emperor was freed from
the necessity of giving up an important province
into the hands of an enemy, or from the indecency
of violating a recent and solemn engagement,
which must have occasioned an immediate rup-
ture with France. He affected, however, to ex-
press great sorrow for the untimely death of a
young prince, who was to have been so nearly
allied to him; but he carefully avoided entering
into any fresh discussions concerning the Milanese,
and would not liften to a proposal which came
from Francis of new modelling the treaty of Cref-
py, so as to make him some reparation for the
advantages which he had loft by the demise of
his son. In the more active and vigorous part
of Francis's reign, a declaration of war would
have been the certain and instantaneous confe-
quence of such a flat refusal to comply with a de-
mand seemingly so equitable; but the declining
ifate of his own health, the exhausted condition
of his kingdoms, together with the burden of the
war against England, obliged him, at present to
dilfemble his resentment, and to put off thoughts
of revenge to some other juncture. In confe-
quence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of
Savoy loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of
his territories; and the rights or claims relin-
quilhed by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full
force to the crown of France, to serve as pretexts
for future wars U.

UPow the first intelligence of the Duke of Or-
leans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde flatter-

Balcarii Comment. 769. Paruta. Hist. Venet. iv. p. 177.

ed

Book vl. ed theinfelves that the essential alterations which it

5"4. occasioned could scarce fail of producing a rupture,

The Pope which would prove the means of their safety. But
grants the
utchis of they were not more disappointed with regard to
Parma and this, than in their expectations from an event
Placentia to
his con. which seemed to be the certain prelude of a quar-

rel between the Emperor and the Pope. Paul,
whose passion for aggrandizing his family, increa-
fed as he advanced in years, and as he saw the
dignity and power which they derived immedi-
ately from him becoming more precarious, finding
that he could not bring the Emperor to approve
of his ambitious schemes, ventured, though at the
rifque of incurring his displeasure, to grant his son
Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia.
At a time when a great part of Europe inveighed
openly againit the corrupt manners and exorbitant
power of Ecclesiastics, and when a council was
summoned to reform the disorders in the church,
this indecent grant of such a principality to a son
of whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought to have
been ashamed, and whose licentious morals all
good men detested, gave general offence. Some
Cardinals in the Imperial interest remonstrated
againfl such an unbecoming alienation of the pa-
trimony of the church; the Spanish ambaflador
would not be present at the oilemnity of his en-
feoffment; and the Emperor peremptorily refu-
fed, upon pretext that these cities were part of the
Milanese ftatc, to confirm the deed of investiture.
But both the Emperor and Pope being intent up-
on one common object in Germany, sacrificed
their particular paltions to that public cause, and
Iiipprclfed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were iliing on this occasion, that they might
jointly pursue what each efleemed of greater iin
portance C.

x Paruta, Hist, Venet. iv. 178. Pallavic. 180.

Anot T

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was Boor vI.

diflurbed by a violent but short eruption of Henry J4J
Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, though fill Henry of
stript of his dominions, which the Emperor held kirdi' a
in sequestration, until his differences with the con- war in Ger.
federates of Smalkalde should be adjusted, posses- "mny
fed however so much credit in Germany that he
undertook to raise for the French King a confi-
derable body of troops to be employed in the war
againit England. The money stipulated for this
purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the troops
were levied; but Henry, inflead of leading them
towards France, suddenly entered his own domi-
nions at their head, in hopes of recovering them
before any army could be assembled to oppose him.
The confederates were not more furprized at this
unexpected attack, than the King of France was
astonished at a mean thievish fraud so unbecoming
the character of a Prince. But the Landgrave of
Hesse, with incredible expedition, collected as
many men as put a flop to the progress of Henry's
undisciplined forces, and being joined by his son-
in-law Maurice, and some of the troops of the
Eletor of Saxony, he gained such advantages over
Henry, who was rash and bold in forming his
schemes, but feeble and undetermined in execu-
ting them, as obliged him to disband his army,
and to surrender himself together with his eldest
son prisoners at discretion. He was kept in close
confinement, until a new reverse of affairs pro-
cured him liberty Y.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprize ad- ,s4h.

ded new reputation to the arms of the Proteltants, Taioofr
the reformation of the Palatinate brought a great tile l'alati-
accession of strength to their party. Frederick, "'"t
who succeeded his brother Lewis in that Electoratc,

r Slcid. 3 5,. Seck. iii. 567.

had

BOO, vII. had lohg been fufpedted of a secret propensity to

,545 the doctrines of the Reformers, which, upon his

acceflion to the principality, he openly manifest-
ed. But as he expected that something effectual
towards a general and legal eitablifhment of reli-
gion would be the fruit of so many diets, confe-
rences, and negotiations, he did not, at first,
attempt any public innovation in his dominions.

,5,6. Finding all these ifflue in nothing, he thought him-
Jan. o1. seif called, at length, to countenance by his autho-

rity the system which he approved of, and to gra-
tify the wishes of his fubjets, who by their inter-
course with the Protestant itates had universally
imbibed their opinions. As the warmth and im-
petuofity which accompanied the spirit of Refor-
mation in its first efforts had somewhat abated,
this change was made with great order and regu-
larity; the ancient rights were abolished, and new
forms introduced without any aa of violence, or
symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adopt-
ed the religious system of the Protestants, he
imitated the example of Maurice, and did not
accede to the league of Smalkalde '.

The ccuncil A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Pa-
afimnblks at
Trent.a latinate, the general council was opened with the

accullomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes of the
Catholick itates were turned with much expeda-
tion towards an assembly, which all had confidered
as a natural and adequate remedy for the difor-
ders of the church, when they first broke out,
though many were afraid that it was now too late
to hope for great benefit from it, when the ma-
lady, by being suffered to make progress during
twenty eight years, had become inveterate, and
grown to such extreme violence. The Pope by

7Slcid. 356. Seck. i. iii. 616

Iis
56

his last bull of convocation, had appointed the first Bv,.
meeting to be held in March. But his views and 1546.
those of the Emperor were To different, that al-
most the whole year was spent in negotiations.
Charles, who foresaw that the rigorous decrees of
the council against the Protestants would soon
drive them, in felf-defence as well as from resent-
ment, to some desperate extreme, laboured to put
off its meeting until his warlike preparations were
so far advanced, that he might be in a condition
to second its decisions by the force of his arms.
The Pope, who had early rent to Trent the le-
gates who were to preside in his name, knowing
to what contempt it would expose his authority,
and what suspicions it would beget of his intenti-
ons, if the fathers of the council (hould remain in
a state of inactivity, when the church was in such
danger as to require their immediate and vigorous
interposition, insisted either upon translating the
council to some city in Italy, or upon suspending
its proceedings at that juncture, or upon authori-
sing it to begin its deliberations immediately.
The Emperor rejected the two former as equally
offensive to the Germans of every denomination,
but finding it impossible to elude the latter, he
proposed that the council should begin with re-
forming the disorders in the church, before it
proceeded to examine or define articles of Faith.
This was the very thing which the court of Rome
dreaded most, and which had prompted it to
employ To many artifices in order to prevent the
meeting of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul,
though more compliant than Come of his prede-
ceflbrs with regard to calling a council, was no less
jealous than they had been of its jurifdition, and
saw what matter of triumph such a method of
proceeding would afford the heretics. He appre-
hended consequences not only humbling but fatal

to

1.--- inquest into abuses as their only business; or, if

inferior prelates were allowed to gratify their own
envy and peevishness by prescribing rules to those
who were exalted above them in dignity and
power. Without listening, therefore, to this
infiduous proposal of the Emperor, he inftruAed
his legates to open the council.

j:n,. i.d THE first session was spent in matters of form.
Its proceed-
ings. In a subsequent one, it was agreed that the fra-

ming of a confession of faith, containing all the
articles which the church required its members to
believe, ought to be the first and principal business
of the council; but that at the fame time, it should
give attention to what was necessary towards the
reformation of manners and discipline. From this
first symptom of the spirit with which the council
was animated, from the high tone of authority
which the legates who presided in it assumed, and
from the implicit deference with which most of
the members followed their directions, the Pro-
teftants conjectured with ease what decisions they
might expeCt. It astonished them, however, to
fee forty prelates, (for no greater number was yet
assembled) afuilme authority as representatives of
the universal church, and proceed to determine the
most important points of doctrines in its name.
Sensible of this indecency, as well as of the ridi-
cule with which it might be attended, the council
advanced slowly in its deliberations, and all its
proceedings were for some time languishing and
feeble". As soon as the confederates of Smalkalde
received information of the opening of the coun-
cil, they published a long manifesto containing
a renewal of their protest againit its meeting,
together with the reasons which induced them to

a F. Paul. 12o, &c. Pallavic. p. 180, &c.

decline

THE REIGN OF THE
58

decline its jurifdi&ions b. The Pope and Empe- Boor Vi.
ror, meanwhile, were so little solicitous to quicken 1546.
or add vigour to its operations, as plainly disco-
vered that some object of greater importance
occupied and interested them.

THE Protestants, as they were not inattentive Apprehen-

or unconcerned fpetators of their motions, enter- ion ors the
tained every day more violent suspicions of their
intentions, and received intelligence from differ-
ent quarters of the machinations carrying on
against them. The King of England informed
them, that the Emperor having long resolved to
exterminate their opinions, would not fail to em-
ploy this interval of tranquillity which he now
enjoyed, as the most favourable junture for car-
rying his design into execution. The merchants
of Augsburg, which was at that time a city of
extensive trade, received advice by means of their
correspondents in Italy, among whom were some
who secretly favoured the Protestant cause c, that
a dangerous confederacy against it was forming
between the Pope and Emperor. In confirmation
of this, they heard from the Low-Countries that
Charles had issued orders, though with every pre-
caution which could keep the measure concealed,
for raising troops both there and in other parts of
his dominions. Such a variety of information,
corroborating all that their own jealousy or ob-
servation led them to apprehend, left the Protef-
tants little reason to doubt of the Emperor's hof-
tile intentions. Under this impreflion, the depu- Their dll-
ties of the confederates of Smalkalde assembled ber.ltions
at Frankfort, and by communicating their iotelli-
gence and sentiments to each other, reciprocally
heightened their sense of the impending danger.
But their union was not such as their situation re-

b Seek, 1. iii. 602, &c, c Seek. 1. iii. 579.

quircdl,

BOOK V1, quired; or the preparations of their enemies ren-

1546. dered necessary. Their league had now fubfited

ten years. Among so many members whose terri-
tories were intermingled with each other, and who,
according to the custom of Germany, had created
an infinite variety of mutual rights and claims by
intermarriages, alliances, and contracts of differ-
ent kinds, fubjets of jealousy and discord had un-
avoidably arisen. Some of the confederates, be-
ing connected with the Duke of Brunswick, were
highly disgusted with the Landgrave, on account
of the rigour with which he had treated that rash
but unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Eletor
of Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league,
with having involved the members in unnecessary
and exorbitant expences by their profuseness or
want of ceconomy. The views, likewise, of these
two great Princes, who, by their superior power
and authority, influenced and directed the whole
body, being extremely different, rendered all its
motions languid, at a time when the utmofi vi-
gour and dispatch were requisite. The Landgrave,
of a violent and enterprising temper, but not for-
getful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the usual
maxims of human policy, infifed that the danger
which threatened them, being manifest and un-
avoidable, they Ihould have recourse to the most
effectual expedient for securing their own safety,
by courting the protection of the Kings of France
and England, or by joining in alliance with the
protestant cantons of Swifferland, from whom they
might expect such powerful and present assistance
as their situation demanded. The Eleator on the
other hand, with the most upright intentions of
any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the
administration of government in any tranquil
period, was possessed with such superstitious vene-
ration for all the parts of the Lutheran systen

anl!

find such bigotted attachment to all its tenets, as Boo VL
made him averse to an union with those who dif- 1546.
sered frqf him in any article of faith, and render-
ed him very incapable of undertaking its defence
in times of difficulty and danger. He seemed to
think, that the concerns of religion were to be
regulated entirely by principles and maxims ds-
ferent from those which apply to the common
affairs of life; and being swayed too much by the
opinions of Luther who was not only a firanger to
the rules of political condut, but despised them;
he often discovered an uncomplying spirit which
proved of the greatest detriment to the cause that
he wilhed to support. Influenced, on this occasion,
by the severe and rigid notions of that Reformer,
he refused to enter into any confederacy with
Francis, because he was a pegfecutor of the truth;
or to solicit the friendship of Henry, because he
was no lets impious and profane than the Pope
himself; or even to join in alliance with the Swiss,
because they differed from him in several effihtial
articles of faith. This dissension, about a point
of fich consequence, produced its natural effets.
Each secretly censured and reproached the other.
The Landgrave confidered the Ele&or as fettered
by narrow prejudices unworthy of a Prince called
to at a chief part in a scene of such importance.
The Elector fufpefted him of loose principles and
ambitious views, which corresponded ill with the
sacred cause in which they were engaged. But
though the Elector's scruples prevented theirtime-
ly application for foreign aid; and the jealousy or
discontent of the other princes defeated a proposal
for renewing their original confederacy, the term
during which it was to continue in force being on
the point of expiring; yet the sense of their com-
mon danger induced themito agree with regard to

V o . III. E other

Boo V1;other points, particularly that they would never

56. acknowledge the aftembly at Trent as a lawful

council, nor susser the Archbishop of Cologne to
be. opprefled on account of the Rfeps which he had
,takenitowards the reformation of his diocese d.

The negoti- *THIE Landgrave, meanwhile, desirous of pene-
thion wph trating to the bottom of the Emperor's intentions,
ror. wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to be tho-

roughly acquainted with all his master's schemes,
informing him of the several particulars which
raised the suspicions of the Protestants, and beg-
ing -an explicit declaration of what they had to
fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, assured
them that the intelligence which they had receiv-
ed of the Emperor's military preparations was
exaggerated, and all their suspicions destitute of
foundation; that, though in order to guard his
frontiers against any insult of the French or
English, he had commanded a small body of men
to be raised in the Low-Countries, he was as
solicitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in
Germany '

BUT the Emperor's acions did not correspond

with these professions. For, inflead of appointing
men of known moderation and a pacific temper to
appear in defence of the Catholic do&rines at the
conference which had been agreed on, he made
choice of fierce bigots, attached to their own sys-
ter with a blind obstinacy, which rendered all
hope of reconcilement desperate. Malvenda, a
Spanish divine, who took the condut of the de-
bate on the part of the Catholics, managed it with
all the subtle dexterity of a fcholaRtic metaphyfi-

Seek. . ii. i 566, 570o, 613 Sd. Sleid .
3 .56

cian,

cian, more fudious to perplex his adversaries than BOol VI.
to convince them, and more intent on palliating -46~.
error than on discovering truth. The Protestants
filled with indignation, as well at his sophistry as
at rome regulations which the Emperor endea-
voured to impose on the disputants, broke off the
conference abruptly, being fully convinced of the
Emperor's having had nothing in view but to
aniufe them, and to gain time for ripening his
own schemes .

f Sleid. 358. Seek. 1. iii. 620.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTO R Y

OF T H E
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BO O K VIII.
Boovii Vi. W HILE appearances of danger daily en

v"_ VV creased, and the tempest which had beer
Dea46h so long a gathering was ready to break forth in all
Luther. its violence against the Protestant church, Luther

t'as ¥aved, by a seasonable death, from feeling
or beholding its deftrudive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining slate of health, and during
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eyfleben,
in order to compose, by his authority, a dissension
rFb. t8. among the counts of Mansfield, he was seized

with a violent inflammation in his ftomacl,
which in a few days put an end to his life, ir
the fixty-third year of his age. As he wa

raise

_ ____ _ . ____
_ ·_ ..·

raifed.up by providence to be the author of one of Booc vlL
ihe greatest and most interesting revolutions re- ,4--
corded in hiltory, there is not any person perhaps
vhofe character has been drawn with such oppo-
site colours. In, his own age, one party, struck
with horror and inflamed with rage, when they
saw with what a daring hand he overturned every
thing which they held to be sacred, or valued as
beneficial, imputed to him not only all the defects
and vices of a man,, but the qualities of a damon.
The other, warmed with admiration and grati-
tude, which they thought he merited- as the re-
ftorer of light and liberty to the Christian church,
ascribed to him perfections above the condition of
humanity, and viewed all his aAcions with a vene-
ration bordering on that which should be paid
only to those who are guided by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. It is his own conduct, not His charac-
the undiftinguifiing censure or the exaggerated ter
praise of his contemporaries, which ought to regu-
late the opinions of the present age concerning him.
Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain it, abilities both natural
and acquired to defend it, and unwearied indufRry
to propagate it, are virtues which fline To confpi-
cuoufly in every part of his behaviour, that
even his enemies must allow him to have pof-
sessed them in an eminent degree, To these may
be added with equal justice, fiich purity and even
austerity of manners, as becamne one who assumed
the character of a Reformer; tilch fantity of life
as suited the doctrine which he delivered; and
such perfect diiintereftednefs as affords no llight
presumption of his sincerity. Superior to all 1el-.
fish considerations, a stranger to the elegancies of
life, and despising its pleasures, he left the ho-
nours and emoluments of the church to his difci-
ples, remaining satisfied himrfelf in his original
state of profeflor in the university, and paflor of

E 3 the
i

BooK nI. the town of Wittemberg, with the moderate ap-

-6. poinitrents annexed to there offices. His extraor-

dinary qualities were allayed with no inconfider-
able mixture of human frailty and human paffi-
ons. These, however, were of such a nature, that
they cannot be imputed to malevolence or cor-
ruption of heart, but seem to have taken their rife
from the fame source with many of his virtues.
His mind forcible and vehement in all its opera-
tions, rouzed by great objects, or agitated by vio-
lent passions, broke out, on many occasions, with
an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler I
spirits, or such as are placed in a more tranquil
situation. By carrying tome praise-worthy difpo-
fitions to excels, he bordered sometimes on what
was culpable, and was often betrayed into aEions
which exposed him to censure. 'His confidence
that his own opinions were well' founded, ap-
proached to arrogance; his courage in asserting
them, to rashn'ess; his firmness in adhering to
them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in confuting his
adversaries, to rage and scurrility. Accustomed
himself' to confider every thing as Subordinate to
truth, he expeted the fame deference for it from
other men; and without making any allowances
fr their timidity or prejudices, he poured forth
against those, who disappointed him in this parti-
cular, a torrent of invective mingled with con-
tempt. Regardless of any distinction of rank or
character when his doctrines were attacked, he
chastised all his adversaries, indiscriminately, with
the fame rough hand; neither the royal dignity
of Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning and
abilities of Erasmus, screened them from the
fame gross abuse with which he treated Tetzel
or Eccius.

BUT there indecencies of which Luther was guil-
ty, must not be imputed wholly to the violence of

. .. hi\

his temper. They ought to be charged in part on Bobx Vml
the manners of the age. Among a rude people, ,-~.
unacquainted with those maxims, which, by put-
ting continual restraint on the passions of indivi-
duals, have polished society and rendered it agree-
able, disputes of every kind were managed with
heat, and strong emotions were uttered in their
natural language, without reserve or delicacy. At
the fame time, the works of learned men were all
composed in Latin, and they were not only autho-
Tifed, by the example of eminent writers in that
language, to use their antagonists with the most
illiberal scurrility; but, in a dead tongue, in-
decencies of every kind appear less {hocking than
in a living language, whose idioms and phrases
seem gross, because they are familiar.

IN pafling judgment upon the characers of

men, we ought to try them by the principles and
maxims of their own age, not by those of another.
For, although virtue and vice are at all times the
fame, manners and customs vary continually. Some
parts of Luther's behaviour, which to us appear
most culpable, gave no disgust to his contempora-
ries. It was even by some of those qualities,
which we are now apt to blame, that he was fitted
for accomplishing the great work which he under-
took. To rouze mankind, when funk in ignorance
or superstition, and to encounter the rage of bi-
gotry, armed with power, required the utmost
vehemence of zeal, and a temper daring to excess.
A gentle call would neither have reached, nor
have excited those to whom it was addressed. A
spirit, more amiable, but less vigorous than Lu-
ther's, would have shrunk back from the dangers,
which he braved and surmounted. Towards the
close of Luther's life, though without any per-

E 4 ceptible

BooK vIII. ceptible declension of his zeal or abilities, the in-

s546. firmities of his temper increased upon him, so that

he grew daily more peevish, more irascible, and
more impatient of contradiCtion. Having lived
to be witness of his own amazing success; to fee
a great part of Europe embrace his doEtrines; and
to shake the foundation of the Papal throne, be-
fore which the mightiest Monarchs had trembled,
he discovered, on some occasions, symptoms of
vanity and felf-applaufe. He must have been in-
deed more than man, if, upon contemplating all
that he actually accomplished, he had never felt
any sentiment of this kind rising in his breast .

SOME time before his death he felt his strength

declining, his constitution being worn out by a
prodigious multiplicity of business, added to the
labour of discharging his ministerial function with
unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of conRfant
iudy, besides the composition of works as volu-
minous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted leisure
and retirement. His natural intrepidity did not
forsake him at the approach of death; his last
conversation with his friends was concerning the

* A remarkable instance of this, as well as of a certain

singularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Last
WilL Though the effefs which he had to bequeath were
very inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a Testa-
ment, but scorned to frame it with the usual legal formalities.
Notus fum, hli)s he, in ccelo, in terra, & in inferno, & auto-
ritateni ad hoc sufficientem habeo, ut nnihi soli credatur, cum
Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et miferabili peccatori, ex
paterna miicricordia Ev'angelium filii fui crediderit, dederitque
ut in eo verax & fidelis fuerim, ita ut multi in mundo illud
per me acceperint, & nie pro Dodtore veritatis agnoverint,
Ipreto banno Papa, Cafaris, Regum, Principum & facerdo-
tum, immo omnium dsemonuui odio. Quidni, igitur, ad dif-
pofitioncm hanc, in re exigua, fufficiat, si adfit manus 1mea
teftimonium, & dici poflit, hCc fcripfit D Martinus Luthei,
Notarips Dei, & testis Evangelii ejus. Seck. 1. iii. p. 65 .

happiness

happiness reserved for good men in a future world, Bo"e VMI
of which he spoke with the fervour and delight 5,46
natural to one who expected and wished to enter
loon upon the enjoyment of it . The account of
his death filled the Roman Catholic party with
excessive as well as indecent joy, and damped the
Ipirits of all his followers ; neither party fuffici-
ently confidering that his doctrines were now so
firmly rooted, as to be in a condition to flpurifh
Independent of the hand which first had planted
them. His funeral was celebrated by order of
the Eletor of Saxony with extraordinary pomp.
He left several children by his wife Catharine Bore,
who survived him towards the end of the last
century, there were in Saxony some of his defcen-
dents in decent and honourable stations .

The Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of The Empe-

diflimulation with which he had set out, employ- voun eoa
ing every art to amuse the Protestants, and to amuse and
quiet their fears and jealousies. For this purpose de^e t.
he contrived to have an interview with the Land-
grave of Hesse, the most active of all the confe-
derates, and the most suspicious of his designs.
To him he made such warm profeflions of his Mrch %B.
concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent measures; he denied, in
such express terms, his having entered into any
league, or having begun any military preparations
which should give cause of alarm to tie Protef-
tants, as seem to have dispelled all the Land-
grave's doubts and apprehensions, and sent him
away fully satisfied of his pacific intentions. This
artifice was of great advantage, and effectually an-

* Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 63?, &c.
b Seek. 1. iii. 651.

fwered

Boor. V ffwered the purpose for which it was intended.

,546. The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where

he had been admitted to this interview, went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldic confederates were
assembled, and gave them such a flattering repre-
fentation of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from the
temper of the German nation as from the genius
of all great aflociations or bodies of men, to be
flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their deli-
berations, thought there was no necessity of
taking any immediate measures againf -danger,
which appeared to be distant or imaginary c

Proceedings SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as flag-
f th co," gered the credit which the Protestants had given
theProtef- to the Emperor's declarations. The council of

ut Trent, though frill composed of a small number

of Italian and spanh prelates, without a tingle
deputy from many of the kingdoms which it as-
fumed the right of binding by its decrees, being
ashamed of its long inactivity, proceeded now to
fettle articles of the greatest importance. Hav-
ing begun with examining the first and chief point
in controversy between the church of Rome and
the Reformers, concerning the rule which should
be held supreme or decisive in matters of faith,
Apri 8. the council, by its infallible authority, determi-

ned, " That the books to which the designation
of Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from
the apostolic age, and preserved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the dotrines

' Slcid. Hist. 367, 373.

and
7°

7r

and precepts which the inspired authors have Boor VIw.
committed to writing; that the Latin translation '5$46
of the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome,
and known by the name of the Vulgate tranflati-
on, should be read in churches, and appealed to
in the schools as authentic and canonical. Against
all who disclaimed the truth of these tenets, ana-
themas were denounced in the name and by the
authority of the Holy Ghost." The decision of
there points, which undermined the main pillar
of the Lutheran system, was a plain warning to
the Protestants what judgment they might expect
when the council Ihould have leisure to take into
consideration the particular and subordinate arti-
cles of their Creed d

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn their opinions, was soon followed by a
striking inRance of the Pope's resolution to pu-
nifh such as embraced them. The appeal of the
canons of Cologne against their Archbishop hav-
ing been carried to Rome, Paul eagerly seized on
that opportunity, both of displaying the extent
of his own authority, and of teaching the Ger-
man ecclesiastics the danger of revolting from the
eRtablifhed church. As no person appeared in
behalf of the Archbishop, he was held to be con-
victed of the crime of heresy, and a Papal bull
was issued, depriving him of his ecclesiastical April 16.
dignity, inflicting on him the sentence of excom-
munication, and absolving his fubjeets from the
oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the on-
ly crime imputed to him, as well as the only rea-
son assigned to justify the extraordinay rigour of
this decree. The Protestants could scarce believe

d F. Paul, 14. Pallav. zo6.

that

Boo, V111 that Paul,'how zealous soever to defend the efta-

,546. hlifhed system, or to humble those who invaded

it, would have ventured to proceed to such extre-
mities against a Prince and Eletor of the Empire,
without having previously secured such powerful
protection as would render his censure something
more than an impotent and despicable sally of
resentment. They were of course deeply alarm-
ed at this sentence against the Archbishop, confi-
dering it as a sure indication of the malevolent
intentions not only of the Pope, but of the Em-
peror, againIt the whole party c,

tnarlc' a- UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with such
c 'mr'rnce violence as is natural to men rouzed from a false
ht,,liiities security, and conscious of their having been de-
Ai'1'tltte ceived, Charles saw that it was now necessary to

throw aside the veil, and to declare openly what
part he determined to act. By a long series of
artifice and fallacy, he had gained so much time,
that his measures, though not altogether ripe for
execution, were greatly matured.' The Pope, by
his proceedings against the Ele¢4or of Cologne,
as well as by the decree of the council, had preci-
pitated matters into such a situation, as rendered
a breach between the Emperor and the Protestants
almost unavoidable. Charles had no choice left
him but either to take part with them in over-
turning what the See of Rome had determined,
or to lupport the authority of the church openly

s:tt.tes by force of arms. Nor did the Pope think it
lI' c' enouCgh to have brought the Emperor under a ne-

cellity of acting he pressed him to begin his ope-
rations, by promising to second him with such vigour
as could scarce fail of securing his success. Tranf-
ported by his zeal against lerefy, he forgot all the
prudent and cautious maximsof the Papal See, with

Sleid. 354. F. Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.

regard

regard to the danger of extending the imperial o \'.
authority beyond due bolnds, and in order to 46
crush the Lutherans, he was willing to contribute
towards raising up a master that might prove for-
midable to himself as well as to the reft of Italy.

BUT besides the certain expeEtaticn of afliftance Cnldlc ·

from the Pope, Charles was now secure from any silvnr.
danger of interruption to his designs by the Turk-
iih arms. His negotiations at the Porte, which
he had carried on with great afliduity since the
peace of Crefpy, were on the point of being ter-
minated in such a manner as he desired. Soly-
man, partly in compliance with the French King,
who, in order to avoid the dilagreeable obligation
of joining the Emperor againt his ancient ally,
laboured with great zeal to bring about an accom-
modation between them; and partly from its be-
ing necessary to turn his arms towards the east,
where the Persians threatened to invade his domi-
nions, consented without difficulty to a truce for
five years. The chief article of it was, that each
should retain poffeflion of what he now held in
Hungary; and Ferdinand as a sacrifice to the pride
of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tribute
of fifty thousand crowns f

BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of.,;n., Mr,-

the Germans themselves that the Emperor relied ri" ana
with the greatest confidence The Germanic bo- ot,,t (, -
dy, he knew, was of such vait firength, as to be I'l"-)
invincible if it were united, and that it was
only by employing its own force that he could
hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the uni-
on of the several members in this gret sys-
tem was so feeble, the whole frame was Ls
loosely compacted, and its different parts
tended so violently. towards reparation from

I ltuan IIf. IIung. 18o. Mem. deRibier tsom i. 8z.;

uef,

'Boor V. each other, that it was almost impoflible for it, on

154. any important emergence, to join in a general or vi-

gorous effort. In the present juncture, the sources
of discord were as many, and as various as had been
known on any occasion. The Roman Catholics,
animated with a zeal in defence of their religion
proportional to the fierceness with which it had
been attacked, were eager to second any attempt
to humble those innovators, who had overturned
it in many provinces, and endangered it in more.
John and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as feve-
ral other Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and
rigour with which the Duke of Brunswick had
been treated by the confederates of Smalkalde,
were impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged
on them. Charles observed, with satisfaction, the
working of these passions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
should think it proper to act, he found it, mean-
while, more necessary to moderate than to inflame
their rage.
Holds' diet SUCH was the Situation of affairs, such the dif-

cernment with which the Emperor foresaw and
provided for every event, when the diet of the
Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the Roman
Catholic members appeared there in person, but
most of the confederates of Smalkalde, under pre-
tence of their being unable to bear the expence
occasioned by the late unnecessary frequency of
such assemblies, Tent only deputies. Their jealousy
of the Emperor, and apprehensions that violence,
perhaps, might be employed in order to force
their approbation of what he should propose in
the diet, was the true cause of their absence.
The fpecch with which the Emperor opened the
diet was extremely artful. After profefling, in
common form, his regard for the prosperity of

the
74

the Germanic body, and declaring that in order BoK VII".
to bestow his whole attention upon the re-establish- ,5s.
ment of its order and tranquillity, he had at pre-
sent abandoned all other cares, rejected the most
prefling solicitations of his other fubjets to reside
among them, and postponed affairs of the great-
eft importance; he took notice, with some indig-
nation, that his disinterested example had not been
imitated; many members of chief consideration
having negleted to attend an assembly to which
he had repaired with such manifest inconveni-
ence to himself. He then mentioned their un-
happy dissensions about religion; lamented the ill
success of his pall endeavours to compose them
complained of the abrupt difiolution of the late
conference, and craved their advice with regard
to the best and most effectual method of restoring
union to the churches of Germany, together with
that happy agreement in articles of faith, which
their ancestors had found to be of no less advan-
tage to their civil interest, than becoming their
Christian profession.

BY this gracious and popular method of con-

fulting the members of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own, be-
fides the appearance of great moderation, and the
merit of paying much refpet to their judgment,
the Emperor dextroufly avoided discovering his
own sentiments, and reserved to himself, as his
only part, that of carrying into execution what
they should recommend. Nor was he less secure
of such a decision as he wished for by referring it
wholly to themselves. The Roman Catholic mem-
bers, prompted by their own zeal, or prepared by
his intrigues, joined immediately in representing
that the authority of the council now met at
Trent ought to be final in all matters of contro-
verfy; that all Christians should submit to its de-

crees

75

BooK VL. crees as 'the infallible rule of their faith; and

,
'". therefore they besought him to exert the power,

with which he was invested by the Almighty, in
protecting that assembly, and in compelling the
Protestants to acquiesce in its determinations.
The Protestants, on the other hand, presented a
memorial, in which, after repeating their objeti-
ons to the council of Trent, they proposed, as the
only effetual method of deciding the points in
dispute, that either a free general council should
be assembled in Germany, or a national council of
the Empire should be called, or a felet number
of divines should be appointed out of each party
to examine and define articles of faith; they men-
tioned the recesses of several diets favourable to
this proposition, and which gave them hope of ter-
minating all their differences in this amicable man-
ner; they now conjured the Emperor not to de-
part from his former plan, and by offering vio-
lence to their consciences to bring calamities upon
Germany, the very thought of which must fill
every lover of his country with horror. The Em-
peror receiving this paper, with a contemptuous
smile, paid no farther regard to it. Having al-
ready taken his final resolution, and perceiving
that nothing but force could compel them to ac-
quiefce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of Trent
,net 9. to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance with

the Pope, the terms of which were already agreed
on; he commanded a body of troops, levied on
purpose in the Low-Countries, to advance towards
Germany; he gave commillions to several officers
for raising men in different parts of the Empire;
he warned John and Albert of Brandenburg,
that now was the proper time of exerting them-
selves, in order to rescue their ally, Henry of
Brunswick, from captivity f.

t Sleid. 374 . Seck . ii658.

At.t
76

ALL there things could not be tranfaCed BOOk Vi

without the observation and knowledge of the ,546.
Protestants. The secret was now in many Te Pro-
hands; under whatever veil of artifice or secrecy alarmd.
the Emperor still asseted to conceal his designs,
his officers kept no such mysterious reserve, and
his allies and fubjeds spoke out his intentions
plainly. Alarmed with reports of this kind,
from every quarter, as well as with the pre-
parations of war which they saw begun, the de-
puties of the confederates demanded audience
of the Emperor, and in the name of their maC-
ters, required to know whether there military
preparations were carried on by his command,
and for what end, and against what enemy.
To a question put in such a tone, and at a time
when faas were become too notorious to be de-
nied, it was necessary to give an explicit answer.
He owned the orders which he had issued, and
professing his purpose not to molest any on ac-
count of religion who ihould at as dutiful sub-
jeds, declared that he had nothing in view but
to maintain the rights and prerogatives of the
Imperial dignity, and by punilhing Come sac-
tious members to preserve the ancient confti-
tution of the Empire from being impaired or dif-
solved by their irregular or licentious conduct.
Though the Emperor did not name the per-
sons whom he charged with such high crimes,
and destined to be the objects of his vengeance,
it was obvious that he had the Eledor of Saxony
and Landgrave of Hesse in view. Their depu-
ties, confidering what he had said, as a plain
declaration of his hoRile intentions, immediately
retired from Ratisbon '.

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult The Empe-

matter to treat with the Pope, who having atwth the
length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan Pope.

* Slgid. 376.
V o. LIII. 1 which

Boor VULwhich he had long recommended, assented with

,546. eagerness to every article that he proposed.
July 16. The league was signed a few days after the Car-

dinal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Protestants in rejecting the holy council
aflembled at Trent, and the neceflity of main-
taining found doctrine together with good order
in the church, are mentioned as the motives
of this union between the contracting parties.
In order to check the growth of these evils,
and to punish such as had impiously contributed
to spread them, the Emperor, having long and
without success made trial of gentler remedies,
engaged instantly to take the field with a fuffi-
cient army, that he might compel by force all
who disowned the council, or had apostatized
from the religion of their forefathers, to return
into the bosom of the church, and to submit
with due obedience to the Holy See. He like-
wife bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without assigning him his thare in
any conquest which should be made upon them;
and that even after that period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church or the interest of re-
ligion. On his part, the Pope Rfipulated to de-
pofite a large fum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain at his own charge, during the space of
fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five hun-
dred horse; to grant the Emperor for one year
half of the ecclesiastical revenues throughout
Spain; to authorize him by a bull to alienate as
much of the lands belonging to religious houses
in that country, as would amount to the fum of
five hundred thousand crowns; and to employ
not only spiritual censures but military force

against
78

against any Prince who should attempt to interruptB." Vl
or defeat the execution of this treaty . 546.

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in Endeavours

which the extirpation of heresy was declared to eaL his ii-
be the object of the war which was to follow tntions
upon this treaty, Charles frill endeavoured to frotetats.
persuade the Germans that he had no design to
abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed
only at vindicating his own authority, and re-
pressing the insolence of those who had in-
croached upon it. With this view, he wrote
circular letters, in the fame firain with his an-
fwer to the deputies at Ratiibon, to most of the
free cities, and to several of the Princes who
had embraced the Proteflant doctrines. In these
he complained loudly, but in general terms, of
the contempt into which the Imperial dignity
had fallen, and of the presumptuous as wetl
as disorderly behaviour of some members of the
Empire. He declared he now took arms, not
in a religious but in a civil quarrel; not to op-
press those who continued to behave as quiet
and dutiful fubjets, but to humble the arro-
gance of such as had thrown off all sense of
that subordination in which they were placed un-
der him as head of the Germanic body. Gross
as this deception was, and manifest as it might
have appeared to all who confidered the Emperor's
conduc with attention, it became necessary
for him to make trial of its effect; and such
was the confidence and dexterity with which
he employed it, that he derived the most solid
advantages from this artifice. If he had avowed
at once an intention of overturning the Protef-
tant church, and of reducing all Germany under
it ancient state of fubjetion to the Papal See,
none of the cities or Princes who had embraced

b Sleid. 381. Pallav. 255. Dumont Corps Diplom. l.

F 2 the

'oox V. the hew opinions could have remained neutral

546. after such a declaration, far less could they have

ventured to assist the Emperor in such an enter-
prize. Whereas by concealing, and even dif-
tlAming any intention of that kind, he not
bnly saved himself from the danger of being
6verwhelmed by a general confederacy of all
.the Protestant states, but he furnished the timid
-with an excuse for continuing inactive, and the
d'figning or interested with a pretext for join-
ing himt without exposing themselves to the in-
famy of abandoning their own principles, or
having an active hand in fupprefling them. At
:the rfme time the Emperor well knew that if
he were enabled, by their affiltance, to break the
p6wet of the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave,
he might afterwards prescribe what terms he
pleased to the feeble remains of a party without
union or leaders, who would then regret, too
late, their miflaken confidence in him, and their
inconsiderate desertion of their associates.

The Pope THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen dif-
his,^ plan. lay of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted

this plan which the Emperor had formed with
so much care and art. Proud of having been
the author of such a formidable confederacy
against the Lutheran heresy, and happy in
thinking that the glory of extirpating it was re-
served for his Pontificate, he published the ar-
ticles of his league with the Emperor as a proof
of their pious intention, as well as of the extraor-
dinary efforts which he himself was about to
make for maintaining the faith in its purity.
Not satisfied with this, he soon after issued a
bull containing most liberal promires of indul-
gence to all who should engage in this holy en-
terprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,

to

to increase the fervour of their prayers, and the Boot VIII.
severity of their mortifications, that they might ..
draw down the blefling of heaven upon those who
undertook it c. Nor was it zeal alone which
pushed the Pope to make declarations so incon-
fiftent with the account wkhich the Emperor him-
self gave of his motives for taking arms. He
was much scandalized at Charles's dissimulation
in such a cause; at his seeming to be ashamed
of owning his zeal for the church; and at his en-
deavours to make that pass for a political contest,
which he ought to have gloried in as a war which
had no other objeat than the defence of religion.
MWith as much solicitude, therefore, as the Em-
peror laboured to disguise the purpose of the
confederacy, did the Pope endeavour to publiih
their real plan, in order that they might come at
once to a rupture with the Protestants, that all
hope of reconcilement might be cut off, and that
Charles might be under fewer temptations, and
have it less in his power than at present, to betray
thle interests of the church by an accommodation
beneficial to himfejf d

THE Emperor, though not a little offended at

the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making this
dicovery, continued boldly to pursue his own
plan, and to assert his intentions to be no other
than m hat he had originally avowed. Several of
the Protestant states, whom he had previously
gained, thought themselves justified in some mea-
llre, by his declarations, for abandoning their as-
fociates, and even for giving alliftance to him.

BUT these artifices did not impose on the The prepa

greater and founder part of the Protestant confe- t '"pc f
derates. They clearly perceived it to be againit lant for

agalntt

i their owa

D u Mont Corps Diplom. defence.
. F. Paul, 18. Thuan. Hit. i. 61.

F 3 the

BooK VII the reforrmed religion that the Emperor had taken

1546. arms, and that not only the suppression of it, but

the extinction of the German liberties, would be
the certain consequence of his obtaining such an
entire superiority as would enable him to execute
his schemes in their full extent. They deter-
mined, therefore, to prepare for their own de-
fence, and neither to renounce those religious
truths, to the knowledge of which they had at-
tained by means so wonderful, nor to abandon
those civil rights which had been transmitted to
them by their ancestors. In order to give the ne-
ceffary directions for this purpose, their deputies
met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure
from Ratisbon. Their deliberations were now
conducted with such vigour and unanimity, as
the imminent danger which threatened them re-
quired. The contingent of troops, which each
of the confederates was to furnish, having been
fixed by the original treaty of union, orders
were given for bringing them immediately into
the field. Being sensible, at last, that through
the narrow prejudices of some of their members,
and the imprudent security of others, they had
negleted too long to strengthen themselves by
foreign alliances, they now applied with great
earnestness to the Venetians and Swiss.

tjheyt foicit To the former, they represented the Empe-
he vene- ror's intention of overturning the present system

of Germany, and of raising himself to absolute
power in that country by means of foreign force
furnished by the Pope; they warned them how
fatal this event would prove to the liberties ot
Italy, and that by suffering Charles to acquire
unlimited authority in the one country, they
would soon feel his dominion to be no less
despotic in the other; they besought them,
therefore, not to grant a passage through theii

territories

territories to those troops, which ought to be BooK VIl.
treated as common enemies, because by subduing -46.
Germany they prepared chains for the reft of
Europe. These reflections had not escaped the
sagacity of those wife republicans. They had
communicated their sentiments to the Pope, and
had endeavoured to divert him from an alliance
which tended to render irresistible the power of a
potentate, whose ambition he already knew to be
boundless. But they had found Paul so eager in
the prosecution of his own plan, that he difre-
garded all their remonstrances . They would do
nothing more towards' preventing the dangers
which they foresaw; and in return to the appli-
cation from the confederates of Smalkalde, inform-
ed them, that they could not obfsrudt the march
of the Pope's troops through an open country,
but by levying an army strong enough to face
them in the field, and that this would draw upon
themselves the whole weight of his as well as of
the Emperor's indignation. For the fame reason
they declined lending a film of money, which the
Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave proposed to
borrow of them, towards carrying on the wars.

THEIR demands upon the Swiss were not con- OftheSwrs.

fined to the obftruEting of the entrance of so-
reigners'into Germany; they required of them, as
the nearest neighbours, and closest allies of the
Empire, to interpose with their wonted vigour for
the preservation of its liberties, and not to stand
as inactive fpe&ators, while their brethren were
oppressed and enslaved. But with what zeal so-
ever the reformed cantons might have been difpo-
led to at when the caule of the Reformation was
in danger, the Helvetic body was so divided with

Adriani Ifloria di fuoi tempi, liv. v. p 332.
Sleid. 381. I'auta Iffor. Venet. tomn. iv. p. 184. I.nin-

hertn,; Iortenfius de bello Germaniro apud Scardiuin, vol. ii.
P* S+4.

F 4

rcga r(l

BK V11. regard to religion, as rendered it unsafe for the

5 Protestants to take any ifep without consulting

their associates; and among them the emissaries
of the Pope and Emperor had such influence, that
a resolution of maintaining an exact neutrality be-
tween the contending parties, was the utmost
which could be procured g.

of Francis BEING disappointed in both these applications,
I. and Hen- aplctos
y viii. they not long after had recourse to the Kings of

France and England; the approach of danger ei-
ther overcoming the Elector of Saxony's scruples,
or obliging him to yield to the importunities of
his confederates. The situation of the two Mo-
narchs flattered them with hopes of success. Hof-
tilities between them had continued for some time
after the peace of Crefpy. But becoming weary
at last of a war, attended with no glory or advan-
tage to either, they had lately terminated all their
differences by a peace concluded at Campe near
Ardres. Francis having with great difficulty pro-
cured his allies, the Scots, to be included in the
treaty, in return for that conceflion he engaged
to pay a great fum, which Henry demanded as due
to him on several accounts, and he left Bologne in
the hands of the English, as a pledge for his faith-
ful performance of that article. But though the
re-establishment of peace seemed to leave the two
Monarchs at liberty to turn their attention towards
Germany, so unfortunate were the Protestants,
that they derived no immediate advantage from
this circumstance. Henry appeared unwilling to
enter into any alliance with them, but on iuch
conditions as would render him not only the head,
but the supreme dircetor of their league; a pre-
eminence which, ad the bonds of union or interest
between them were but feeble, and as he differed
from them so widely in his religious sentiments,

I Slcid. 39.,

they

they had no inclination to admit h. Francis, more BOOK V1s.
powerfully inclined by political considerations to 4""
furnish them with afliftance, found his kingdom
so much exhaufled by a long war, and was so
much afraid of irritating the Pope by entering into
close union with excommunicated Heretics, that
he durst not undertake the protection of the Smal-
kaldic league. By this ill-timed caution, or super-
ilitious deference to scruples, to which at other
times he was not much addicted, he loft the most
promising opportunity of mortifying and diitref-
sing his rival, which presented itself during his
whole reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their Proteranti

negotiations with foreign courts, the confederates with a great
found no difficulty at home, in bringing a fuffici- rmy.
ent force into the field. Germany abounded at
that time in inhabitants; the feudal inititutions
subsisted in full force, and enabled the nobles to
call out their numerous vassals, and to put them
in motion on the shortest warning; the martial
spirit of the Germans, not broken or -enervated by
the introduction of commerce and arts, had acqui-
red additional vigour during the continual wars in
which they had been employed, for half a centu-
ry, either in the pay of the Emperors or Kings of
France. Upon every opportunity of entering into
service, they were accustomed to run eagerly to
arms; and to every tfandard that was erected,
volunteers flocked fiom all quarters i. Zeal lecond-
ed, on this occasion, their native ardour. Men,
on whom the doctrines of the Reformation had
made that deep imprellion which accompanies
truth when first discovered, prepared to maintain
it with proportional vigour; and among a warlike
people, it appeared infamous to remain inactive,

i Rymer xv. 93. Herbert, 258. i Seck. 1. iii. 16i.

when

Boo, vin. when the defence of religion was the motive for

1546. taking arms. Accident combined with all these

4 circumstances in facilitating the levy of soldiers
among the confederates. A considerable number
of Germans in the pay of France, being dismissed
by the King on the profpea of peace with England,
joined in a body the flandard of the Protestants k.
By fich a concurrence of causes, they were ena-
bled to afemnble in a few weeks an army compo-
fed of seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand
horse; provided with a train of an hundred and
twventy cannon, eight hundred ammunition wag-
gons, eight thousand beasts of burden, and fix
thousand pioneers . Nor was this army, one of
the most numerous, and undoubtedly the best ap-
pointed of any which had been levied in Europe
during that century, raised by the united effort of
the whole Protestant body. The eletor of Sax-
ony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Wltr-
temberg, the Princes of Anhault, and the Impe-
rial cities of Auglburg, Ulm, and Stralburg,
were the only powers which contributed towards
this great armament: The electors of Cologne,
of Brandenburg, and the count Palatine, over-
awed by the Emperor's threats, or deceived by
his profellions, remained neuter. John marquis of
Brandenburg Bareith, and Albert of Brandenburg
Anfpach, though both early converts to Lutheran-
ism, entered openly into the Emperor's service,
under pretext of having obtained his promire for
the security of the Protestant religion; and Mau-
rice of Saxony soon followed their example.

'rheincqui. THE immense number of their troops, as well
v'1peo'e, as the amazing rapidity wherewith they had al:
forccf to fembled them, astonished the Emperor, and filled
theirs.

k Thuan. 1. i. 68 ' Thuan. 1. i. 6o0. Ludovici ab

Avila & Zunga Commnentariorumi de bel. Germ. lib. duo.
Antw. 1550. 2110o. p. 13. a.

hin'
86

him with the most disquieting apprehensions. BooK VIl.
He was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a 15ó.
mighty force. Shut up' in Ratisbon, a town of 5
no great strength, whose inhabitants, being mostly
Lutherans, would have been more ready to betray
than to assist him, with only three thousand Spa-
nifh foot, whom he had called from the frontiers
of Hungary, and about five thousand Germans
who had joined him from different parts of the
Empire, he muff have been overwhelmed by the
approach of such a numerous army, which he
could not fight, nor even hope to retreat from it
in safety. The Pope's troops, though in full
march to his relief, had scarce reached the fron-
tiers of Germany; the forces which he expected
from the Low-Countries had not yet begun to
move, and were even far from being complete m.
His situation, however, called for more immedi-
ate succour, nor did it seem practicable for him
to wait for such distant auxiliaries, with whom
hisjuntion was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that They im-

the confederates did not avail themselves of the prudntly
advantage which lay so full in their view. In ci- intead of
vil wars, the first steps are commonly taken with aaing.
much timidity and hesitation. Men are folici-
tolls, at that time, to put on the semblance of
noderation and equity; they strive to gain par-
tizans by seeming to adhere firictly to known
formsi nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those established institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most
vigorous and decisive. Influenced by there con-
fiderations, which, happily for the peace of so-

'Sleid. 389. Avila, 8. a.

ciety,

87

°' V",eciety, operate powerfully on the human mind,
s546. the confederates could not think of throwing off

that allegiance which they regularly owed to the
head of the Empire, of turning their arms against
him without one solemn appeal more to his can-
dour, and the impartial judgment of their fellow
July s5. fubjecs. For this purpose, they addressed a letter

to the Emperor, and a manifesto to all the inha-
bitants of Germany. The tenor of both was the
farce. They represented their own conduct with
regard to civil affairs as dutiful and submissive;
they mentioned the inviolable union in which they
had lived with the Emperor, as well as the many
and recent marks of his good-will and gratitude
wherewithal they had been honoured; they as-
ferted religion to be the ible cause of the violence
which the Emperor now meditated against them;
and in proof of this adduced many arguments to
convince those who were so weak as to be deceived
by the artifices with which he endeavoured to co-
ver his real intentions; they declared their own
resolution to rifque every thing in maintenance of
their religious rights, and foretold the dissolution
of the German conffitution, if the Emperor should
finally prevail against them ".

The Empe-
mr Puts BUT Charles, though in such a perilous fitua-
them under ticn as might have inspired him with moderate
the ban ofr
the Empire. Sentiments, appeared as inflexible and haughty

as if his affairs had been in the moss profpe-
)1 rous state. His only reply to the address and

manifesto of the Protestants, was to publish the
ban of the Empire against the Eletor of Sax-
ony and Landgrave of Hesse, their leaders, and
against all who should dare to assist them. By
this sentence, the ultimate and most rigorous
one which the German jurisprudence has pro-

n Sleid 384

vided

vided for the punishment of traitors, or enemies lBo ,2'
to their country, they were declared rebels and ,546.
outlaws, and deprived of every privilege which
they enjoyed as members of the Germanic body;
their goods were confiscated; their subje&s ab-
solved from their oath of allegiance; and it be-
came not only lawful but meritorious to invade
their territories. The nobles, and free cities,
who framed or perfeted the conititution of the
German government, had not been so negligent
of their own safety and privileges as to trust the
Emperor with this formidable jurifdicEion. The
authority of a diet of the empire ought to have
been interposed before any of its members
could be put under the ban. But Charles over-
looked that formality, well knowing that, if his
arms were crowned with success, there would
remain none who would have either power or
courage to call in question what he had done u.
The Emperor, however, did not found his fen-
tence against the Eletor and Landgrave on
their revolt from the established church, or their
condut with regard to religion; he affected to
aflign for it reasons purely civil, and these too
expressed in such general and ambiguous terms,
without specifying the nature or circumstances
of their guilt, as rendered it more like an at of
despotic power, than of a legal and limited ju-
rifdidtion. Nor was it altogether from choice,
or to conceal his intentions that Charles had re-
course to the ambiguity of general expeflions,
he durst not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every action which he could
have charged upon the Eledtor and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal justice to condemn such of the Protestants
whom he fill pretended to confider as faithful

u Sleid. 386. Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 1l. 314.
Pteficl Hil. Abregedu Droit PuLl. 168. 736. 5. ft

fllbjets,

Boos VIIl. subje&s, aid whom it would have been extreme-
"~4.. ly imprudent to alarm or disgust.

They de- THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes
arew"ar of accommodation to be at an end, had only to
charles. choose whether they would submit without re-

serve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hostilities. Nor did they want public spirit and
resolution to make the proper choice. A few
days after the ban of the Empire was published,
they, according to the custom of that age, sent a
herald to the imperial camp with a solemn de-
claration of war against Charles, to whom they
no longer gave any other title than that of pre-
tended Emperor, and renounced all allegiance,
homage or duty he might claim, or they had
hitherto yielded to him. But previous to this
formality, part of their troops had begun to at.

Their frft The command of a considerable body of troops
perations, raised by the city of Augsburg having been

given to Sebaflian Schertel, a soldier of fortune,
who by the booty he had got when the Impe-
rialifts plundered Rome, together with the me-
rit of long service, had acquired wealth and au-
thority, which placed him on a level with the
chief of the German nobles; that gallant vete-
ran resolved before he joined the main body of
the confederates, to attempt something suitable
to his former fame, and to the expectation of
his countrymen. As the Pope's forces were
hattening towards Tyrol, in order to penetrate
into Germany, by the narrow passes through the
mountains which run across that country, he
advanced thither with the utmost rapidity, and
seized Ehrenberg and Cuffftein, two firong
castles which commanded the principal defiles.
Without flopping a moment, he continued his
march towards Infpruck, by getting poffeflion
of which he would have obliged the Italians to
stop (hort, and with a rmall body of men could
have resifted all the efforts of the greatest ar-

mies.
90

mies. Caftlealto, the governor of Trent, knew- Boo V11, .
i!g what a fatal blow this would be to the Em- ' "'
peror, all whose designs must have proved abor-
tive if his Italian auxiliaries had been intercept-
ed, raised a few troops with the utmost dispatch,
and threw himself into the town. Schertel,
however, did not abandon the enterprize, and
was preparing to attack the place, when the
intelligence of the approach of the Italians, and
an order from the Elector and Landgrave
obliged him to desist. By his retreat the passes
were left open, and the Italians entered Ger-
many without any opposition, but from the
garrisons that Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg
and Cuffitein, which having no hopes of being
relieved, were not long in lurrendering £ *

NOR was the recalling of Schertel the only and illn-

error of which the confederates were guilty. duc"
As the supreme command of their army was
committed, in term, of the league of Smalkalde,
to the Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave of
Hesse with equal authority, all the inconveni-
encies arising from a divided and co-ordinate
jurifdicion, which is always of fatal consequence
in the operations of war, were immediately felt.

x Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iftoria di fuoi tempi, lib.

33g.

*Seckendorf, the industrious author of the Commen-

tarius Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have lo long
and safely followed as my guide in German affairs, was de-
scended from Schertel. With the care and lblicitude of a Ger-
man, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has pub-
lilhed a long digreflion concerning his ancelor, calculated
chiefly to lhew how Schertel was ennobled, and his poflerity
allied to many of the moit ancient families in the empire.
Among other curious particulars, he gives us an account of
his wealth, the chief source of which was the plunder he got
at Rome. His landed estate was fold by his grandtons for
fix hundred thousand florins. By this we may formn ome
idea of the riches anafIed by the Condattiiri, or commanders
of mercenary bands in that age. At the taking of Rome,
Schertel was only a captain. Seckend. lib. ii. 73.

The

Boo, VIt. The Elector, though intrepid in his own person

&546. to excess, and most ardently zealous in the cause,

was sow in deliberating, uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations, and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and
safe, to such as were bold and decisive. The
Landgrave, of a more aAive and enterprizing
nature, formed all his resolutions with promp-
titude, wished to execute them with spirit, and
uniformly preferred such schemes as tended to
bring the contest to a speedy issue. Thus their
maxims, with regard to the condut of the
war, differed as widely as those by which they
were influenced in preparing for it. Such per-
petual contrariety in their sentiments gave rife,
imperceptibly, to jealousy and the spirit of con-
tention. These multiplied the dissensions flow-
ing from the incompatibility of their natural
temper, and rendered them more violent. The
other members of the league, confidering them-
selves as independent, and fubjeat to the Elecor
and Landgrave, only in consequence of a vo-
luntary confederacy, did not long retain a pro-
per veneration for commanders, who proceed-
ed with so little unanimity ; and the numerous
army of the Protestants, like a vast machine
whose parts are all compacted, and which is
destitute of any power sufficient to move and
regulate the whole, acted with no consistency,
vigour or effect.

The Pop's THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
th^pisor r maining at Ratihbon, he would render it imnpol-

fible for the Pope's forces to join him, having
boldly advanced to Landlhut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the terri-
tories of the duke of Bavaria, a neutral prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly

abandoned
92

abandoned the design, and hastened to attack Boor VIII.
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave ',"'V
only a small garrison. Meanwhile the Papal
troops, amounting.fully to that number which
Paul had flipulated to furnish, reached Land-
shut, and were followed by fix thousand Spa-
niards of the veteran bands ifationed in Naples.
The confederates, after Schertel's spirited but
fruitless expedition, seem to have permitted there
forces to advance unmolested to the place of
rendezvous, without any attempt to attack
either them or the Emperor separately, or to
prevent their junclion x. The Imperial army
amounted now to thirty-fix thousand men, and
was still more formidable by the discipline and
valour of the troops, than by their number.
Avila, commander of Alcantara, who had been
present in all the wars carried on by Charles,
and had served in the armies which gained the
memorable victory at Pavia, which conquered
Tunis, and invaded France, gives this the pre-
ference to any martial force he had ever seen
assembled Y. Oeavio Farnese, the Pope's grand-
son, aflifted by the ablest officers formed in
the long wars between Charles and Francis,
commanded the Italian auxiliaries. His bro-
ther the Cardinal Farnese, accompanied him as
Papal legate; and in order to give the war the
appearance of a religious enterprize, he pro-
posed to march at the head of the army, with
a cross carried before him, and to publish in-
dulgences wherever he came to all who should
give them any afiftance, as had anciently been
the practice in the Crusades against the In,
fidels. But this the Emperor ftrialy prohibit-
ed, as inconsistent with all the declarations which
he had made to the Germans of his own party;
and the legate perceiving, to his aftonilhment,
that the exercise of the Protestant religion, the

x Adriani Iforia di fuoi tempi, lib. 4. 340.
Y Avila, 18.
VOL. III. G extirpation

*

Bot vti. extirpation of which he confidered as the sole
'-ó Jeobject of the war, was publickly permitted in

the Imperial camp, soon returned in disgust to
Italy'.

THz -arrival of there troops enabled the Em-

peror to fend such a reinforcement to the gar-
rifon of Ratisbon, that the confederates relin-
quifhing all hopes of reducing that town, march-
ed towards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to
which Charles was now encamped. Meanwhile
they exclaimed loudly against the Emperor's
notorious violation of the laws and constitution
of the Empire, in having called in foreigners
to lay waste Germany, and to oppress its li-
berties. As in that age, the dominion of the
Roman See was so odious to the Protestants,
that the name of the Pope was sufficient to in-
spire them with horror at any enterprize which
he countenanced, and to raise in their minds
the blackest suspicions, it came to be univer-
sally believed among them, that Paul, not fa
tisfied with attacking them openly by force of
arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over Ger-
many to set on fire their towns and magazines,
and to poison the wells and fountains of water.
Nor did this rumour spread only among the
vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful
enough to make a deep impression on their
credulity; even the leaders of the party, blind-
ed by their prejudices, published a declaration,
in which they accused the Pope of having em-
ployed these Antichriftian and diabolical arts
against them '. These sentiments of the con.
federates were confirmed, in Come measure, by
the behaviour of the Papal troops, who, thinking
nothing too rigorous towards Hereticks anathe-
,matized by the church, were guilty of great ex-
cesss in the Lutheran territories, and aggra-

· F. Paul. 191. a Sleid. 399.

vated
94

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 95

vated the calamities of war, by mingling with it Boor VL.
all the cruelty of bigotted zeal. t-6.

THE first operations in the field, however, The confe-

did not correspond with the violence of those vacet t-
paTions which animated individuals. The Em- wardes he
peror had prudently taken the resolution ofarmy.
avoiding an action with an enemy so far fupe-
rior in number b, especially as he foresaw
that nothing could keep a body compored of so
many and such diflimilar members from falling
to pieces, but the pressing to attack it with an
inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates,
though it was no leTs evident to them that every
moment's delay was pernicious, were still pre-
vented by the weakness or division of their lea-
ders from exerting that vigour, with which thei
situation, as well as the ardour of their soldiers,
ought to have inspired them. On their arrival AUg. 9i
at Ingoldftadt, they found the Emperor in a
camp not remarkable for strength, and fir-
rounded only by a flight entrenchment. Be-
fore the camp lay a plain of such extent, as as-
forded sufficient space for drawing out their
whole army, and bringing it to at at once.
Every consideration should have determined
them to have seized this opportunity of attack-
ing the Emperor; and their vast superiority in
numbers, the eagerness of their troops, together
with the ltability of the German infantry in
pitched battles, afforded them the most proba-
ble expectation of victory. The Landgrave
urged this with great warmth, declaring, that if
the sole command were vested in him, he
would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general action the fate of the two
parties. But the Elector, reflecting on the va-
lour and discipline of the enemies forces, ani-
mated by the presence of the Emperor, and con-.

b Avill, 78, .

G 2 du;ed

BooK vIII. dueted by the best officers of the age, would no.
%~(,3 venture upon an ation, which he thought to be

so doubtful, as the attacking such a body of ve-
terans on ground which they themselves had
chosen, and while covered by fortifications
which, though imperfec, would afford them no
small advantage in the combat. Notwith-
standing his hesitation and remonstrances, it
was agreed, to advance towards the enemies
camp in battle array, in order to make trial
whether by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the

The Empe- Imperialists out of their works. But the Em-
battle. peror had too much sagacity to fall into this

snare. He adhered to his own system with in-
flexible constancy; and drawing up his soldiers
behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should ven-
ture upon an assault, calmly waited their ap-
proach, and carefully restrained his own men
from any excursions or fkirmilhes that might
bring on an engagement, Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addrefling the troops of
the different nations in their own language, en-
couraged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice
and countenance; he exposed himself in places
of the greatest danger, and amidst the warmest
fire of the enemies artillery, the most nume-
rous that had hitherto been brought into the
field by any army. Rouzed by his example,
not a man quitted his ranks; it was thought in-
famous to discover any 'ymptomn of fear when
the Emperor appeared lo intrepid; and the
meanest boldier plainly perceived, that their de
clining the combat at prelent was not the et
set of timidity in their general, but the result
of a well weighed caution. The confederatesi
after firing several hours on the Imperialils:
with more noise and terror than execution, lee
ing no profped of alluring them to fight oV
equal terms, retired to their own camp. Tlw

Emperor
96

Emperor employed the night with such dili-BooK v"1.
gence in strengthening his works, that the con- s4.
tederates, returning the canonade next day,
found that, though they had now been willing
to venture upon such a bold experiment, the
opportunity of making an attack with advantage
was loft c.

AFTER such a discovery from their own fee, TheFlemiah

troops join

blenefs and irresolution, and of the prudence as th'Ejperor
well as firmness of the Emperor's conduct, the
confederates turned their whole attention to-
wards preventing the arrival of a powerful rein-
forcement of ten thousand foot, and four thou-
sand horse, which the count de Buren was bring-
ing to the Emperor from the Low-Countries.
But though that general had to traverse such an
extent of country; though his rout lay through
the territories of several flates warmly disposed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach, and by their vast fu-
periority in numbers might easily have detach-
ed a force sufficient to overpower him, he ad-
vanced with such rapidity, and by such well
concerted movements, while they opposed him
with such remissness, and so little military Ikill,
that he conduced this body to the Imperial
camp without any loss d.

AFTER the arrival of the Flemings, in whom Sept. 1o.

he placed great confidence, the Emperor alter-
ed, in rome degree, his plan of operations, and
began to act more upon the offensive, though he
still avoided a battle with the utmoil induitry.
He made himself master of Neuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen,

G 3 and

Sle.id. 395, 397. Avila 27. a. Lamb. Hortcnr. sp,

Leaid. ii.
1 Seid 403.

BooK VII. and several other towns, situated on the most
""v'"confiderable fireams that fall into that mighty

river. By this he got the command of a great
extent of country, though not without being
obliged to engage in several encounters, of which
the success was various, nor without the most
eminent danger oftner than once of being
stateofbothdrawn into a battle. In this manner the whole

' autumn was spent; neither party gained any re-

markable superiority over the other, and nothing
was yet done towards bringing the war to a pec
riod, The Emperor had often foretold, with
confidence, that discord and the want of money
would compel the confederates to disperse that
unwieldly body, which they had neither abilities
to guide, nor funds to support ; but though
he waited with impatience for the accomplish-
ment of his predicion, there was no profped of
that event being at hand. Meanwhile, he him-
self began to susser from the want of forage and
provisions; even the Catholic provinces being
so much incensed at the introduction of so-
reigners into the Empire, that they supplied
them with reluctance, while the camp of the
confederates abounded with a profusion of all
necessaries, which the zeal of their friends in
the adjacent countries furnished with the ut-
most liberality and good-will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccuflomed to
the climate or food of Germany, were become
unfit for service through sickness f. Confi-
derable arrears were now due to the troops,
who had scarce received any money from the
beginning of the campaign; the Emperor, ex-
periencing on this as well as on former occa-
lions, that his jurifdidion was more extenfivd

than

* Belli Snialkaldici Commentarius Graco fermone fcriptus
a Joach. Camerario ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.

i Camerar. ap. Ficher. 483.
98

than his revenues, and that the former enabled Book V"l.
him to assemble a greater number of soldiers, 546.
than the latter- were sufficient to pay. Upon
all these accounts, he found it difficult to keep
his army in the field; some of his ablest gene-
rals, and even the duke of Alva himself, perse-
vering and obstinate as he usually was in the
prosecution of every meafilre, advising him to
disperse his troops into winter-quarters. But as
the arguments urged against any plan which
he had adopted, rarely made much impression
upon the Emperor, he paid no regard to their
opinion, and determined to continue his efforts
in order to weary out the confederates; being
well assured that if he could once oblige them
to separate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body g. Still, however, it
remained a doubtful point, whether his fteadi-
ness was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be
exhausted. It was still uncertain which party,
by first dividing its forces, would give the fu-
periorjty to the other ; when an unexpected event
decided the contest, and occasioned a fatal reverse
in the affairs of the confederates.

MAURICE of Saxony having, by the arts which Thtecheme

have already been described, insinuated himfelfof Saxony.
into the Emperor's confidence, no sooner saw
hoflilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vafft
prospects of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to
him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying
his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea-
sure the approach of civil war, as amidst the re-
volutions or convulsions which it occasions, op-
portunities which at other times are fought in
vain, of acquiring new power as well as addi-
tional dignity, present themselves to an enter-

Thuan. 83.

G 4 prizing

BOOK VIIi prizing spirit. As he was thoroughly acquaint-

'54ó' ed with the state of the two contending parties,

and the qualities of their leaders, he did not he-
fitate long in determining on which fide the
greatest advantages were to be expected.-
Having resolved all these things in his own
mind, and having taken his final resolution of
joining the Emperor, he prudently determined
to declare early in his favour; that, by the me-
rit of this, he might acquire a title to a pro-

His league portional recompense. With this view, he had
with the
mrperor. repaired to Ratisbon in the month of May, un-

der pretext of attending the diet; and after
many conferences with Charles or his ministers,
concluded, though with the most mysterious
secrecy, a treaty in which he engaged to con-
cur in assisting the Emperor as a faithful sub-
je&t; and Charles, in return, stipulated to bestow
on him all the spoils of the Elector of Saxony,
his dignities as well as territories h. History
scarce records any treaty which can be confidered
as a more manifest violation of those just prin-
ciples which ought to influence human actions.
Maurice, a professed Protestant, at a time when
the belief of religion, as well as zeal for its inte-
refts, took itrong poffefilon of every mind, binds
himself to contribute his assistance towards carry-
ing on a war which had manifestly no other objeft
than the extirpation of the Protestant doctrines. He
engages to take arms against his father-in-law, and
to itrip his nearest relation of his honours and do-
minions. He joins a dubious friend againit a
known benefactor, to whom his obligations were
both great and recent. Nor was the prince who
ventured upon all this, one of those audacious
politicians, who, provided they can accomplish
their ends and secure their iitereft, disregard
avowedly tile moit sacred obligations, and glory
in contemning whatever is honourable or de-

cent.

hI Haraec. Annal. Brabant. vol. i. 628. Struvii. Corp. 1048.

Thuan. 84.
100

cent. Maurice's conduct, if the whole must be BooK Vlt.
ascribed to policy, was more artful and mar- 46.
terly; he executed his plan in all its parts, and
yet endeavoured to preserve, in every ftep which
he took, the appearance of what was fair, and
virtuous, and laudable. It is probable from his
subsequent behaviour, that with regard to the
Protestant religion at least, his intentions were
upright, that he fondly trusted to the Emperor's
promises for its security, but that, according to
the fate of all who refine too much in policy, and
who tread in dark and crooked paths, in attempt-
ing to deceive others, he himself was, in some de-
gree, deceived.

His first care, however, was to keep these en- His artifices

i n order to

gagements with the Emperor closely concealed :conceal his
and To perfect a master was he in the art of diffi- ienntions.
mulation, that the confederates, notwithstanding
his declining all connections with them, and his
remarkable assiduity in paying court to the Em-
peror, seemed to have entertained no suspicion of
his designs. Even the Elector of Saxony, when
he marched at the beginning of the campaign to
join his associates, committed his dominions to his
protection, which Maurice, with an insidious ap-
pearance of friendship, readily undertook '. But
scarce had the Eledor taken the field, when
Maurice began to consult privately with the King
of the Romans how to invade those very territo-
ries, with the defence of which he was intrusted.
Soon after, the Emperor lent him a copy of the
Imperial ban denounced against the Eledtor and
Landgrave. As he was next heir to the former,
and particularly interested in preventing strangers
from getting his dominions into their poffeflion,
Charles required him, not only for his own
fake, but upon the allegiance and duty which

! Struvii Corp. I 046.

BooK V11i he owed to the head of the Empire, instantly

4 to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited

eflates of the Eledtor; warning him, at the fame
time, that if he negleted to obey these com-
mands, he should be held as accessary to the
crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
punishment k.

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice

himself suggested, was employed by him in order
that his condud towards the Eletor might
seem a matter of necessity but not of choice,
an act of obedience to his superior, rather than
a volurntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman
and ally. But in order to give rome more fpe-
cious appearance to this thin veil with which
he endeavoured to cover his ambition, he had
called together, soon after his return from Ra-
tifbon, the states of his country; and repre-
senting to them that a civil war between the Em-
peror and confederates of Smalkalde was now
become unavoidable, desired their advice with
regard to the part he should ad in that event.
They being prepared, no doubt, and tutored
before-hand, as well as desirous of gratifying
their Prince, whom they both esteemed and lov-
ed, gave such counsel as they knew would be
most agreeable; advising him to offer his me-
diation towards reconciling the contending par-
tits ; but if that were rejected, and he could
obtain proper security for the Protestant reli-
gion, they delivered it as their opinion that he
ought, in all other points, to yield obedience to
the Emperor. Upon receiving the Imperial
rescript, together with the ban againit the Elec-
tor and Landgrave, he summoned the states of
his country a second time; he laid before them
the orders which he had received, and the pu-
niflment with which he was threatened in cafe

k Sleid. 391. Thuan.84.

of
102

of disobedience; he acquainted them that the Boo,~ Vm.
confederates had refused to admit of his media-
tion, and that the Emperor had given him the
most fatisfaftory declarations with regard to re-
ligion s he mentioned his own interest in securing
possession of the electoral dominions, together
with the danger of allowing strangers to obtain
an establishment in Saxony; and upon the whole,
as the point under deliberation refpedted his sub-
jeas no less than himself, he desired to know their
sentiments how be ffould steer in that difficult and
arduous conjuncture. The states, no less obfe-
quious and complaisant, than formerly, relying on
the Emperor's promises as a perfect security for
their religion, proposed that, before he had re-
course to more violent methods, they would write
to the Eledtor, exhorting him, as the best means
of appeasing the Emperor, and of preventing his
dominions from being seized by foreign or hostile
powers, to give his consent that Maurice should
take poffiefion of them quietly and without op-
position. Maurice himself seconded their argu-
ments in a letter to the Landgrave, his father-
in-law, Such an extravagant proposition was
rejected with the scorn and indignation which
itdeferved. The Landgrave, in return to Maurice,
taxed him with his treachery and ingratitude to-
wards a kinsman to whom he was so deeply in-
debted; he treated with contempt his affetation
of executing the Imperial ban, which he could not
but know to be altogether void, by the unconfti-
tutional and arbitrary manner in which it had
been iflued; he besought him, not to fufler him-
self to be so far blinded by ambition, as to forget
the obligations of honour and friendship, or to be-
tray the Protestant religion, the extirpation of
which out of Germany, even by the acknow-
ledgment of the Pope himself, was the great ob-
jed of the present war

c!eid. 405, &e Thmlo. 85. Camerar 414

BUT

BooK VIII. BuT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-

'

46. verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or

He invades arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-
the territo-
ies of the cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried on
Eleaorof by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his bold-
Saxony. ness in action inferior to his subtilty in contrivance.
November. Having assembled about twelve thousand men, he

suddenly invaded one part of the eletoral pro-
vinces, while Ferdinand with an army composed
of Bohemians and Hungarians, over-ran the o-
ther. Maurice, in two sharp encounters, defeated
the troops which the Eletor had left to guard his
country; and improving these advantages to the
utmost, made himself master of the whole Electo-
rate, except Wittemberg, Gotha, and Eisenach,
which being places of considerable strength, and
defended by sufficient garrisons; refused to open
their gates. The news of these rapid conquests
soon reached the Imperial and confederate camps.
In the former, their fatisfaaion with an event,
which it was foreseen would be productive of the
most important consequences, was exprefed by
every possible demonstration of joy. The latter
was filled with astonishment and terror. The
name of Matrice was mentioned with execration,
as an apostate from religion, a betrayer of the
German liberty, and a contemner of the most fa-
cred and natural ties. Every thing that the rage
or invention of the party could suggest, in order
to blacken and render him odious; invetives, fa-
tires and lampoons, the furious declamations of
their preachers, together with the rude wit of
their authors, were all employed against him.
While he, trusting to the arts which he had so
long practised, as if his actions could have admit-
ted of any serious justification, publilhed a mani-
fefto, containing the fame frivolous reasons for
his condluc, which he had formerly alledged. in the
meeting of his states, and in his letter to the
.Landgrave m. THE

" Sliid. 4c9, 410.
o104

THE Ele&or, upon the first intelligence of Boo Vl.

Maurice's motions, proposed to return home ,s46.
with his troops for the defence of Saxony. But the The confe-
deputies of the league, aflembled at Ulm, pre-overtures of
vailed on him, at that time, to remain with the accommoda-

tion to the

army, and to prefer the success of the common Enpeor.;
cause before the security of his own dominions.
At length the sufferings and complaints of his
ftbjects encreafed so much, that he discovered
the utmost impatience to set out, in order to ref-
cue them from the oppression of Maurice, and
from the cruelty of the Hungarians, who having
been accustomed to that licentious and merciless
species of war which was thought lawful against
the Turks, committed, wherever they came, the
wildest ats of rapine and violence. This desire
of the Elecor's was so natural and so warmly
urged, that the deputies at Ulm, though fully
sensible of the unhappy consequences of dividing
their army, durst not refute their content, how
unwilling soever to grant it. In this perplexity,
they repaired to the camp of the confederates at
Giengen on the Brenz, in order to consult their
constituents. Nor were they lets at a loss what
to determine in this pressing emergence. But,
after having confidered ferioully the open defer-
tion of Come of their allies; the Scandalous luke-
warmness of others who had hitherto contributed
nothing towards the war; the intolerable load
which had fallen, of consequence, upon such
members as were most zealous for the cause, or
most faithful to their engagements; the ill success
of all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid;
the unusual length of the campaign, the rigour
of the season; together with the great number
of soldiers, and even officers, who had, on that
account, quitted the iervice; they concluded
that nothing could Cave them, but either the
bringing the conteil to the immedide decilion of

a battle

105

Boor Vl a battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an

4.6 accommodation of all their differences with

Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency
and dejetion which now oppressed the party,
that of these two they chose what was most fee-
ble and unmanly, empowering a minifler of the
Eletor of Brandenburg to propound overtures
of peace in their name to the Emperor.

which he No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty
Ijeas.' confederacy, which had so lately threatened to

drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the first advances towards an agreement,
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately afflimed the
tone of a conqueror; and as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
tiation, but upon condition of the Eletor of
Saxony's consenting previously to give up himself
and his dominions absolutely to his disposal .
As nothing more intolerable or ignominious could
have been prescribed, even in the worfl situation
of their affairs, it is no wonder this proposition
was rejected by a party, humbled and difcon-
certed rather than subdued. But though they
refused to submit tamely to the Emperor's will,
they wanted spirit to purfile the only plan which
could have preserved their independence; and
forgetting that it was the union of their troops
in one body which had hitherto rendered the con-
federacy formidable, and had more than once
obliged the Imperialists to think of quitting the
field; they inconsiderately abandoned that advan-
vantage, which, in spite of the diversion in Sax-
Thc troops ony, would flill have kept the Emperor in awe;

,fd thc°yce and yielding to the Eletor's intreaties, consented
parate. to his proposal of dividing the army. Nine

Hottentius ap. Scard. ii. 485.

thousand
0o6

thousand men were left in the dutchy of Wur-Bo1o V;
temberg, in order to protect that province, as ,46.
well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a con-
fiderable body marched with the Eletor towards
Saxony; but the greater part returned with their
refpetive leaders into their own countries, and
were dispersed there b.

THE moment the troops Separated, the confe- Almof ail

themembers

deracy ceased to be the objet of terror; and theof the con-
members of it, who while they composed part of fedracy
a great body had felt but little anxiety about their the Empe-
own security, began to tremble when they re-"r'
fleded that they now stood exposed singly to
the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leisure to recover from
their confternatioh, or to form any new schemes
of union. As soon as the confederates began to
retire, he put his army in motion, and though it
was now the depth of winter, he resolved to keep
the field, in order to make the most of that fa-
vourable juncure for which he had waited so
long. Some small towns in which the enemy had
left garrisons immediately opened their gates.
Norlingen, Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could not
prevent the Elector from levying, as he retreated,
large contributions upon the archbishop of Mentz,
the abbot of Fulda, and other ecclefiafticks',
this was more than balanced by the fubmiflion of
Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly
distinguished by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league.
As soon as an example was set of deserting the
common cause, the reft of the members became
instantly impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid
left others, by getting the start of them in re
turning to their duty, should, on that account,

b Sleid. 411. c Thuan 88.

obtain

Boos VI. a battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an

46.. accommodation of all their differences with

Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency
and dejetion which now oppressed the party,
that of there two they chore what was most fee-
ble and unmanly, empowering a minister of the
Eletor of Brandenburg to propound overtures
of peace in their name to the Emperor.

which he No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty
ejects. confederacy, which had so lately threatened to

drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the first advances towards an agreement,
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately affiumed the
tone of a conqueror; and as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
tiation, but upon condition of the Eletor of
Saxony's consenting previously to give up himself
and his dominions absolutely to his disposal'.
As nothing more intolerable or ignominious could
have been prescribed, even in the worst situation
of their affairs, it is no wonder this proposition
was rejected by a party, humbled and difcon-
certed rather than subdued. But though they
refused to submit tamely to the Emperor's will,
they wanted spirit to purfiue the only plan which
could have preserved their independence; and
forgetting that it was the union of their troops
in one body which had hitherto rendered the con-
federacy formidable, and had more than once
obliged the Imperialists to think of quitting the
field; they inconsiderately abandoned that advan-
vantage, which, in spite of the diversion in Sax-

Thc troops ony, would Rill have kept the Emperor in awe;
fdcracy fc and yielding to the Eletor's intreaties, consented
parate. to his proposal of dividing the army. Nine

r Hortentius ap. Scard. ii. 485.

thousand
ro6

thousand men were left in the dutchy of Wur- Bo

v-

temberg, in order to proteA that province, as ,546.
well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a con-
fiderable body marched with the Ele&tor towards
Saxony; but the greater part returned with their
refpedive leaders into their own countries, and
were dispersed there b.

THE moment the troops separated, the confe- AlmoR aul

deracy ceased to be the object of terror; and the of the con.
members of it, who while they composed part offdertcy
a great body had felt but little anxiety about their the Empe-
own security, began to tremble when they re-°"'
fleted that they now stood exposed singly to
the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leisure to recover from
their consternation, or to form any new schemes
of union. As soon as the confederates began to
retire, he put his army in motion, and though it
was now the depth of winter, he resolved to keep
the field, in order to make the most of that fa-
vourable juncure for which he had waited so
long. Some small towns in which the enemy had
left garrisons immediately opened their gates.
Norlingen, Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could not
prevent the Ele&or from levying, as he retreated,
large contributions upon the archbishop of Mentz,
the abbot of Fulda, and other ecclefiafticksc,
this was more than balanced by the fubmiflon of
Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly
diftinguilhed by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league.
As soon as an example was set of deserting the
common cause, the reft of the members became
instantly impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid
left others, by getting the start of them in re
turning to their duty, should, on that account,

b Sleid. 411. c. Thuan. 88.

obtain

BooI Viii. obtain more favourable terms. The elector Pa
1'""-" latine, a weak Prince, who, notwithstanding hi!

6. professions of neutrality, had, very preposterously,

lent to the confederates four hundred horse, a
body so inconsiderable as to be scarce any addition
to their strength, but great enough to render him
guilty in the eyes of the Emperor, made his ac-
knowledgments in the most abjet manner. The
inhabitants of Augsburg, ihaken by so many
instances of apoftacy, expelled the brave Schertel
out of their city, and accepted such conditions as
the Emperor was pleated to grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among

the first who had offered to fiibmit, was obliged
to sue for pardon on his knees, and even after
this mortifying humiliation obtained it with dif-
';47. ficulty d. Memmingen, and other free cities

in the circle of Suabia, being now abandoned by
all their former associates, found it necessary
to provide for their own safety by throwing
themselves on the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg
and Franckfort on the Maine, cities far remote
from the feat of danger, discovered no greater
fteddinefs than those which lay more exposed.
Thus, a confederacy, lately so powerful as to
shake the Imperial throne, fell to pieces and was
dissolved in the space of a few weeks; scarce
any member of that formidable combination
now remaining in arms, but the EleCtor and
Landgrave, whom the Emperor, having from
the beginning marked out as the victims of his

The rigo- vengeance, was at no pains to reconcile. Nor
tions iml- did he grant those who fulbmitted to him a gene-
ledby the rous and unconditional pardon. Conscious of
Emperor. his own superiority, he treated them both with

haughtiness and rigour. All the Princes in per-

a Mcne. de Ribier. tom, i. 589.

Ton,

son, and the cities, by their deputies, were corn- Boor Vm.
pelled to implore mercy in the humble posture of ,7.
supplicants. As the Emperor laboured under
great difficulties from the want of money, he im-
posed heavy fines upon them, which he levied
with moss rapacious exaanefs. The duke of
; Wurtemberg paid three hundred thousand crowns;

the city of Augsburg an hundred and fifty thou-
sand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Frankfort
eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand;
and the reft in proportion to their abilities, or their
different degrees of guilt. They were obliged,
betides, to renounce the league of Smalkalde;
to furnish afliftance, if required, towards execu-
ting the Imperial ban against the EleEtor and
Landgrave; to give up their artillery and war-
like flores to the Emperor; to admit garrisons
into their principal cities and places of strength;
and in this disarmed and dependent situation, to
expect the final award which the Emperor should
think proper to pronounce when the war came to
:n issue a. But, amidst the great variety of arti-
cles dictated by Charles on this occasion, he, in
conformity to his original plan, took care that
nothing relating to religion should be inserted,
and to such a degree were the confederates hum-
bled or over-awed, that, forgetting the zeal which
had so long animated them, they were solicitous
only about their safety, without venturing to in-
fill on a point, the mention of which they saw him
avoiding with so much industry. The inhabi-
tants of Memmingen alone made some feeble es-
forts to procure a promise of protection in the
exercise of their religion, but were checked so
severely by the Emperor's ministers, that they in-
ftantly fell from their demand.

Sleid. 411, &c; Thuan. lib. iv, p. 125. Mem, de
Ribier, tom. i. 606.

VO L. III.

H

BooK VII. THE Elector of Cologne, whom, notwith-

,47. flanding the sentence of excommunication issued

against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto al-
lowed to remain in poffefiion of the archiepifco-
pal fee, being now required by the Emperor to
submit to the censures of the church, this vir-
tuous and disinterested prelate, unwilling to ex-
pose his subje&s, on his account, to the miseries
of war, voluntarily resigned that high dignity.
jan. 25. With a moderation becoming his age and charac-

ter, he chose to enjoy truth together with the
exercise of his religion in the retirement of a pri-
vate life, rather than to disturb society by en-
gaging in a doubtful and violent itruggle in order
to retain his office b

ThcEleaor MEANWHILE the Eletor of Saxony reached
returns to
Sxony, and the frontiers of his country. As Maurice could
recovers assemble no force equal to the army which ac-
possession of *
it companied him, he, in a short time, not only

recovered possession of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all that
belonged to him except Dresden and Leipfic,
which being towns of some strength could not be
suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit the
field, and to shut himself up in his capital, dil-
patched courier after courier to the Emperor, repre-
senting his dangerous situation, and soliciting hinm
with the most earnest importunity to march imme
diately to his relief. But Charles, busy at that time
in prescribing terms to such members of the league
as were daily returning to their allegiance, thought
it sufficient to detach Albert Marquis of Branden
burg-Anfpach with three thousand men to his al-
fiftance. Albert, though an entcrprizing and ac-
tive officcr, allowed himielf to be furprized by tili
Elctor, who killed many of his troops, dilpcrfcc

b Slcid. 418. Thuan .

li .
iv. 128.

11;i:

tile remainder, and took him prisoner C. Maurice BooK ViIl.
continued as much exposed as formerly; and if ,547.
his enemy had known how to improve the oppor-
tunity which presented itself, his ruin must have
been immediate and unavoidable. But the Elec-
tor, no less flow and dilatory when inveited with
the role command, than he had been formerly
when joined in authority with a partner, never
gave any proof of military aEtivity but in this
enterprize against Albert. Instead of marching
directly towards Maurice, whom the defeat of
his ally had greatly alarmed, he inconsiderately
listened to overtures of accommodation, which
his artful antagonifl proposed with no other inten-
tion than to amuse him, and to flacken the vigour
of his operations.

SucH, indeed, was the posture of the Empe- The Empe-

ror's affairs that he could not march instantly to f preeom at-
the relief of his ally. Soon after the reparation tacking the
of the confederate army, he, in order to ease Eea&or and
himself of the burden of maintaining a super- ve.
fluous number of troops, had dismissed the count
of Buren with his Flemings d, imagining that the
Spaniards and Germans, together with the papal
forces, would be fully sufficient to crush any de-
gree of vigour that yet remained among the
members of the league. But Paul, growing wife
too late, began now to discover the imprudence
of that measure, from which the more sagacious
Venetians had endeavoured in vain to difuade
him. The rapid progress of the Imperial arms,
and the ease with which they had broken a com-
bination that appeared To firm and powerful,
opened at length his eyes, made him forget at
once all the advantages which he had expected

c Avila 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier, tor. i. 62o.
' Avila 83. 6. Men. de Ribier, tom. i. 592.

I 1

frol
H 2

Boor. V. from such a compleat triumph over heresy, and

1547. placed, in the firongeft light, his own impolitic

conduct, in having contributed towards acquiring
for Charles fich an immense increase of power,
as would enable him, after opprefling the liberties
of Germany, to give law with absolute authority
to all the ilates of Italy. The moment he per-
ceived his error, he endeavoured to correA it.

The Pope Without giving the Emperor any warning of his
troopshis intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson, to

return instantly to Italy with all the troops un-
der his command, and at the fame time recalled
the license which he had granted Charles, of ap-
propriating to his own use, a large ihare of the
church -lands in Spain. He was not deffitute of
pretences to juflify this abrupt desertion of his
ally. The term of fix months, during which
the stipulations in their treaty were to continue in
force, was now expired; the league, in oppofiti-
on to which their alliance had been framed,
seemed to be entirely dissipated; Charles, in all
his negotiations with the Princes and cities which
had submitted to his will, had neither consulted
the Pnpe, nor had allotted him any part of the
conquests which he had made, nor had commu-
nicated to him any share in the vast contributions
that he had raised. He had not even made any
provision for the fuppreflion of heresy, or the re-
establishment of the catholic religion, which
were Paul's chief inducements to bestow the trea-
fures of the church so liberally in carrying on the
war. These colours, how specious soever, did
not conceal fiom the Emperor that secret jealou-
fy which was the true motive of the Pope's con-
duct. But, as Paul's orders with regard to the
march of his troops were no less peremptory than
unexpected, it was impoflible to prevent their re-
treat. Charles exclaimed loudly against thisl
trcachery, in abandoning him so unlieafonably,

wlhil:

while .he was prosecuting a war undertaken in BooK, VII
compliance with his earnest solicitations, and -47-
from which, if successful, so much honour and
advantage would redound to the church. To
complaints he added threats and expostulations.
But Paul remained inflexible; his troops conti-
nued their march towards the ecclesiastical slate;
and in an elaborate memorial, intended as an
apology for his behaviour, he discovered new and
more manifest symptoms of alienation from the
Emperor, together with a deep-rooted terror of
his power'. Charles weakened by the with-
drawing of so great a body from his army, which
was already much diminished by the number of
garrisons that he had been obliged to throw into
the towns which had capitulated, found it ne-
cefTary to recruit his forces by new levies, before
he could venture to march in person towards
Saxony.

THE fame and splendor of his success could A conrpi-

not have failed of attrating such multitudes ofovrturnthe
soldiers into his service from all the extensive ter- government

of Genoa.

ritories now subjet to his authority, as must have
soon put him in a condition of taking the field
against the Eleftor; but the sudden and vio-
lent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as well as
the great revolutio:s which that event, extremely
myfferious in its firfl appearances, seemed to
portend, obliged him to avoid entangling him-
self in new op"'raticls in Germany, before he had
fully discoverl.d its source and tendency. The
form of gover:ment which had been eftablifled
in Genoa, at the time when Andrew Doria refto-
red liberty to his c. ;:ntry, though calculated to
obliterate the memory of former dilfenfions, and

F. Paul. zo8. Pallavic. par. ii' p. 5. Thuan. 126.

H r received

BooK VIII. received at first with eager approbation, did not,

,547. after a trial of near twenty years, give universal

fatisfation to there turbulent and facious repub-
licans. As the entire administration of affairs was
now lodged in a certain number of noble fami-

oTfthe b? lies? many, envying them that pre-eminence,
ipirators. wished for the restitution of a popular govern

ment, to which they had been accustomed; and
though all reverenced the disinterested virtue of
Doria, and admired his talents, not a few were
jealous of that ascendant which he had acquired
in all the councils of the commonwealth. His
age, however, his moderation, and love of liber-
ty, afforded ample security to his countrymen
that he would not abuse his power, nor stain the
close of his days by attempting to overturn that
fabrick, which it had been the labour and pride
of his life to erect. But that authority and in-
fluence, which in his hands were innocent, they
easily saw would prove defructive, if usurped by
any citizen of greater ambition, or less virtue. A
citizen of this dangerous character had actually
formed such pretensions, and with some profpedt
of success. Giannetino Doria, whom his grand
uncle Andrew destined to be the heir of his pri-
vate fortune, aimed likewise at being his successor
in power. His temper haughty, insolent, and over-
bearing to such a degree as would scarce have been
tolerated in one born to reign, was altogether in-
supportable in the citizen of a free state; and the
more sagacious among the Genoese already feared
and hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While
Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and un-
discerning affection which persons in advanced
age often contract for the younger members of
their family, set no bounds to the indulgence
with which he treated him; teeming less fblici-

toul;

tous to secure and perpetuate the freedom of the Boo" vli
commonwealth, than to aggrandize that unde- 547.
serving kinsman.

BUT whatever fiufpicion of Doria's designs, or

whatever dissatisfaction with the system of admi-
niftration in the commonwealth, there circum-
flances might have occasioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than mur-
murings and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco, Fiefco.count
count of Lavagna, observing this growing disgust, of Lheavag
had not been encouraged by it to attempt one of the conlpi-
the boldest actions recorded in history. That ra"
young nobleman, the richest and most illustrious
fubjedt in the republic, pofieffed, in an eminent
degree, all the qualities which win upon the hu-
man heart, which command refpedt, or secure at-
tachment. He was graceful and majestic in his
person; magnificent to profusion; of a genero-
fity that prevented the wishes of his friends, and
exceeded the expectations ot strangers; of an in-
finuating address, gentle manners and a flowing
affability. But under the appearance of there vir-
tues, which seemed to form him for enjoying and
adorning civil life, he concealed all the difpofi-
tions which mark men out for taking the lead in
the most dangerous and dark conspiracies; an in-
satiable and restless ambition, a courage unac-
quainted with fear, and a mind that disdained
ftbordination. Such a temper could ill brook
that flation of inferiority, wherein he was placed
in the republic; and as he envied the power
which the elder Doria had acquired, he was filled
with indignation at the thoughts of its descend-
ing, like an hereditary pofieliion, to Giannetino.
Tliefe various paflions, preying with violence on
his turbulent and aspiring mind, determined him

H 4 to

Boos VIII. to attempt overturning that domination to which
^"h he could not submit.

'547'.

Intrigues AT firfl he thought of an alliance with Francis,
tionsof the and even proposed it to the French ambassador
confplirators. at Rome, as the molf effetual means of accom-

plifhing this; and after expelling Doria together
with the Imperial faction by his assistance, he re-
solved to put the public once more under the
protection of that Monarch, hoping in return for
that service to be entrusted with the principal
share in the adminifiration of government. But
having communicated his scheme to a few chosen
confidants, from whom he kept nothing secret,
Verrina, the chief of them, a man of desperate
fortune, capable alike of advising and of execu-
ting the most audacious deeds, remonfirated with
earnestness againif the folly of exposing himself
to the most imminent danger, while he allowed
another to reap all the fruits of his fuccels; and
exhorted him warmly to aim himself at that pre-
eminence in his country, to which he was def
tined by his illustrious birth, was called by the
voice of his fellow-citizens, and would be raised
by the zeal of his friends. This discourse open-
ed such vati prospeCts to Fiefco, and so filitable
to his.genius, that abandoning his own plan, he
eagerly adopted that of Verrina. The other per-
sons present, though sensible of the hazardous
nature of the undertaking, did not choose to con-
demn what their patron had To warmly approved.
It was inflantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to
affffinate the two Dorias as well as the principal
persons of their party, to overturn the eifablifh-
ed system of government, and to place Fiefco
on the ducal throne of Genoa. Time, however,
and preparations were requisite to ripen such a
design for execution ; and while he was employ-

ed

ed in carrying on these, Fiefco made it his chief BOOK V"i.
care to guard against every thing that might be- 547
tray his secret, or create suspicion. Thie disguise
he assumed was of all others the most impene-
trable. le seemed to be abandoned entirely to
pleasure and dissipation. A perpetual gaiety, di-
verfified by the pursuit of all the amulements
becoming his age and rank, engrossed, in appear-
ance. the whole of his time and thoughts. But,
amidst this hurry of difipation, he prosecuted
his plan with the most cool attention, neither re-
tarding the design by a timid hesitation, nor pre-
cipitating the execution by an excess of impa-
tience. He continued his correspondence with
the French ambassador at Rome, though without
communicating to him his real intentions, that
by his means he might secure the protection of
the French arms, if hereafter he should find it
necessary to call them to his aid. He entered
into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of
Parma, who being disgusted with the Emperor
for refuting to grant him the investiture of that
dutchy, was eager to promote any measure that
tended to dimini(h his influence in Italy, or to
ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as that
of Doria. Being sensible that in a maritime slate,
the acquisition of naval power was what he
ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased four gal-
leys from the Pope, who probably was not un-
acquainted with the design which he had formed,
and did not disapprove of it. Under colour of
fitting out one of these gallies to fail on a cruise
against the Turks, he not only afembled a good
number of his own vassals, but engaged in his
service many bold adventurers, whom the truce
between the Emperor and Solyman had deprived
of their usual occupation and subsistence.

WH I ,E

Boo VIr. WHILE Fiefco was taking these important
'-547 fleps, he preserved so admirably his usual ap-

pearance of being devoted intirely to pleasure
and amusement, and paid court with such artful
address to the two Dorias, as imposed not only on
the generous and unfufpicious mind of Andrew,
but deceived Giannetino, who conscious of his
own criminal intentions, was more apt to di(fruf:
the deiigns of others. So many infiruments be-
ing now prepared, nothing remained but to strike
the blow. Various consultations were held by
Fiefco with his confidants, in order to fettle the
manner of doing it with the greatest certainty
and effect. At first, they proposed to murder
the Dorias and their chief adherents, during the
celebration of high mass in the principal church;
but as Andrew was often absent from there reli-
gious folemnities, on account of his great age,
that design was laid aside. It was then concert-
ed that Fiefco should invite the uncle and ne-
phew, with all their friends whom he had mark-
ed out as vidims, to his house ; where it would
be easy to cut them off at once without danger or
resistance; but as Giannetino was obliged to leave
the town on the day which they had chosen, it
became necessary likewise to alter this plan.
They at last determined to attempt by open force,
what they found difficult to effec by stratagem,
and fixed on the night between the second anti
third of January, for the execution of their en-
terprize. The time w;s chosen with great pro-
priety ; for as the Doge of the former year was
to quit his office, according to cullom, on the
first of the montli, and his lucceflbr could not be
elected sooner than the fourth, the republick re-
mained during that interval in a fort of anarchy,
and Fiefco might with less violence take poll'e-
sion of the vacant dignity.

'l' II

THR morning of that day Fiefco employed Boo ,

VII1.

in visiting his friends, pafiing some hours among ,4
them with a spirit as gay and unembarraffed as Theco.n-
at other times. Towards evening he paid court alriemi ,,to
to the Dorias with his ufiual marks of refped, execute
and surveying their countenance and behaviourthci l'ha°
with the attention natural in his situation, was
happy to observe the perfect security in which
they remained, without the least foresight or dread
of that storm which had been so long a gathering,
and was now ready to burst over their heads. From
their palace he haffened to his own, which flood by
itself in the middle of a large court, surrounded by
a high wall. The gates had been set open in the
morning, and all persons, without diftindtion, were
allowed to enter, but strong guards posted within
the court suffered no one to return. Verrina mean-
while, and a few persons trusted with the secret of
the conspiracy, after conduCting Fiefco's vas-
fals, as well as the crews of his gallies into the
palace in small bodies, with as little noise as
possible, dispersed themselves through the city,
and in the name of their patron, invited to an en-
tertainment the principal citizens whom they knew
to be disgusted with the administration of the Do-
rias, and to have both inclination and courage to
attempt a change in the government. Of the vast
number of persons who now filled the palace, a few
only knew for what purpose they were aflembled,
the reft astonished at finding instead of the prepara-
tions for a feast, a court crowded with armed men,
and apartments filled with the instruments of war,
gazed on each other with a mixture of impatience,
curiosity and terror.

WHILE their minds were in this slate of sus- Fierco' .r-

hnrwt at ion

penfe and agitation, Fielco appeared. With ao; thm.
look full of alacrity and confidence he address-
ed himself to the persons of chief diftindion,

telling

Boor vm. telling tlem, that they were not now called rt

547, partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but

to join in a deed of valour, which would lead thein
to libertyand immortal renown. Heset before their
eyes the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority
of the elder Doria, which the ambitio' of Gianne-
tino, and the partiality of the Emperor to a family
more devoted to him than to their country, was
about to enlarge and to render perpetual. This un-
righteous domination, continued he, you have it
now in your power to subvert, and to establish the
freedom of your country on a firm basis. The ty-
rants must be cut off I have taken the most es-
fectual measures for this purpose. My associates are
numerous. I can depend on allies and protectors if
necessary. Happily the tyrants are as secure as I
have been provident. Their insolent contempt of
their countrymen, has banished the suspicion and
timidity which usually render the guilty quick-
fighted to discern, as well as sagacious to guard
against the vengeance which they deserve. They
will now feel the blow, before they suspect any
hostile hand to be nigh. Let us then sally forth,
that we may deliver our country by one generous
effort, almost unaccompanied with danger, and
certain of fuccels, These woris, uttered with
that irresistible fervour which animates the mind
when rouzed by great objecs, made :he d:fired
impression on the audi.-nce. Fiefco'b val.i!s,
ready to execute whatever their master fhoulI
command, received his diicourfe with a rr.,n'mul
of applause. To many whose for!,es v *.
desperate, the license and confusion of an ini m -
redion afforded an agreeable prolpet. Those
of higher rank and more vii;uous fentinents,
durst not discover the furprize or houror with
which they were struck at the propolal of an
enterprize so unexpected and atrocious; as each
imagined the other to be in the secret of the

conlpiracy,

conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by persons Boo. vI-L
who waited only a signal from their leader toperpe- 47
trate the greatest crime. With one voice then all
applauded, or feigned to applaud, the undertaking.

HAVING thus fixed and encouraged his affo- His inter-

ciates, before he gave them his last orders, he hiw wifth
hastened for a moment to the apartment of his
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom he
loved with tender affection, and whole beauty
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love.
The noise of the armed men who crowded the
court and palace, having long before this reach-
ed her ears, she concluded some hazardous en-
terprize to be in hand, and ihe trembled for her
husband. He found her in all the anguish of un-
certainty and fear; and as it was now impofible
to keep his design concealed, he informed her of
what he had undertaken. The prospeCt of a scene
so full of horror as well as danger, compleated
her agony; and foreboding immediately in her
mind the fatal issue of it, she endeavoured, by her
tears, her entreaties, and her delpair, to divert
him from his purpose. Fiefco, after trying in
vain to tooth and to inspire her with hope, broke
from a situation into which an excess of tenderners
had unwarily fcduced him, though it could not
liake his resolution. " Farewell, cried he, as he
quitted her apartment, you shall either never fee
me more, or you (hall behold to-morrow every
thing in Genoa fubjeca to your power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he al- They attack

lotted each his proper station; some were ap-'he city'
pointed to aflault and seize the different gates
of the city; some to make themselves matters
of the different streets or places of strength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the har-
hour where Doria's gallies were laid up, as the

post

121

BooK VI1. pot of chief importance, and of greatest danger.

5 It was now midnight, and the citizens slept in the

security of peace, when this band of conspirators,
numerous, desperate and well armed, rushed
out to execute their plan. They furprized with-
out refinance rome of the gates. They got pof-
feflion of others after a sharp conflit with the
soldiers on guard. Verrina, with the galley that
had been fitted out against the Turks, blocked
up the mouth of the Darfena or little harbour
where Doria's fleet lay. All poflibility of elcape
being by this precaution cut off, when Fieico at-
tempted to enter the gallies from the (hore to
which they were made fail, as they were unrg-
ged and disarmed, having no crew on board but
the slaves chained to the oar, they were in no
condition to make resistance. Every quarter of
the city was now filled with noise and tumult, all
the streets resounding with the cry of Fiefco and
liberty. At that name, so popular and beloved,
many of the lower rank took arms, and joined
the conspirators. The nobles and partizans of the
aristocracy, afloniihed or affrighted, ihut the gates
of their houses, and thought of nothing but fe-
curing them from pillage. At last, the noise
excited by this scene of violence and confusion,
reached the palace of Doria ; Giannetino flarted
immediately from his bed, and imagining that
it was occasioned by rome mutiny among the
sailors, ruffled out with a few attendants, and
hurried towards the harbour. The gate of St.
Thomas, through which he had to pals, was al-
ready in the potieflion of the conspirators, who,
the moment he entered, fell upon him with the
utmofl fury, and murdered him upon the spot.
The fame mul: have been the fate of the elder
Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco had executed his
brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately
to attack him in his palace; but he, from the

fordid

fordid consideration of preventing its being plun- Boos VeI.
dered amidst the confusion, having forbid his s;4v.
followers to advance, Andrew got intelligence
of his nephew's death, as well as of his own
danger; and mounting on horleback, saved
himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few senators
had the courage to assemble in the palace of the
republick Y. At firfl, some of the most daring
among them attempted to rally the scattered
soldiers, and to attack a body of the conspirators;
but being repulsed with loTs, all agreed that
nothing now remained, but to treat with the
party which seemed to be irrefillible. Deputies
were accordingly sent to learn of Fiefco what
were the conceflions with which he would be
satisfied, or rather to submit to whatever terms
he should please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they cacuf e

their mir-

yuere empowered to negotiate, was no more. carriae.
Tuft as he was going to leave the harbour, where
every thing had succeeded to his wish, that he
might join his viCtorious companions, he heard
some extraordinary uproar on board the Admi-
ral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing
that the Plaves might break their chains, and
overpower his affociatts, he ran thither; but
the plank which reached from the shore to the
veiTel happening to overturn, he fell into the
lea, whilfl he hurried forward too precipitately.
Being loaded with heavy armour, he funk to
the bottom, and perished in the very moment
i\hen he must have taken full pofleflion of
every thing that his ambitious heart could de-
fire. Verrina was the firfl who dilcovered this
fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its
confiquences, concealed it with the utmoit in-
duftry from every one but a few teaders of the
conspiracy. Nor was it difficult, arnidfl the
ldrknefS and confflion of the night, to have

y II palazza della dc Signoria

kept

r23

Boos vil. kept it secret, until a treaty with the senators

,57 ould have put the city in the power of the

conspirators All their hopes of this were dif-
concerted by the imprudence of Jerome Si.
efco, who, when the deputies of the senate en.
quired for his brother, the count of Lavagna,
that they might make their proposals to him,
replied with a chirdifil vanity, " I am now the
only person to whom that title belongs, and
with me you mull treat." Thele words dif:
covered both to his friends and enemies what
had happened, and made the impression that
might have been expected upon both. The
deputies, encouraged by this event, the only
one which could occasion tuch a sudden revo-
lution as might turn to their advantage, afil-
med instantly, with admirable pretence of mind,
a new tone, suitable to the change in their cir-
cumifances, and made high demands. While
they endeavoured to gain time by protradting
the negotiation, the reft of the senators were
buly in assembling their partizans, and forming
a body capable ot defending the palace of the
republick. On the other hand the conspirators
aftonithed at the death of a man whom they
adored and trusted, and placing no confidence in
Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage die
away, and their arms fall from their hands.
That profound and amazing secrecy with
which the conspiracy had been concerted, and
which had contributed hitherto so much to
its fuccels, proved now the chief cause of its
mircarriage. The leader was gone, the greater
part of those who aded under him, knew not
his confidants, and were strangers to the objed
at which he aimed. There was no person
among them whose authority or abilities en-
titled him to aflhme F'iefco's place, or to finish
his plan; after having loft the Ipirit which ani-
mated it, life and activity deserted the whole
body. M';ny of the conprirators withdrew to

their
124

their houses, lhoping that amidst the darkness of Booa Viit
the night they had passed unobserved, and might ,47.
remain unknown. Others fought for safety by a
timely retreat; and before break of day, all of
them fled with precipitation from a city, which,
but a few hours before, was ready to acknow-
ledge them as mafiers.

NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Trnrquil-

Genoa; not an enemy was to be seen; few marks established
of the violence of the former night appeared, in Genoa.
the conspirators having conducted their enterprize
with more noise than bloodshed, and gained all
their advantages by furprize, rather than by force
of arms. Towards evening Andrew Doria re-
turned to the city, being met by all the inhabi-
tants, who received him with acclamations of
joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger of
the preceding night, were fresh in his mind, and
the mangled body of his kinsman still before his
eyes, such was his moderation and magnanimity,
that the decree iffiued by the senate against the
conspirators, did not exceed that just measure of
severity which was requisite for the support of
government, and was dictated neither by the vio-
lence of resentment, nor the rancour of revenge *.

AFTER taking the necessary precautions forTheEmp -
preventing the flame, which was now so happily r a',lmed

Ipirtcy.

z Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrea Doria, 1196. La

Conjuration de Cointe de Fiefque par Cardin. de Retz.
Adrani Iftoria, lib vi. 369. Folietz Conjuratio Jo. Lud.
Fiefci ap. Grav. Thef. Ital. i. 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz composed, at

the age of eighteen, a hiltory of this conspiracy, contain-
ing such a diicovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his
enterprize, that it is not furprizing that a minister, so jea-
lous and discerning as Richlieu, should be led by the peru-
fal of it to predit the turbulent and dangerous spirit of
that young EcclefiaRick. Men, de Retz, tom. i. p. 13.

V L. lII. I extinguished,

Boo VlII. extinguiffied, from breaking-eut anew, the first

,-47. care of the senate was to fend an ambassador to

the Emperor to give him a particular detail of
what had happened, and to beg his assistance
towards the reduction of Montobbio, a strong
fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had shut himself up. Charles was
no less alarmed than astonished at an event so
firange and unexpeted. He could not believe
that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever,
durst have attempted such an enterprize, but on
foreign suggestion, and from hope of foreign aid.
Being informed that the Duke of Parma was
well acquainted with the plan of the conspirators,
he immediately supposed that the Pope could not
be ignorant of a measure, which his son had
countenanced. Proceeding from this to a farther
conjecure, which Paul's cautious maxims of po-
licy in other inRfances, rendered extremely pro-
bable, he concluded that the French King must
have known and approved of the design and
he began to apprehend that this spark might
again kindle the flame of war which had raged

surpends so long in Italy. As he had drained his Italian
his opera-
tions in territories of troops on account of the Germa:n
Ceimany. war, he was altogether unprovided for refifiing

any hostile attack in that country; and on the
firif appearance of danger he must have de-
tached'thither the greate[f part of its forces for
its defence. In this situation of affairs, it would
not have been altogether imprudent in the Em-
peror to have advanced in person against the
EleCtor, until he should learn with iome degree
of certainty whether such a feene were not about
to open in Italy, as might put it out of his power
to keep the field with an army sufficient to oppo:e
him.

THE

# BOOK IX.

THE1
HISTORY

OF T ttE
R E l G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.
iH E Emperor's dread of the hostile inten- BooK ix.

tions of the Pope and French King did "

not proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded Francs47jea
suspicion. Paul had already given the strongest os of the
proofs both of hisjealoufy and enmity. Charles power and
could not hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip fu"cefl
of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the con-
federate Protestants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjecture. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefs of his arms with deep concern, and though
prevented hitherto, by circumstances which have
been mentioned, from interposing in order to
check them, he was now convinced that, if he
did not make some extraordinary and timely

I 2 effort,

ooK x., effort, Charles muff acquire such a degree of
1547. power as would enable him to give law to the reft

of Europe. This apprehension, which did not
take its rife from tle envy of rivalfhip alone, but
was entertained by the wisest politicians of the age,
suggested various expedients which might serve to
retard the course of the Emperor's victories, and
to form by degrees such a combination againfl him
as might put a stop to his dangerous career.

Negotiates WITH this view, Francis inftruated his emif-
pwh the; saries in Germany to employ all their address in

order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from submitting to the
Emperor. He made liberal offers of his assistance,
and entering into a close correspondence with.-he
Ele&or and Landgrave, whom he knew to be the
most zealous as well as the moit powerful of the
'Whole body, he used every argument, and pro-
posed every advantage which could either confirm
their dread of the Emperor's designs, or deter
mine them not to imitate the inconsiderate credu-
lity of their associates in giving up their religion
and liberties to his disposal. While he took this
ftep towards continuing the civil war which raged
in Germany, he endeavoured, likewise, to stir

with Soly- up foreign enemies againift the Emperor. He so-
man' licited Solyma!n to seize this favourable oppor.

tunity of invading Hungary, which had been
drained of all the troops necellilry for its defence,
in order to form the army againlf the confe-
derates of Smalkalde. He exhorted the Pope to
repair, by a vigorous and fiafonablc effort, the
error of'which he had been guilty in contribu-
ting to raise the Emperor to fluch a formidable

with the height of power. Finding Paul, both from the
v',ltti,,, confcioufilefs of his own mistake, and his dread

of its consequences, abundantly disposed to liflcn
to his exhortations, he availed himself of this

favourable

favourable disposition which the Pontiff began to Boor IX.
discover, as an argument to gain the Venetians. 5 7J
He endeavoured to convince them that nothing
could save Italy, and even Europe from oppref-
sion and servitude, but their joining the Pope and
him in giving the first beginning to a general con-
federacy in order to humble that ambitious poten-
tate, whom they had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot there negotiations in the With the

Kings of

southern courts, he turned his attention next Denmark
towards those in the north of Europe. As the and Eng-
King of Denmark had particular reasons to be land
offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined
that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had projected; and left con-
fiderations of caution or prudence should restrain
him from joining in it, he attempted to overcome
these, by offering him the young Queen of Scots
in marriage to his fona. As the ministers who
governed England in the name of Edward VI. had
openly declared themselves converts to the opi-
nions of the Reformers, as soon as it became safe
upon Henry's death to lay aside that disguise
which his unforgiving bigotry had forced them to
aftume, Francis flattered himself that their zeal
would not allow them to remain inactive fpeta-
tors of the overthrow and destruCtion of those
who profefled the fame faith with themselves;
and he hoped that notwithstanding the struggles
of faction incident to a minority, and the prof-
peat of an approaching rupture with the Scots,
he might prevail on them likewise to take part
in the common cause b.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of ex-
pedients, and exerted himself with such extra-
ordinary activity, to rouze the different states of

Mem. de Rib. i. 600, 606. b Mem. de Rib. i. 635.

I 3 Europe

Boo" Ix Europe against his rival, he did not neglect what

547. depended on himself alone. He levied troops in

all parts of his dominions ; he collected military
stores; he contracted with the Swiss cantons for
a considerable body of men; he put his finances
in admirable order; he remitted considerable fums
to the Eletor and Landgrave; and took all the
other lepsneceffarytowardscommencing hostilities
on the shortest warning, and with proper vigour'.

The Empe- OPERATIONS so complicated, and which re-
ror greatly quired the putting To many instruments in motion,
!armed. did not escape the Emperor's observation. He

was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in the
several courts, as well as of his domestic prepa-
rations; and sensible how fatal an interruption a
foreign war would prove to his designs in Germa-
ny, he trembled at the profped of that event.
The danger, however, appeared to him as un-
avoidable as it was great. He knew the infati-
able and well direted ambition of Solyman, and
that he always chore the season for beginning his
military enterprizes with prudence equal to the
valour with which he conducted them. ThePope,
as he had good reason to believe, wanted not
pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclinations to
begin hostilities. He had already made some
discovery of his sentiments, by exprefling a joy
altogether unbecoming the head of the church,
upon receiving an account of the advantage which
the Eledor of Saxony had gained over Albert of
Brandenburg; and as he was now secure of find-
ing in the French King, an ally of sufficient power
to support him, he was at no pains to conceal the
violence and extent of his enmityd. The Ve-
netians, Charles was well assured, had long ob-
served the growth of his power with jealousy,
which, added to the solicitations and promises ot

Mem. de Rib. i. 595 d Mem. de Rib. tom; i. 637.

France,

France, might at last quicken their flow counsels, Boor x.
and overcome their natural caution. The Danes ,547.
and English, it was evident, had both peculiar
reason to be disgusted, as well as strong motives
to at againit him. But above all, he dreaded the
aftive emulation of Francis himself, whom he
confidered as the foul and mover of any confede-
racy that could be formed against him; and as
that Monarch had afforded protection to Verrina,
who failed directly to Marseilles upon the mif-
carriage of Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles expected.
every moment the commencement of those hostile
operations in Italy, of which he conceived the in-
furrection in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

BUT while he remained in this itate of suspense Entertains

and solicitude, there was one circumitance which the decli-
afforded him some profpet of escaping the dan- ning tate
ger. The French King's health began to decline. healthi'
A disease, the effect of his intemperance and in-
considerate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually
on his constitution. The preparations of war, as
well as the negotiations in the different courts,
began to languish, together with the Monarch,
who gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during March.
that interval, reduced Montobbio, took Jerome
Fiefco prisoner, and putting him together with his
chief adherents to death, extinguished all remains
of the conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities
in Germany, despairing of timely afliftance from
France, submitted to the Emperor. Even the
Iandgrave seemed disposed to abandon the Elec-
tor, and to bring matters to a speedy accommo-
dation, on such terms as he could obtain. In
the mean time, Charles waited with impati-
ence the issue of a distemper, which was to
decide whether he must relinquish all other
schemes, in order to prepare for resisting a com-
bination of the greater part of Europe againit

I 4 him,

^Boo" . him, or whether he might proceed to invade

,547. Saxony, without interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that some historians have called it
the Star of the House of Austria, did not desert

Death of him on this occasion. Francis died at Rambouillet,
Francis, and on the last day of March, in the fifty-third year
on hish. of his age, and the thirty-third of his reign.
raaer and During twenty-eight years of that time, an
rivalthip
with avowed rivalfhip fibfifted between him and the
Charles. Emperor, which involved not only their own do-

minions, but the greater part of Europe in wars,
prosecuted with more violent animosity, and
drawn out to a greater length, than had been
known in any former period. Many circum-
itances contributed to both. Their animosity
was founded in opposition of interest, heightened
by personal emulation, and exasperated not only
by mutual injuries, but by reciprocal insults. At
the fame time, whatever advantage one seemed
to pofrefs towards gaining the ascendant, was
wonderfully balanced by some favourable circum-
fiance, peculiar to the other. The Emperor's
dominions were of great extent, the French King's
lay more compact; Francis governed his kingdom
with absolute power; that of Charles was limited,
but he flipplied the want of authority by address;
the troops of the former were more impetuous
and enterprizing; those of the latter better dif-
ciplined, and more patient of fatigue. The
talents and abilities of the two Monarchs were as
different as the advantages which they possessed,
a;nd contributed no less to prolong the contest be-
tween them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly,
prosecuted them at first with warmth, and pushed
tlem into execution with a most adventurous cou-
rage; but being destitute of the perseverance
neceflary to surmount difficulties, he often aban-

doned

doned his designs, or relaxed the vigour of pur- Bok IX.
suit, from impatience, and sometimes from levity. 1547.
Charles deliberated long, and determined with
coolness; but, having once fixed his plan, he
adhered to it with inflexible obstinacy, and nei-
ther danger nor discouragement could turn him
aside from the execution of it. The success of
their enterprizes was altogether as different as their
characers, and was uniformly influenced by them.
Francis, by his impetuous activity, often difcon-
certed the Emperor's best laid schemes; Charles,
by a more calm but steady prosecution of his de-
signs, checked the rapidity of his rival's career,
and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous efforts.
The former, at the opening of a war or of a cam-
paign, broke in upon his enemy with the violence
of a torrent, and carried all before him; the latter,
waiting until he saw the force of his rival begin to
abate, recovered in the end not only all that he had
loft, but made new acquisitions. Few of the
French Monarch's attempts towards conquest,
whatever promising aspect they might wear at first,
were conducted to an happy issue; many of the
Emperor's enterprizes, even after they appeared
desperate and impracticable, terminated in the
most prosperous manner. Francis was dazzled
with the splendor of an undertaking; Charles was
allured by the profped of its turning to his ad-
vantage. The degree, however, of their com-
parative merit and reputation, has not been fixed
either by a firidt scrutiny into their abilities for
government, or by an impartial consideration of
the greatness and success of their undertakings;
and Francis is one of those Monarchs who occu-
pies a higher rank in the temple of fame, than
either his talents or performances intitle him to hold.
This pre-eminence he owed to many different
circumstances. The superiority which Charles
acquired by the victory of Pavia, and which from

that

Boos IX. that period he preserved through the remainder of
,, ihis reign, was so manifest, that Francis's struggle

against his exorbitant and growing dominion was
viewed by most of the other powers, not only
with the partiality which naturally arises for those
who gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but
with the favour due to one who was resisting a
common enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds
to a Monarch equally formidable to them all.
The characters of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon their
talents for government, but upon their qualities
as men. Francis, notwithstanding the many er-
rors conspicuous in his foreign policy and dometfic
administration, was nevertheless humane, bene-
ficent, generous. He possessed dignity without
pride; affability free from meanness; and courtesy
exempt from deceit. All who had access to him,
and no man' of merit was ever denied that privi-
lege, refpeted and loved him. Captivated with
his personal qualities, his fubjeds forgot his de-
sects as a Monarch, and admiring him as the most
accomplished and amiable gentleman in his domi-
nions, they never murmured at ats of male-
adminiflration, which, in a Prince of less engaging
dispositions, wotlld have been deemed unpardon-
able. This admiration, however, muff have been
temporary only, and would have died away with
the courtiers who bestowed it; the illusion arising
from his private virtues must have ceased, and
posterity would have judged of his public conduct
with its usual impartiality ; but another circum-
france prevented this, and his name hath been
transmitted to posterity with increasing reputa-
tion. Science and the arts had, at that time,
made little progress in France. They were just
beginning to advance beyond the limits of Italy,
where they had revived, and which had hitherto

been

been their only feat. Francis took them imme-BooK Ix.
diately under his protection, and vied with Leo ,,
himself, in the zeal and munificence with which
he encouraged them. He invited learned men to
his court, he converted with them familiarly, he
employed them in business, he raised them to
offices of dignity, and honoured them with his
confidence. That race of men, not more prone
to complain when denied the refpedt to which they
fancy themselves entitled, than apt to be pleated
when treated with the diftin&tion which they con-
fider as their due, thought they could not exceed
in gratitude to such a benefactor, and strained
their invention, and employed all their ingenuity
in panegyric. Succeeding authors, warmed with
their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted
their encomiums, and refined upon them. The
appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred among
historians, and they seem to have regarded it as a
fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defects. Thus Francis, notwith-
standing his inferior abilities, and want of success,
hath more than equalled the fame of Charles. The
virtues which he possessed as a man, have entitled
him to greater admiration and praise than have been
bestowed upon the extentive genius and fortunate
arts of a more capable, but less amiable rival.

BY his death, a considerable change was made Efreas of

in the state of Europe. Charles, grown old in Francis's
the arts of government and command, had now to death.
contend only with younger Monarchs, who could
not be regarded as an equal match for him, who
had flood the encounter with Henry VIII. and
Francis I. and come off with honour in all there
different contests. By this event, he was eased of
all his disquietude, and was happy to find that he
might begin with safety those operations against

the

Boon IX. the Eleeor of Saxony, which he had hitherto

! 547 been obliged to fif'pend. He knew the abilities

of Henry II. who had just mounted the throne of
France, to be greatly inferior to those of his fa-
ther, and foresaw that he would be so much oc-
cupied for some time in displacing the late King's
minister-, whom he hated, and in gratifying the
ambitious demands of his own favourites, that
he had nothing to dread, either from his personal
efforts, or from any confederacy which this un-
experienced Prince could form.

Charles BUT as it was uncertain how long such an inter-
marchess- val of security might continue, Charles determi-
gainft the
Ele&orof ned inflantly to improve it ; and as soon as he
Saxony. heard of Francis's demise, he began his march
April ,3. from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the

departure of the Papal troops, together with the
retreat of the Flemings, had so much diminilhed
his army, that sixteen thousand men were all he
could assemble. With this inconsiderable body he
set out on an expedition, the event of which was
to decide what degree of authority he should pof-
kffs trom that period in Germany: but as this
little army con ifted chiefly of the veteran Spanifi
and Italian bands, he did not, in truflingto them,
commit much to the decision of chance, and even
with so fimall a force he had reason to entertain the
most sanguine hopes of success. The EleAor,
it is true, had levied an army greatly superior
in number; but neither the experience and dif-
cipline of his troops, nor the abilities of his of-
ficers, were to be compared with those of the
Emperor. The Elector, besides, had already
been guilty of an error, which deprived him of
all the advantage which he might have derived
from his superiority in number, and was alone
filfficient to have occasioned his ruin. In-
stead of keeping his forces united, detached

one

one great body towards the frontiers of Bohemia, Booi 1X.
in order to facilitate his junction with the male- 547.
contents of that kingdom, and cantoned a confi-
derable part of what remained in different places
of Saxony, where he expected the Emperor
would make the first inpreffion, vainly imagining
that these open towns, with small garrisons, might
be rendered tenable againif an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontierProgre' of

of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Eliter.
The folly of the measure which the Elector had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted
in that town surrendering without refitance; and
those in all the other places between that and the
Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled as
the Imperialists approached. Charles, that they
might not recover from the panic with which
they seemed to be struck, advanced without
losing a moment. The Eletor, who had fixed
his head quarters at Meissen, continued in his
wonted state of fluctuation and uncertainty. He
even became more undetermined, in proportion
as the danger grew near and called for prompt
and decisive resolutions. Sometimes he aCted, as
if he had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe,
and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon as
the detachments which he had called were able to
join him. At other times, he abandoned this as
rash and perilous, seeming to adopt the more pru-
dent counsels of those who advised him to endea-
vour at protracting the war, and for that end to
retire under the fortifications of Wittemberg,
where the Imperialiftscould not attack him with-
out manifest disadvantage, and where he might
wait, in safety, for the succours which he ex-
peeed from Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and the
Protestant cities on the Baltic. Without fixing

upon

Boos IX. the Ele&or of Saxony, which he had hitherto

been obliged to fifipend. He knew the abilities
of Henry II. who had just mounted the throne of
France, to be greatly inferior to those of his fa-
ther, and foresaw that he would be To much oc-
cupied for some time in displacing the late King's
minister., whom he hated, and in gratifying the
ambitious demands of his own favourites, that
he had nothing to dread, either from his personal
efforts, or from any confederacy which this un-
experienced Prince could form.

Charles BUT as it was uncertain how long fich an inter-
niarches - val of security might continue, Charles determi-
gainft the
Eleaorof ned inflantly to improve it; and as soon as he
Saxony. heard of Francis's demise, he began his march
April ,3. from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the

departure of the Papal troops, together with the
retreat of the Flemings, had so much diminished
his army, that sixteen thouSand men were all he
could assemble. With this inconsiderable body he
set out on an expedition, the event of which was
to decide what degree of authority he (hould pof-
siss trom that period in Germany: but as this
little army consisted chiefly of the veteran Spanifi
and Italian bands, he did not, in truftingto them,
commit much to the decision of chance, and even
with so small a force he had reason to entertain the
moll sanguine hopes of success. The Elector,
it is true, had levied an army greatly superior
in number; but neither the experience and dif-
cipline of his troops, nor the abilities of his of-
ficers, were to be compared with those of the
Emperor. The Ele&or, besides, had already
been guilty of an error, which deprived him of
all the advantage which he might have derived
from his superiority in number, and was alone
fifficient to have occasioned his ruin. In-
stead of keeping his forces united, detached

one

one great body towards the frontiers of Bohemia, oo I
in order to facilitate his juncion with the male- ,547
contents of that kingdom, and cantoned a confi-
derable part of what remained in different places
of Saxony, where he expected the Emperor
would make the first impreflion, vainly imagining
that there open towns, with small garrisons, might
be rendered tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontierProgrefs of

of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elffer. ar
The folly of the measure which the EleEtor had
taken was immediately seen, the troops poRfed
in that town surrendering without refifance; and
those in all the other places between that and the
Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled as
the Imperialists approached. Charles, that they
might not recover from the panic with which
they seemed to be struck, advanced without
losing a moment. The Elector, who had fixed
his head quarters at Meiflen, continued in his
wonted state of fluctuation and uncertainty. He
even became more undetermined, in proportion
as the danger grew near and called for prompt
and decisive resolutions. Sometimes he acted, as
if he had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe,
and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon as
the detachments which he had called were able to
join him. At other times, he abandoned this as
rash and perilous, teeming to adopt the more pru-
dent counsels of those who advised him to endea-
vour at protracting the war, and for that end to
retire under the fortifications of Wittemberg,
where the Imperialists could not attack him with-
out manifest disadvantage, and where he might
wait, in safety, for the succours which he ex-
pected from Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and the
Proteflant cities on the Baltic. Without fixing

upon

BOOK ix. upon either of these plans, he broke down the

'S ^bridge at MeifTen and marched along the east

bank of the Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deli-
berated anew, and after much hesitation, adopted
one of there middle schemes, which are always
acceptable to feeble minds incapable of deciding.
He left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the
Imperialists, if they should attempt to pass at
that place, and advancing a few miles with his
main body, encamped there in expectation of the
event, according to which he proposed to regulate
his fuibfequent motions.

Passes the CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward incef-
Elbe. fantly, arrived the evening of the twenty-third of

April on the banks of the Elbe opposite to Muhl-
berg. The river, at that place, was three hun-
dred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth,
its current rapid, and the bank possessed by the
Saxons was higher than that which he occupied.
Undismayed, however, by all these obstacles, he
called together his general officers, and without
aiking their opinions, communicated to them his
intention of attempting next morning to force his
paflage over the river, and to attack the enemy
wherever he could come up with them. They all
expressed their astonishment at such a bold refolu-
tion, and even the Duke of Alva, though natu-
rally daring and impetuous, and Maurice of
Saxony, notwithstanding his impatience to crush
his rival the Eletor, remonitrated earnestly againit
it. But the Emperor, confiding in his own judg-
ment, or good fortune, paid no regard to their
arguments, and gave the orders neceflary for
executing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanilh

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incefrant fire upon the enemy. The

long

long heavy muskets used in that age, did execu- Boo, IX.
tion on the opposite bank, and many of the fol- '.q4y
diers, hurried on by a martial ardour in order
to get nearer the enemy, rulhed into the stream,
and advancing breafft high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effect. Under co-
ver of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun to
be laid for the infantry; and a peasant having
undertaken to conduct the cavalry through the
river by a ford with which he was well acquaint-
ed, they also were put in motion. The Saxons
posted in Muhlberg endeavoured to obstruct
these operations, by a brisk fire from a battery,
which they had erected; but as a thick fog
covered all the low grounds upon the river, they
could not take aim with any certainty, and the
Imperialiffs suffered very little; at the fame time
the Saxons being much galled by the Spaniards
and Italians, they set on fire some boats which
had been collected near the village, and prepared
to retire. The Imperialists perceiving this, ten
Spanish soldiers instantly stript themselves, and
holding their swords with their teeth, swam across
the river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ven-
tured to oppose them, saved from the flames as
many boats as were sufficient to complete their
own bridge, and by this spirited and successful
action, encouraged their companions no less than
they intimidated the enemy.

BY, this time, the cavalry, each trooper hav-
ing a foot soldier behind him, began to enter the
river, the light horse marching in the front,
followed by the men at arms, whom the Em-
peror led in person, 'mounted on a Spanish
horse, dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carry-
ing a javelin in his hand. Such a numerous
body struggling through a great river, in which,

according

XBoo ix. according to the directions of their guide, they
' 547 were obliged to make several turns, sometimes

treading on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions, whom they left be-
hind, a fpe'tacle equally magnificent and interest-
ing d. Their courage, at last, filrmounted every
obstacle, no man betraying any symptom of fear,
when the Emperor shared in the danger no less
than the meanest soldier. The moment that they
reached the opposite fide, Charles, without wait-
ing the arrival of the reft of the infantry, ad-
vanced towards the Saxons with the troops which
had passed along with him, who flushed with
their good fortune, and despising an enemy who
had neglected to oppose them, when it miglht
have been done with such advantage, made no
account of their superior numbers, and marched
on as to a certain victory.

nlconduua DURING all these operations, which neceffi-
oftheElec-rily consumed much time, the Eleftor remain-
tor. ed inacive in his camp; and from an infatua-

tion which appears to be so amazing, that the
best informed hiflorians impute it to the trea-
cherous arts of his generals, who deceived him
by false intelligence, he would not believe that
the Emperor had passed the river, or could be
so near at hand e. Being convinced, at last, of
his fatal mistake, by the concurring testimony
of eye witnesses, he gave orders for retreating
towards Wittemberg. But a German army en-
cumbered, as uflial, with baggage and artillery,
could not be put suddenly in motion. They
had scarce begun to march when the light
troops of the enemy came in view, and the
Eledor saw an engagement to be unavoidable.

As

d Avila, 115. a.
' Camerar. ap, Freher. iii. 493. Struv. corp. biltl

Germ. 1047, 1049.
140

As he was no less bold in adtion than irresolute in BooK Ix
council, he made the disposition for b ttle with ,'~,
the greatest pretence of mind, and in the moftBlttle of
proper manner, taking advantage of a great forest Mu"h"u"'
to cover his wings, so as to prevent his being fur-
rounded by the enemies cavalry, which were far
more numerous than his own. The Emperor,
likewise, ranged his men in order as they came up,
and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with
few but efficacious words to do their duty. It
was with a very different spirit that the two armies
advanced to the charge. As the day, which had
hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened to clear
up at that moment, this accidental circumstance
made an impreflion on the different parties cor-
responding to the tone of their minds; the Saxons,
furprized and disheartened, felt pain at being ex-
posed fully to the view of the enemy; the Impe-
rialifts, being now secure that the Pioteftant forces
could not escape from them, rejoiced at the re-
turn of sun-shine as a certain presage of viCtory.
The (hock of battle would not have been long or
doubtful, if the personal courage which the Elec-
tor displayed, together with the activity which
he exerted from the moment that the approach of
the enemy rendered an engagement certain, and
cut off all poflibility of hesitation, had not re-
vived in some degree the spirit of his troops.
They repulsed the Hungarian light horse who
began the attack, and received with firmness the
men at arms who next advanced to the charge
but as there were the flower of the Imperial army,
were commanded by experienced officers, and
fought under the Emperor's eye, the Saxons soon
began to give way, and the light troops rallying
at the fame time and falling on their flanks, the
flight became general. A small body of chofel The Eleaor
soldiers, among whom the Eletor had fought in dtedrtnd
person, still continued to defend themselves, and loner.

Vo L. III. K cndcavoured,

BoOK IX. endeavoured to save their master by retiring into

,s47. the forest ;but being surrounded on every fide,

the Eletor, wounded in the face, exhausted with
fatigue; and perceiving all resistance to be vain,
surrendered himself a prisoner. He was con-
duaed immediately towards the Emperor, whom
he found just returned from the pursuit, flanding
on the field of battle in the full exultation of sic-
cess, and receiving the congratulations of his
officers, upon this compleat victory obtained by
his valour and conduct. Even in such an unfor-
tunate and humbling situation, the Elector's be-
haviour was equally magnanimous and decent.
Sensible of his condition, he approached his con-
queror without any of the iullennefs or pride,
which would have been improper in a captive;
and conscious of his own dignity, he descended
to no mean fubmiflion, unbecoming the high
station which he held among the German Princes.

Hisharfhre-" The fortune of war, said he, has made me
tption by yrour prisoner, most gracious Emperor, and I

hope to be treated"-Here, Charles harshly in-
terrupted him. " And am I then, at last, ac-
knowledged to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent
was the only title you lately allowed me. You
shall be treated as you deserve." At thete
words, he turned from him abruptly, with an
haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King of
the Romans added reproaches in his own, name,
using expressions still more ungenerous and in-
fulting. The Eletor made no reply; but, with
an unaltered countenance, which discovered
neither astonishment nor deje&ion, accompanied
the Spanish soldiers appointed to guard him f.

r Sleid. hilt. 426. Thuan. 136. IHortenfius dc Bello

German. ap. Scard. vol. ii. 498. Defcrpt. pugnae Mul-
berg. ibid. p. o09. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. xii. c. 1'3
... -' p. 298.

TH r

THIS decisive victory coit the mperialiso ily Br Ix.

fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons w:re ,547.
killed chiefly in the pursuit, and a great number Chales's
taken prisoners. About four hundred kvpt in a Ptergh vi
body, and escaped to Wittemberg, together with tory.
the electoral Prince, who had likewise been wound-
ed in the action. After refting two days on the
field of battle, partly to refresh his army, and
partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent
towns, which were impatient to secure his pro-
tetion by fibmitting to his will, the Emperor
began to move towards Wittemberg, that he
might terminate the war at once, by the reduction
of that city. The unfortunate Fleeor was car-
ried along in a fort of triumph, and exposed every
where, as a captive, to his own fubjeets; a spec-
tacle extremely affliting to them who both ho-
noured and loved him; though the infiult was so
far from subduing his firm spirit, that it did not
even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and composure
of his mind.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, invefs wit-

of the Electoral branch of the Saxon family, wastemberg
one of the strongest cities in Germany, and
would not be taken, if properly defended, with-
out great difficulty, the Emperor marched thi-
ther with the utmost dispatch, hoping that
while the consternation occasioned by his victory
was fill recent, the inhabitants might imitate
the example of their countrymen, and submit to
his power, as soon as he appeared before their
walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the Elector's wife,
a woman no less distinguished by her abilities
than her virtue, instead of abandoning herself to
tears and lamentation upon her husband's mif-
fortune, endeavoured, by her example as well as
exhortation, to animate the citizens; and she

K z intpired

r43

BooE I. inspired them with such resolution, that, when

1"4" summoned to surrender, they returned a vigo-

rous answer, warning the Emperor to behave
towards their Sovereign with the refpeat due
to his rank, as they were determined to treat Al-
bert of Brandenburg, who was still a prisoner,
precisely in the fame manner that he treated
him. The spirit of the inhabitants, no less than
the strength of the city, seemed now to render a
siege in form necessary. After such a signal vic-
tory it would have been disgraceful not to have
undertaken it, though at the fame time the Em-
peror was destitute of every thing requisite for
carrying it on. But Maurice removed all diffi-
culties, by engaging to furnish provisions, artil-
lery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever else
mhould be needed. Trusting to this, Charles
gave orders to open the trenches before the
town. It quickly appeared, that Maurice's
eagerness to reduce the capital of those domini-
ons, which he expeted as his reward for taking
arms against his kinsman, and deserting the
Protestant cause, had led him to promise what
exceeded his power to perform. A battering
train was, indeed, carried safely down the Elbe
from Dresden to Wittemberg; but as Maurice
had no sufficient force to preterve a secure com-
munication between his territories, and the
camp of the besiegers, Count Mansfeldt, who
commanded a body of eletoral troops, destroy-
ed a convoy of provisions and military stores,
and dispersed a band of pioneers destined for
the service of the Imperialists. This put a stop
to the progress of the siege, and convinced the
Emperor that as he could not rely on Maurice's
promises, recourse ought to be had to some
more expeditious as well as more certain method
of getting possession of the town.

Tfr

BooK IX.

THE unfortunate Eleetor was in his hands, and ,547.
he was ungenerous and hard-hearted enough to The Empe-

ror's Bnge-

take advantage of this, in order to make an ex- neroi treat-
periment whether he might not bring about his met of the
design, by working upon the tenderness of a wife
bfr her htfband, or upon the piety of children
towards their parent. With this view he fum-
moned Sybilla a second time to open the gates,
letting her know that if she again refused to com-
ply, the Elector should answer with his head for
her obstinacy. To convince her that this was not
an empty threat, he brought his prisoner to an im-
mediate trial. The proceedings against him were
as irregular, as the stratagem was barbarous. In-
stead of consulting the states of the Empire, or
remitting the cause to any court, which accord-
ing to the German constitution might have legally
taken cognizance of the EleAor's crime, he sub-
jeted the greatest prince in the Empire to the
jurisdiction of a court-martial compored of Spanish
and Italian officers, and in which the unrelenting
Duke of Alva, a fit instrument for any aft of
violence, presided. This strange tribunal found- May .o.
ed its charge upon the banof the Empire which
had been iliued against the prisoner, a sentence
pronounced by the sole authority of the Emperor,
and destitute of every legal formality which could
render it valid; but presuming him to be there-
by manifestly convicted of treason and rebellion,
the court-martial condemned him to susser death
by being beheaded. This decree was intimated
to the Elector while amusing himself in playing
at Chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-pri-
soner. He paused for a moment, tho' without The Elec-
any symptom either of furprize or terror and nirity.'a^"
after taking notice of the irregularity as well as
injustice of the Emperor's proceedings " It
is easy, continued he, to comprehend his scheme.

K 3 Imuft

pooK Ix. I must die, because Wittemberg will not furren-
L^"" der; and I shall lay down my life with pleasure,

if, by that sacrifice, I can preserve the dignity of
my house, and transmit to my posterity the in-
heritance which belongs to them. Would to God,
that this sentence may not affect my wife and
children more than it intimidates me! and that
they, for the fake of adding a few days to a life
already too long, may not renounce honours and
territories which they were born to possess s." He
then turned to his antagonist, whom he challenged
to continue the game. He played with his ufiial
attention and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest,
expressed all the fatisfaaion which is commonly
felt on gaining such victories. After this he with-
drew to his own apartment, that he might employ
the reft of his time in such religious exercises as
were proper in his situation h.

the ditrefs IT was not with the fame indifference, or corn-
of his fa- pofure, that the account of the Elector's danger

was received at Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had
supported with such undaunted fortitude her
husband's misfortunes, while the imagined that
they could reach no farther than to diminish his
power or territories, felt all her resolution fail the
moment his life was threatened. Solicitous to
save that, she despised every other consideration;
and was willing to make any sacrifice in order to
appease an incensed conqueror. At the fame time,
the Duke of Cleves, the Elector of Brandenburg,
and Maurice, to none of whom Charles had com-
municated the true motives of his violent proceed-
ings against the EleCtor, interceded warmly with
him to spare his life. The first was prompted to
do to merely by companlion for his fitter, and

s Thuan. i. 142. h Struvii corpus 1050.

regard
146

regard for his brother-in-law. The two other BoK IX.
dreaded the universal reproach that they would 1547.
incur, if, after having boasted so often of the
ample security which the Emperor had promised
them with refped to their religion, the first effect
of their union with him should be the public exe-
cution of a Prince, who was justly held in reve-
rence as the most zealous protetor of the Pro-
teitant cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw that
he must become the object of detestation to the
Saxons, and could never hope to govern them with
tranquillity, if he were confidered by them as ac-
celfary to the death of his nearest kinsman, in
order that lie might obtain poffeflion of his do-
llinions.

WHILE they, from such various motives, so- His tresty

licired Charles, with the most earnest importunity, by which he
not to execute the sentence, Sybilla, and the reft urrends.
of the Elector's family, conjured him by letters as rates
well as memengers to firuple at no conceilions that
would extricate him out of the present danger, and
deliver them from their fears and anguish on his ac-
count. Tile Emperor, perceiving that the ex-
pedient which he had tried began to produce the
effect he intended, fell by degrees from his former
rigour, and allowed himself to soften into pro-
miles of clemency and forgiveness, if the Elector
wxould lhew himself worthy of his favour by sub-
mitting to reasonable terms. The Elecor, on
whom the consideration of what he might susser
limfelf had made no impreflion, was melted by
the tears of a wife whom he loved, and could not
refilt the entreaties of his family. In compli-May 19.
ance with their repeated solicitations, he agreed
to articles of accommodation, which he would
otherwise have rejected with disdain. The
chief of them were, that he flould resign the
Electoral dignity, as well for himself as for his

K 4 posterity,

BooK IX. posterity, into the Emperor's hands, to be disposed

547- of entirely at his pleasure; that he should infiantly

put the Imperial troops in possession of the cities
of Wittemberg and Gotha; that he should set
Albert of Brandenburg at liberty without ransom;
that he should submit to the decrees of the Imperial
chamber, and acquiesce in whatever reformation
the Emperor should make in the constitution of
that court; that he should renounce all leagues
against the Emperor or King of the Romans, and
enter into no alliance for the future, in which they
were not comprehended. In return for there im-
portant concessions, the Emperor promised not
only to spare his life, but to fettle on him and his
posterity the city of Gotha and its territories, to-
gether with an annual pension of fifty thousand
florins, payable out of the revenues of the Elec-
torate; and likewise to grant him a fum in ready
money to be applied towards the discharge of his

and remains debts. Even these articles of grace were clogged
prioner. with the mortifying condition of his remaining the

Emperor's prisoner during the reft of his life i
To thewhole, Charles had subjoined, that he should
submit to the decrees of the Pope and council with
regard to the controverted points in religion; bu:
the Eleftor, tho' he had been persuaded to facri-
fice all the objects which men commonly hold to
be the dearest and most valuable, was inflexill
with regard to this point; and neither threats P'r
intreaties could prevail to make him renounce whai
he deemed to be truth, or persuaded him to ac'
in opposition to the dictates of his conscience.

v?:.ulice put As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of
, 'i~lc .l.c -Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled his engagc-
i,,.,1 dumi- ments to Maurice; and in reward for his meril

il having defrrted the Protestant cause, ani

i Sleid. 427. Thuan. i. 142. Du Mont Corps Diploll'

iv. p. L.
1 33z.

lhaving
148

having contributed with such success towards the BooK Ix.
dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he gave him ,-
poffefilon of that city, together with all the other 547
towns in the electorate. It was not without
reluctance, however, that he made such a facri-
fice; the extraordinary success of his arms had
begun to operate, in its usual manner, upon his
ambitious mind, suggesting new and vast projects
for the aggrandizement of his family, towards
the accomplishment of which the retaining of
Saxony would have been of the utmofft colfe-
quence. But as this scheme was not then ripe
for execution, he durst not yet venture to disclose
it; nor would it have been either safe or prudent
to have offended Maurice, at thatjuncture, by such
a manifest violation of all the promises, which
had reduced him to abandon his natural allies.

THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was Nt,,,,,;,i-

fiill in arms; and though now left alone to main- olS with the
tain the Protetant cause, was neither a feeble nor Lalnr t
contemptible enemy. His dominions were of
considerable extent; his subjects animated with
zeal for the Reformation; and if he could have
held the Imperialists at bay for a short time, he
had much to hope from a party whose strength
was still unbroken, whose union as well as vigour
might return, and which had reason to depend,
with certainty, on being effectually supported by
the King of- France. The Landgrave thought
not of any thing ib bold or adventurous; but
being seized with the fame consternation which
had taken poffellion of his associates, he was
intent, only, how to procure favourable terms
from the Emperor, whom he viewed as a conque-
ror, to whose will there was a necellity of tlb-
mitting. Maurice encouraged this tame and pa-
(cific spirit, by magnifying, on the one hand, the
Emperor's power; by boatsing, on the other, of

his
«

. o,~ mx. his own interest with his victorious ally; and by

1547. representing the advantageous conditions which he

could not fail of obtaining by his intercession for
a friend, whom he was so solicitous to save.
Sometimes, the Landgrave was induced to place
such unbounded confidence in his promires, that
he was impatient to bring matters to a final ac-
commodation. On other occasions, the Empe-
ror's exorbitant ambition, restrained neither by
the scruples of decency, nor the maxims of ju-
tice, together with the recent and ihocking proof
which he had given of this in the cruel and op-
preffive treatment of the Eledor of Saxony, came
so full into his thoughts, and made such a lively
impression on them, that he broke off abruptly
the negotiations which he had begun; seeming to
be convinced that it was more prudent to depend
for safety on his own arms, than to confide in
Charles's generosity. But this bold resolution,
which despair had suggested to an impatient fpirir,
fretted by disappointments, was not of long con-
tinuance. Upon a more deliberate survey of the
enemy's power, and his own weakness, his doubts
and fears returned upon him, and together with
them the spirit of negotiating, and the desire of
accommodation.

Ti .co(!i- MAURICE, and the Elector of Brandenburg,
I'.'"^.y' acted as mediators between him and the Empc-
tii.' ,mr- ror ; and after all that the former had vaunltc

"r of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the

Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The arti-
cles with regard to his renouncing the league of
Smalkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's autho-
rity, and fuibmitting to the decrees of the Impc-
rial chamber, were the fame which had be.:n
imposed on the Eletor, of Saxony. Besides
hlete, he was required to firrender his person and(
tciritoris to the Emperor; to implore for pardon

01on

on his knees; to pay an hundred and fifty thou- Boo. IX.
sand crowns towards defraying the expences of C'
the war; to demolish the fortifications of all the
towns in his dominions except one; to oblige the
garrison which he placed in it to take an oath of
fidelity to the Emperor; to allow a free paflage
through his territories to the Imperial troops as
often as it shall be demanded; to deliver up all
his artillery and ammunition to the Emperor; to
let at liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunf-
wick, together with the other prisoners he had
taken during the war; and heither to take arms
himself, for the future, nor to permit any of his
fubjets to serve against the Emperor or his allies a

THE Landgrave ratified there articles, though To which

with the utmost reluctance, as they contained no he rublit
stipulation with regard to the manner in which he
was to be treated, and left him entirely at the
Emperor's mercy. Neceflity, however, compelled
him to give his assent. Charles, who had assumed
the haughty and imperious tone of a conqueror,
ever since the reduction of Saxony, insisted on an
unconditional submission, and would permit no-
thing to be added to the terms which he had pre-
ic ibed, that could in any degree limit the fullness
of his power, or restrain him from behaving as he
saw meet towards a Prince whom he regarded as
absolutely at his disposal. But though he would
not vouchsafe to negotiate with the Landgrave, on
filch a footing of equality, as to susser any article
to be inserted among those which he had dictated
to him, that could be confidered as a formal ftipu-
lation for the security and freedom of his person ;
lie, or his ministers in his name, gave the Elector
of Brandenburg and Maurice such full fatisfadtion
with regard to this point, that they assured the
Landgrave that Charles would behave to him in the

* Sleid. 430. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.

fame

,,;; Ix. fame way that he had done to the Duke of Wur-

temberg, and would allow him, as soon as he
had made lIis fibmiflion, to return to his own
territowies. Upon finding the Landgrave to be
fiill possesed with his former suspicions of the
Emperor's intentions, and unwilling to trust ver-
bal or ambiguous declarations, in a matter of
ifch essential concern as his own liberty, they sent
him a bond signed by them both, containing the
nlofl solemn obligations, that if any violence what-
ibever were ofTred to his person, during his inter-
view with the Emperor, they would inifantly
furrendcr thernfclves to his sons, and remain in
their hands to be treated by them in the fame
manner as the Emperor should treat him b

I-. repirs TIls, together with the indispensable obliga-
rli.,,,, t ion of performing what was contained in the ar-

ticles of which he had accepted, removed his
d,ubts and scruples, or made it neceflary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to
the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a
circumstance occurred which revived his fufpici-
oi:s and increased hlis fears. Just as he was about
to enter the chamber of presence, in order to
mn.ike lis public lillmiflion to the Emperor, a
c(,yV of the articles which he had approved ol

uwas put into his hands, in order that lie might

ratify tlcmn anew. Upon perusing them, he
perceived tlat the Imperial minifiers had added
t,> o new articles; one importing, that if any
. ;iipute slould arise concerning the meaning of
the fcrmcr collditio:s, the Emperor should have
the right 'o putting what interpretation upon
tlic:-n he thought n;mo reasonable; the oilier,
tlhat tile Landgrave was bound to submit impli-
cit!y to tlih decisions of the council of Trent.
This unworthy artific, calculated to furprizc

b Du Mun: Corps Diploni. iv. p. 11, 336.

him into an approbation of articles to which he had Boo; IX.
not the most distant idea of assenting, by presenting '.7.-
them to him at a time when his mind was engrossed
and disquieted with the thoughts of that hiu Irbling
ceremony which he had to perform, filled the
Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly out
intoall those violent expreflions of rage to which his
temper was prone. With tome difficulty, the EleCor
of Brandenburg and Maurice prevailed at length on
the Emperor's ministers to drop the firmer article
asunjuft, and to explain the latter in fulch a man-
ner, that he could agree to it, without openly re-
nouncing the Proteflant religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Land- The:C -

h cr in

i , n h; h

grave was impatient to finil a ceremony which, tlur.::,ror
how mortifying soever, had been declared necef- rese¢vl
fary towards his obtaining pardon. The Emperor
was feated on a magnificent throne, with all the
ensigns of his dignity, surrounded by a numerous
train of the Princes of the Empire, among whom
was Henry of Brunswick, lately the Landgrave's
prisoner, and tnow, by a sudden reverse of fortune, a
fpedator of his humiliation. The Landgrave was
introduced with great solemnity, and advancing to-
wards the throne, fell upon his knees. His chancel-
lor, who walked behind him, immediately read, by
his master's command, a paper which contained an
humbleconfellion of the crime whereof he had been
guilty; an acknowledgment that he had merited oni
that account the most revere puniilhment; an abib-
lute resignation of himself and his dominions to be
disposed of at the Emperor's pleasure; a filbmillive
petition for pardon, his hopes of which were fotund-
ed entirely on the Emperor's clemency; and itcon-
cluded, with promises of behaving, for the future,
likea subjet, whose principles of loyalty and obe-
dience would be confirmed, and would even de-
rive new force from the sentiments of gratitude

which

BooT IX. which must hereafter fill and animate his heart,

!547. While the chancellor was reading this abject de-

claration, the eyes of all the fpedtators were fixed
on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could behold
a Prince, so powerful as well as high-fpirited, siing
for mercy in the posture of a filppliant, without be-
ing touched with commiseration, and perceiving
serious refletions arise in their minds upon the in-
stability and emptiness of human grandeur. The
Emperor viewed the whole tranfadion with an
haughty, unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profund silence himself, made a sign to one of his
secretaries to read his answer; the tenor of which
was, That though he might havejuftly inflicted on
him the grievous punishment which his crimes de-
served, yet, prompted by his own generosity, moved
by the solicitations of several Princes in behalf of the
Landgrave, and influenced by his penitential ac-
knowledgments, he would not deal with him ac-
cording to the rigour ofjuitice, and would filbjeEt
him to no penalty which was not specified in the
articles that he had already subscribed. The mo-
ment the secretary had finished, Charles turned a-
way abruptly without deigning togive the unhappy
suppliant any sign of compassion or reconcilement.
He did not even desire him to rife from his knees;
which the Landgrave having ventured to do un-
bidden, advanced towards the Emperor with an in-
tention to kifs his hand, flattering himself, that his
guilt being now fully expiated, he might presume to
take that liberty. But the Eledor of Brandenburg
perceiving that this familiarity would be offensive
to the Emperor, interposed, and desired the Land-
grave to go along with him and Maurice to the
Duke of Alva's apartments in the cattle.

HE was, received and entertained by that

nobleman with the respect and courtesy due to
such a guest. But, after supper, while he was
engaged in play, the Duke took the Elelor

and

and Maurice aside, and communicated to them BooK IX.
theEmperor's orders that the Landgrave must re- 5,.
main a prisoner in that place under the cuflody'of He * de-
a Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto enter- taied a
tained the mofl distant suspicion of the Emperor's
sincerity and rectitude of intention, their furprize
was exceflive, and their indignation not inferior to
it, on discovering how greatly they had been de-
ceived themselves, and how infamously abused in
having been made the instruments of deceiving and
ruining their friend. They had recourse to com-
plaints, to arguments and to intreaties, in order to
save themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate
him out of the wretched situation into which he had
been betrayed by too great confidence in them. But
the Duke of Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded
the neceflity of executing the Emperor's commands.
By this time it grew late, and the Landgrave, who
knew nothing of what had passed, nor dreaded the
snare in which he was entangled, prepared for de-
parting, when the fatal orders were intimated to
him. Hewasftruck dumb atfirft with aflonifhment,
but after being silent a few moments, he broke out
into all the violent expressions which horror at in-
justice accompanied with fraud naturally suggests.
He complained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed;
sometimes inveighing againfl the Emperor's arti-
sices as unworthy of a great and generous Prince;
fumetimes censuring the credulity of his friends in
trulting to Charles's insidious promises; bometimes
charging them with meanness in slooping to lend
their afliftance towards the execution of such a perfi-
dious and dishonourable scheme; and in the end he
required them to remember their engagements to
his children, and instantly to fulfil them. They, al-
ter giving way for a little to the torrent of his pas-
sion, solemnly asserted their own innocence a:id up-
right intention in the whole tranfa.tion, and en-
couraged him to hope, that as soon as they law the

Emperor,

Boos Ix. Emperor, they would obtain redress of an injury,
'. .. which affected their own honour, no less than it did

his liberty. At the fame time, in order to sooth his
rage and impatience, Maurice remained with him
during the night, in the apartment where he was
confined d

TheEle6tor NEXT morning, the Elector and Maurice ap-
fur,"ant" plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the in-
M:urice to- famy to which they would be exposed throughout
licit in v.iin
so: his li- Germany, if the Landgrave were detained in cul-
berty. tody; that they would not have advised, nor would

he himself have consented toan interview, if they
had suspected that the iofs of his liberty was to be
the consequence of his fiubmiffion; that they were
bound to procure his release, having plighted their
faith to that effect, and engaged their own persons
as sureties for his. Charles liflened to their earnest
remonflrances with the utmost coolness. He now
flood no longer in need of their services, and they
had the mortification to find that their former ob-
fequioufnefs was forgotten, and little regard paid
to their interceflion. He was ignorant, he told
them, of their particular or private transactions
with the Landgrave, nor was his conduCt to be
regulated by there; though he knew well what
he himlelt had promised, which was not that
the Landgrave should be exempt from all re-
itraint, but that he should not be kept a priloner
during life '. Having said this with a pe-
remptory and decisive tone, he put an end to

the

d Sleid. 433. Thuan. 1.iv. 147. Struv. corp. his.
Germ. ii. 10$2.

' Accoiding to several hiaofians of great name, the

Emnpcror, in his treaty with the Landgrave. Itipulatcd
that he would not detain him in any prison But in exe-
cuting the deed, which was written in the Gerain tongue,
the Imperial miniffters fraudulently substitutcd the word
erviger infltcd of' einger, und thus the treaty in place
of a prounife that he should not be detained in any pri-
son, containcd only an engagenient that he Should not be

(letainc'

the conference; and they feeing no probability, at BOOR IX.
that time, of making any impreflion upon the "
Emperor, who seemed to have taken his refolu- 5
tion deliberately, and to be obitinately bent on
adhering to it, were obliged to acquaint the un-
fortunate prisoner with the ill success of their en-
deavours in his behalf. This disappointment threw
him into a new and more violent transport of rage,
so that to prevent his proceeding to some desperate
extremity, the EleCtor and Maurice promised that
they would not quit the Emperor, until, by the
frequency and fervour of their importunity, they
had extorted his content to set him free. They
accordingly renewed their solicitations a few days
afterwards, but found Charles more haughty and
intratable than before, and were warned that if
they touched again upon a subjec so disagreeable,
and with regard to which he had determined to
hear nothing farther, he would instantly give orders
to convey the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurt-
ing the Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed zeal
to serve him, they not only desisted, but left the
court, and as' they did not choose to meet the first
rallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning
the cause of their departure, they informed him of
it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to fulfil
all that he had promised to the Emperor, as the
molt certain means of procuring a speedy release,

detained in perpetual imprisonment. But authors eminent for
hiltorical knowledge and critical accuracy have called in
ilueflion the truth of this common fiory. ' he silence of
bleidan with regard to it, as well as its not being mentioned
in the various memorials which he has published concerning
the Landgrave's imprilonment, greatly favour this opinion.
But as several books which contain the information necessary
towards difcufling this point, with accuracy, are written in
the German language, which I do not underfiand, I cannot
pretend to enquire into this matter with the fame accuracy,
with which I have endeavoured to fettle some other contro-
verted tads that have occurred in the courfc of this hillory,
See Struv. Corp. 1052. Mdlheim's Eccles. Hll.' vol. ii. p.
i61, 162. Engl. Edit.

VOL. II. L WHAT;VER

t5i

B9oo IX. WHATEVER violent emotions their abandon-

547. ing his cause in this manner occasioned, his im-

His impati- patience to recover liberty made him follow their
restraint. advice. He paid the fum which had been in-

posed on him, ordered his fortresses to be razed,
and renounced all alliances that could give offence.
This prompt compliance with the will of the con-
queror produced no effe&. He was fRill guarded
with the fame vigilant severity; and being carried
about, with the degraded Ele&or of Saxony,
wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and
his triumph was each day renewed. The forti-
tude and equanimity, with which the Eletor bere
these repeated insults, were not more remarkable
than the Landgrave's fretfulness and impatience.
His adive impetuous mind could ill brook re-
ifraint; and refletion upon the shameful artifices
by which he had been decoyed into that situation,
as well as indignation at the injullice with which
he was frill detained in it, drove him often to the
wildeif excesses of passion.

The rigour THE people of the different cities, to whom
of the Em- Charles thus wantonly exposed these illustrious

ions in prisoners as a public fpedacle, were sensibly
Germany. touched with such an insult offered to the Gcrn;a-

nic body, and murmured loudly at this indecent
treatment 6f two of its greatest Princes. They
had soon other causes of complaint, and fuclh as
affeced: them more nearly. Charles proceeded to
add oppreflion to insult, and arrogating to himself
all the rights of a conqueror, exercised them witi
the utmost rigour. He ordered his troops to seize
the artillery and military flores belonging to such
as had been members of the Smalkaldic league,
and hiaving collected upwards of five hundred
pieces of cannon, a great number irn that age, he
sent part <of them into the Low-Countries, part
into Italy;, hd part into Spain, in order to spread

by
158

by this means the fame of his -success, and that BOOK -.
they might serve as monuments of his having.fub- 147.
dued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He
then levied by his whole authority, large rums as
well upon those who had served him with fidelity
during the war, as upon such as had been in arms
againfl him; upon the former, as their contingent
towards a war, which having been undertaken, as
lie pretended, for the common benefit, ought to be
carried on at the common charge, upon the latter,
as a fine by way of punishment for their rebellion.
By there exactions he amassed above one million fx
hundred thousand crowns, a rum which appeared
prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so ge-
neral was the consternation which had seized t)jc
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at the fame time,
there extraordinary firetches of power greatly
alarmed a people, jealous of their privileges, and
habituated during several ages to confider.the Ir.-
perial authority as neither extensive nor formidable.
This discontent and resentment, how industriously
soever they concealed them, became universal.;
and the more there paflions were restrained and
kept down for the present, the more likely were
they to buxrft out soon with additional violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans :like 'erdinand's

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his iub- fencrtchn
jeSts in Bohemia with still greater -rigour. That the liberties
kingdom possessed privilegs .and immuniti.s . hs min frub
extensive as thof. of any nation in whih ;the -fU- jcas.
dal intfitutions were established. The prerogativ
of their Kings was extremely limited, an; the
crown itself eletive. Ferdinand, when pla.d mt
the throne, had confirmed: their liberties.lwith
every solemnity prescribed' by, their excelive fpl?-
citudc for the security of a dontitution of gover.-7

L z ment

Boo Ix ment to which they were extremely attached. He

,547. roon began, however, to be weary of a jurifdic-

tion so much eircumfcribed, and to despise a fcep-
tre which he could not transmit to his poflerity;
and notwithstanding all his former engagements,
he attempted to overturn the constitution from its
foundations; that instead of an elective kingdom
he might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians
seemed resolved not to relinquish, tamely, privi-
leges which they had long enjoyed. At the fame
tirie, many of them having embraced the doc-
trines of the Reformers, the feeds of which John
Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in their
country about the beginning of the preceding cen-
tury, the desire of acquiring religious liberty
mingled itself with their zeal for their civil rights;
and these two kindred passions heightening, a,
usual, each other's force, precipitated them imme-
diately into violent measures. They had not only
refused to serve their sovereign against the confe-
derates of Smalkalde, but having entered into a
close alliance with the Eletor of Saxony, they
boind themselves, by a solemn afrociation, to
defend their ancient constitution; and to persist,
until they should obtain such additional grants as
they thought necessary towards perfeAing the
present model of their government, or rendering
it more permanent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a
nobleman of diftintion, to be their general; and
levied an army of thirty thousand men to enforce
their petitions. But either from the weakness of
their leader, or from the dissensions in a great
unwieldy body, which having united hastily, was
not thoroughly compaCted, or from some other
unknown cause, the subsequent operations of the
Bohemians bore no proportion to the zeal and ar-
dour with which they took their first resolutions.
They suffered themselves to be amused so long
with negotiations and overtures of different kinds,

that
x6o

that before they could enter Saxony, the battle Boo° lx.
of Muhlberg was fought, the Elector deprived i47.
of his dignity and territories, the Landgrave con-
fined to close custody, and the league of Smal-
kalde entirely dissipated. The fame dread of the
Emperor's power which had seized the reft of the
Germans, reached them. As soon as their fove-
reign approached with a body of Imperial troops,
they instantly dispersed, thinking of nothing but
how to atone for their pals guilt, and to acquire
some hope of forgiveness, by a prompt fubmiflion.
But Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full
of that implacable resentment which inflames
Monarchs whose authority has been despised, was
not to be mollified by the late repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious fubjets to their
duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intreaties and
tears of the citizens of Prague, who appeared
before him in the posture of suppliants, and im-
plored for mercy. The sentence which he pro-
nounced against them was rigorous to extremity;
he abolished many of their privileges, he abridged
(thers, and new modelled the constitution accord-
ing to his pleasure. He punished many of those
who had been most active in forming the late
association against him with death, and gill a
greater number with confiscation of their goods,
or perpetual banishment. He obliged all his sub-
je'ts, of every condition, to give up their arms
to be deposited in forts where he planted garri-
sons; and after disarming his people, he loaded
them with new and exorbitant taxes. Thus, by
an ill conducted and unsuccessful effort to extend
their privileges, the Bohemians not only enlarged
the sphere of the royal prerogative which they
intended to have circumfcribed,but they almost an-
nihilated those liberties which they aimed at elta-
blifhing on a broader and more secure foundation ".

n Sleid. 408, 419, 434. Ttuan. I, iv. 129, 15o. Struv.
Co.p. ii.

I6i

THEi
L3

Bó . ,i ..THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as

,-,7 he imagined, fubdtied the independent and stub-

Diet held at born spirit of the Germans by the terror of arms
AuSgburg. and the rigour of punishment, held a diet at

Augsburg, in order to compose finally the con-
troverfies with regard. to religion, which had tl
long disturbed the Empire. il-e durst not, how-
ever, trust the determination of a matter so in-
teresting to the free suffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds now were to fubjeftion.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanish
troops, and assigned them quarters there. The
reft of his soldiers he' cantoned in the adjacent
villages; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were surround-
ed by the fame army which had overcome their
countrymen. Immediately after his public entry,
Charles gave a proof of the violence with which
he intended to proceed. He took poffeflion by
force of the cathedral together with one of thit
principal churches;. and his priefis having, by
various ceremonies, purified them from the pol-
lution with which they supposed the unhailowed
miniitrations of the Protellants to have d&fiied
them, they re-established with great pomp the
rites of the Romish worship .

}'or exhortp THE concourse of members to this diet wa.s
them to tub- extraordinary ; the importance of the affairs coi.-
,,it to tie
c'.;nlcra cerning which it was to deliberate, and the Icar
Loulil. of giving offence to the Emperor by an abfelicc

which lay open to mifconftru.tion, brought toge-
ther almost all the Princes, nobles and rcprci;'n-
tatives of cities who had right to lit in that afi:.n-
bly. The Emperor, in the itecch with which he
opened the meeting, called their attention inll;:
diately to the point, which teemed ciicly t')

o Sle1i. 435, 437.

IlCI'ri.
162

merit it. Having mentioned the fatal effects of Boo 1x.
the religious dissensions which had arisen in Ger- '547.
many, and taken notice of his own unwearied
endeavours to procure a general council, which
alone could provide a remedy adequate to these
evils, he exhorted them to recognize its authority,
and to stand to the award of an afembly, to
which they had originally appealed, as having the
file right of judgment in the cafe.

BUT the council, to which Charles wished Variousre-

them to refer all their controversies, had, by this hlutioncisi
time, undergone a violent change. The fear and
jealousy, with which the Emperor's first success
against the confederates of Smalkalde had infpi-
red the Pope, continued to encreafe. Not satis-
fled with attempting to retard the progress of the
Imperial arms, by the fldden recall of his troops,
Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he must soon feel,
and againif whom he could not be too hasty in
taking precautions. He foresaw that the imme-
diate effect of the Emperor's acquiring absolute
power in Germany, would be to render him en-
tirely master of all the decisions of the council,
if it should continue to meet in Trent. It was
dangerous to allow a Monarch, so ambitious, to
get the command of this formidable engine,
vwhich he might employ at pleasure to limit or
overturn the Papal authority. As the only me-
tlod of preventing this, he determined to tranf-
hte the council to some city more immediately
under his own jurifdidtion, and at a greater dif-
tance from the terror of the Emperor's arms, or
the reach of his influence. An incident fortunate-
ly occurred which gave this measure the appear-
ance of being neceflary. One or two of the fa-
thers of the council, together with some of their
domestics, happening to die suddenly, the phyfi-

L 4 cians,

I63

BOOK X. cians, deceived by the symptoms, or suborned by

1,47. the Pope's legates, pronounced the distemper to

be infectious and pestilential. Some of the pre-
lates, struck with a panic, retired; others were
impatient to be gone; and after a short confulta-

March ii. tion, the council was translated to Bologna, a city
Trannfated subjed to the Pope. All the bishops in the Im-
from Trent - P o n i -
to Bologna. perial interest, warmly opposed this resolution, as

taken without necessity, and founded on false or
frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and
most of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's ex-
press command, remained at Trent; the reft, to
the number of thirty-four, accompanying the le-
gates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced, in
that very assembly, which had been called to heal
the divisions ps Christendom; the fathers of Bo-
logna inveighing against those who itaid at Trent,
as contumacious and regardless of the Pope's au-
thority; while the others accused them of being
so far intimidated by the fears of imaginary danger,
as to remove to a place where their confiultations
could prove of no service towards re-establishing
peace and order in Germany P.

Symptoms THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed
,pitwl' thie all his interest to procure the return of the coun-
I'oi, and cil to Trent. But Paul, who highly applauded
mpcror. his own sagacity in having taken a itep which

put it out of Charles's power to acquire the cli-
redtion of that assembly, paid po regard to a re-
qutfl, the object of which was so extremely (b-
vious. The lilmmcr was consumed in fruitles
negotiations with reipeft to this point, the im-
portunity of the one and the obflinacy of the
othrll daily incrcafing. At last an event happened
.vhicih uvidcicn( the brlach irreparably, and rer-
dleitd thc ].:pce utterly avxerli from liftenirg to

, y pic(ftil that calinc from the Emperor,

P 1'. ';,ul, 2.,8. &c

Cha rlcs,
164

Charles, as has been already observed, had so vio- BooK IX.
lently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's ,54
ion, by refuting to grant him the investiture of
Parma and Placentia, that he had watched ever
since that time with all the vigilance of resentment
for an opportunity of revenging that injury. He
had endeavoured to precipitate his father into
open hostilities against the Emperor, and had
earnestly solicited the King of France to invade
Italy. His hatred and resentment extended to all
those whom he knew that the Emperor favoured ;
he persecuted Gonzaga, governor of Milan, with
ill offices, and had encouraged Fiefco in his at-
tempt upon the life of Andrew Doria, because
both Gonzaga and Doria possessed a great degree
of the Emperor's esteem and confidence. His
malevolent and secret intrigues were not unknown
to the Emperor, who could not be more desirous
to take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga and
Doria were to be employed as his instruments in
inflicting it. Farnese, by the profligacy of his
life, and by enormities of every kind, equal to
those committed by the worif tyrants who have
disgraced human nature, had rendered himself so
odious, that they thought any violence whatever
might be attempted against him. They soon
lfund among his own fubjeds, persons who were
eager, and even deemed it meritorious to lend their
hands in such a service. As he, animated with the
iealoufy which ufilally poffelfes petty fovcrcigns,
had employed all the cruelty and fraud, whcrcby
they endeavour to flpply their dcfect of power, in
order to humble and extirpate the nobility (fibjtcd
to his government, five noblemen of the greateftl The nf.ll'i.
difcincion in Placentia, combined to avenge tlhe ,:.i..,' thle
i:njtries, which they themselves had liiiTcrcd, as
vwll as those which he had oflcred to tlcicr (,r1:r.
They formed their plan in conjunctii n with G;.,I-
2iga; but it remains uncertain whether lhe ori)iiiiliy

1; ?,._"b ld

. Boot IX. suggested the scheme to them, or only approved

of what they proposed, and co-operated in carry-
ing it on. They concerted all the previous steps
with such foresight, conducted their intrigues with
such secrecy, and displayed fich courage in the
execution of their design, that it may be ranked
among the most audacious deeds of that nature
s,,t. ,0. mentioned in history. One body of the confpi-

rators furprized, at mid-day, the gates of the
citadel of Placentia where Farnese resided, over.
powered his guards, and murdered him. Ano-
tler party of them made themselves masters of
the town, and called upon their fellow-citizens to
take arms, in order to reaflume their liberty. The
multitude ran towards the citadel, from which
three great guns, a signal concerted with Gon-
zaga, had been fired; and before they could gue's
the cause or the authors of the tumult,"hey saw
the lifeles body of the tyrant hanging by the
heels from one of the windows of the citadel.
But so universally deteflable had he become, that
not one exprefled any sentiment of concern at
such a fad reverse of fortune, or of indignation
at this ignominious treatment of a sovereign
Prince. The exultation at the success of the con-
ipiracy was general, and all applauded the adois
il) it, as the deliverers of their country. The body
v,.as tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the
citadel, and expoifcl to the insults of the rabble;
the rcit of the citizens returned to their usual occu-
paltiuns, as if nothing extraordinary had happened.

;riti. Ei::rFOi next morning, a body of troops ir-

,.: ,,,r';,,:1 riving from the frontiers of the Milanese, where
.i.li 'i 'r- tlhey had been polled in expectation of the event,

t(,ok polii'lion of the city in the Emperor's namc,
and reinflatcd the inhabitants in the poffelfon of
thilir ancient privileges. Parmna, which the lm-
perialills attlempted likewise to futrprize, was saved

by

by the vigilance and fidelity of the officers whom BooK IX.
Farnese had intrusted with the command of the ,le
garrison. The death of a son whom, notwith- 57
standing his infamous vices, Paul loved with an
excess of parental tenderness, overwhelmed him
with the deepest affliction; and the loss of a city,
of such consequence as Placentia, greatly embit-
tered his sorrow. He accused Gonzaga, in open
consistory, of having committed a cruel murder in
order to prepare the way for an unjust usurpation,
and immediately demanded of the Emperor satis-
fadion for both; for the former, by the punishment
of Gonzaga; for the latter, by the restitution of
Placentia to his grandson Oaavio, its rightful
owner. But Charles, who, rather than quit a prize
of such value, was willing to expose himself to the
imputation of being acceifary to the crime which
had given an opportunity of seizing it, and to bear
the infamy of defrauding his own fon-in-law of
the inheritance which belonged to him, eluded all
his solicitations, and determined to keep poTef-
sion of the city together with its territoties q.

THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so The rope

courts the

rapacious, as to be refrained by no consideration allilce of
either of decency or justice, transported the Pope th leldn h

,* r i j i * /*

i j * i * Kin. andi the

io far beyond his usual moderation and caution, Vcrt!,ns.
that he was eager to take arms against the Emperor
in order to be avenged on the murderers of his
1)n], and to recover the inheritance wrested from
his family. Conscious, however, of his own in-
ability to contend with such an enemy, he warmly
(elicited the French King and the republick of
Venice tojoin in anoffenfive league against Charles.
BuLt Henry was intent at that time on other ob-
jcts. His ancient allies the Scots, having been

IF. Paul. 257. Pallavic. 41, 4Z. Thuani iv. 156. Memi.

de Ribier. 59, 67. Natalis Comitia Hiftor. lib. iii .
p. 64.

defcated

o. o [. defeated by the English in one of the greatef
, -4. battles ever fought between there two rival nations,

he was about to fend a numerous body of veteran
troops into that country, as well to preserve it
from being conquered, as to gain the acquisition
of a new kingdom to the French monarchy, by
marrying his son the Dauphin to the young Queen
,if Scotland. An undertaking accompanied with
such manifefr advantages, the success of which
appeared to be so certain, was not to be relin-
quifhed for the remote profpe(t of benefit from
a:n alliance depending upon the precarious life of
a Pope of fourscore, who hlad nothing at heart
but the gratification of his own private resent-
ment. Instead, therefore, of rushing headlong
into the alliance proposed, Henry amused the
Pope with such general professions and promises,
.s might keep him from any thoughts of endea-
vouring to accommodate his differences with the
Emperor, but at the fame time avoided any fich
engagement as might occasion an immediate rup-
ture between Charles and himself, or precipitate
hirr into a war for which lie was not prepared.
The Venetians, though much alarmed at feeing
Placentia'in the hands of the Imperialilfs, imitated
the Mary conduat of the French King, which re-
fembled so ricarly the spirit with which they thern-
lelves ulually carried on their negotiations r.

,' ,;n(" Ct BUT, though the Pope found that it was not
Tion,,Sf'i, in lis power to light up immediately the flam(s
tLc lu un cl of war, he did not forget the injuries, which he
thel c:uncil - I
to 'r',,i. was obliged lor the prefcnt to endure; resent-

menct fcttlcd deeper in his mind, and became
more rancorous in proportion as he felt the dif-
ficulty of gratis ilg it. It was, while there fen-

Meln. *c! Rihlicr. ii. 63, 71, 85, 95. Paruta Illor.
ili V lnez. 199, 2-3. 'Ihuain. iv. 60o.

timents

timents of enmity were in full force, and the de- BoK IX.
fire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of 547.
Augsburg, by the Emperor's command, petiti-
oned the Pope, in name of the whole Germanic
body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to
join in this request. Having observed a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protef-
tants with refpef to the fubmillion which he had
required to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether intracable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdic-
tion upon certain conditions, he employed all his
address in order to gain or to divide them. He
threatened and over-awed the EleEtor Palatine,
a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance on
account of the afiftance which he had given to
the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of pro-
curing liberty for the Landgrave, together with
the formal confirmation of his own electoral dig-
nity, overcame Maurice's scruples, or prevented
him from opposing what he knew would be agree-
able to the Emperor. The Elector of Bran-
denburgh, less influenced by religious zeal than
any Prince of that age, was easily induced to imi-
tate their example in assenting to all that the
Emperor required. The deputies of the cities
remained still to be brought over; they were more
tenacious of.their principles, and though every
thing that. could operate either on their hopes or
fears was tried, the utmost that they would pro-
mise was to acknowledge the jurifdition of the
council, if effectual provision were made for fe-
curing the divines of all parties free access to
that alfembly, with entire liberty of debate; and
if all points in controversy were decided accord-
ing to scripture and the usage of the primitive

church.

169

CKo Ii. church. But when the memorial containing this
,547. declaration was presented to the Emperor, he ven-

tured to put in practice a very extraordinary arti-
fice. Without reading the paper, or taking any
oa. 19. notice of the conditions on which they had i rfifted,

he seemed to take it for granted that they had
complied with his demand, and gave thanks to the
deputies for their full and unreserved fibmiffion
to the decrees of the council. The deputies,
though astonished at what they had heard, did
not attempt to set him right, both parties being
better pleased that the matter should remain under
this state of ambiguity, than to push for an ex-
planation, which muff have occefioned a dispute,
and would have led, perhaps, to a rupture '.

The Pore HAVING obtained this seeming fibmiflion of
demand. the diet to the authority of the council, Charles

employed that as an argument to enforce their
petition for its return to Trent. But the Pope,
from the satisfaction of mortifying the Emperor,
as well as from his own aversion to what was
demanded, resolved, without hesitation, that this
petition should be rejeced; though in order to
avoid the imputation of being influenced. wholly
by resentment, he had the address to throw it
upon the fathers at Bologna, to put a:direc ne-
gative upon the request. He referred to their
consideration the petition of the diets and they,
ready to confirm by their assent whatever the
Dec. ho. legates were pleased to dictate, declared that the

council could not, in confiffence with its dignity,
return to Trent, unless the prelates who, by
remaining there, had discovered a.fchifmatick
spirit, would firif repair to Bologna, and join
their brethren; and that, even after their junc-
tion, the council could not renew its conlulta-

' F. Paul, 259. Slid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. 155

tions

171

tions with any profped of benefit to the church, if Boon Ix.
the Germans did not prove their intention of obey- 7-J
ing its future decrees to be fincerc, by yielding im-
mediate obedience to those which it had already
pafied '.

THIS answer was communicated to the Emperor The r.-,.

by the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted him r inl thr.
to comply with demands that appeared to be so c;uncil o¢
reasonable. But Charles was better acquainted o'og"'
with the duplicity of the Pope's character than to
be deceived by such a gross artifice; he knew that
the prelates of Bologna durst utter no sentiment
but what Paul inspired; and, therefore, overlook-
ing them as mere instruments in the hand of ano-
ther, he confidered their reply as a full discovery
of the Pope's intentions. As he could no longer
hope to acquire such an ascendant in the council as
to render it subservient to his own plan, he saw it
to be neceifary that Paul should not have it in his
power to turn against him the authority of so ve-
nerable an assembly. In order to prevent this, he ,54f.
sent two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the Ja"nY Is-
presence of the legates, protested, That the tranf-
lation of the council to that place had been un-
neceflary, and founded on false or frivolous pre-
texts; that while it continued to meet there, ij
ought to be deemed an unlawful and hchifmatical
conventicle; that all its decisions ought of courle
to be held as null and invalid; and that as the
Pope, together with the corrupt ccclefiafics who
depended on him, had abandoned the care of the
church, the Emperor, as its protector, would
employ all the power which God had committed
to him, in order to preserve it fiom those cala-
mities with which it was threatened. A few jgn. :3.
days after, the Impcrial amballadlor at Rome dc-

'F. Paul, 25o. Pallav. ii. 49.

man dcd

oo" I. manded an audience of the Pope, and in prefenco
1548. of all the Cardinals as well as foreign ministers

protested against the proceedings of the prelates ai
Bologna, in terms equally harsh and disrespectful

The Empe- IT was not long before Charles proceeded tc
Jor prepares
'a fytep, rtcarry these threats, which greatly alarmed botlh
serve as the Pope and council at Bologna, into execution.
rule of faith
inGermany. He let the diet know the ill success of his endea-

vours to procure a favourable answer to their peti-
tions, and that the Pope, equally regardless of their
entreaties, and of his services to the church, had re-
fused to gratify them by allowing the council to
meet again at Trent; that, though all hope of hold-
ing this afiembly in a place where they might look;
for freedom of debate and judgment, was not to
be given up, the profped of it was, at present, dif-
tant and uncertain: that, in the mean time, Ger-
many was torn in pieces by religious dissensions,
the purity of the faith corrupted, and the minds of
the people disquieted with a multiplicity of new
opinions and controversies formerly unknown
among Christians; that, moved by the duty which
lie owed to them as their sovereign, and to the
Church as its protector, he had employed some
divines, of known abilities and learning, to prepare
a fyflem of doctrine, to which all should conform
until a council, such as they wished for, could be
convocated. This system was compiled by Pflug,
Helding and Agricola, of whom the two former
were dignitaries in the Romish church, but re-
markable for their pacific and healing spirit; the
last was a Proteflant divine, fufpe6ted, not with-
out reason, of having been gained by bribes and
promises, to betray or mislead his party on this
occalion. The articles presented to the diet o0

uS. Paul, 264. Pallav. 5, Sleid. 4,,. Goldalti Con-
llit. Imperial. i. 561.

Ratifhce:
?z7

Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred BooK IX-
and forty-one, in order to reconcile the con-'V"
tending parties, served as a model for the pre- '54 8
sent work. But as the Emperor's situation was
much changed since that time, and he found it
no longer necessary to manage the Proteflants
with the fame delicacy as at that juncture, the
conceflions in their favour were not now so nu-
merous, nor did they extend to points of so much
confcquence. The treatise contained a compleat
fyllern of theology, conformable in almost every
article to the tenets of the Romi(h church,
though expressed, for the most part, in the softest
words, or in scriptural phrases, or in terms of
studied ambiguity. Every doftrine, however,
peculiar to Popery, was retained; and all the
rites, which the Protestants condemned as in-
ventions of men, introduced into the worihip of
God, were enjoined. With regard to two points
only, Come relaxation of their rigour was grant-
ed, and some latitude in practice admitted.
Such ecclesiastics as had married, and would
not put away their wives, were allowed, never-
thelefs, to perform all the functions of their fa-
cred office; and those provinces which had been
acculomred to partake of the cup, as well as of
the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
were still indulged the privilege of receiving
both. Even these were declared to be con-
ceflions for the fake of peace, and granted
only for a season, in compliance with the weak-
nels or prejudices of their countrymen (x).

THIS system of doctrine, known afterwards'hiswhich

by the name of the Interim, because it contained ih, interm,
temporary regulations which were to continue lcys b,-

May ,5.

(x) P. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 60. Sleid. 453, 457. Struv.
Corp. 1054. Goldalt. Conftit. Imper. i. 51s.

Vol. III. M no

BooK IX. no longer in force than until a free general coun.

V cil could be held, the Emperor presented to the
'548' diet with a pompous declaration of his sincere

intention to re-establish tranquillity and order
in the church, as well as of his hopes that their
adopting these regulations, would contribute
greatly to bring about that defireable event.
It was read, in pretence, according to form.
As soon as it was finished, the archbifhopof
Mentz, president of the electoral college, rose
up hastily, and having thanked the Emperor for
his unwearied and pious endeavours in order
to restore peace to the church, he, in the name
of the diet, signified their approbation of the
system of doctrine which he had prepared, toge-
ther with their resolution of conforming to it in
every particular. The whole assembly was a-
mazed at a declaration so unprecedented and
unconstitutional, as well as at the Elecor's pre-
fumption in pretending to deliver the sense of
the diet, upon a point, which had not hitherto
been the subjet of consultation or debate. But
not one member had the courage to contradict

and extorts what the EleLtor had said; some being overawed
their aropr- by fears, others remaining lilent through com-

plaifance. The Emperor held the archbilhop's
declaration to be a fiull conititutional ratification
of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the ob-
fervance of it, as a decree of the Empire (y).

New and DURING this diet, the wife and childrenof
frt;tliefs b. the Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of
I Citations
tor tho Saxony, endeavoured to interest the members

eL;ndgravcsin behalf of that unhappy Prince, who flill
ty languilled in confinement. But Charles, whov

did not choose to be brought under the necelfity
of reje'ting any requelt that came from fuchi ;
refpetable body, in order to prevent their re-
presentations, laid before the diet an account of
his tranfadions with the 'Landgrave, together

() Slcid. 4(o. F. Paul, a73. Pallav. 63.

xvkht

with the motives which had at first induced him BooK IX.
to detain that Prince in cuflody, and which ren. a
dered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep him 1548'
still under restraint. It was no eary matter to
give any good reason for an action, incapable
of being jultified. But he thought the most fri-
volous pretexts might be produced in an as-
fembly willing to be deceived, and afraid of
nothing so much as to discover that it saw his
condu& in its true colours. His account of his
own conduA was accordingly admitted to be
fully fatisfa&ory, and after some feeble intrea-
ties that he would extend his clemency to
his unfortunate prisoner, the Landgrave's con-
cerns were no more mentioned. (z)

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable

impreflion which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his resentment, inverted Mau-
rice, in the elecoral dignity, with all the le-
gal formalities. The ceremony was performed,
with extraordinary pomp, in an open court,
so near the apartment in which the degraded
Eletor was kept a prisoner, that he could
view it from his windows. Even this insult did
not ruffle his usual tranquillity; and turning his
eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival
receiving those ensigns of dignity of which he
had been firipped, without uttering one fen-
timent unbecoming the fortitude which he
had preserved amidf all his calamities (a).

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of theTheInterim

,.eq lly di[-

diet, the Emperor ordered the Interim to bea'proveato
published in the German as well as Latin lan-by Prtcf-
guage. It met with the usual reception of con-Papiin

(z) Sleid. 441.
(a) Thuan. Hilt. lib. v 176. Struv. Corp. S054. Invefli-

tura Mauritii a Mammerano Lucemburgo dcfcripta ap.
cairdium ii. o58.

M ? ciliating

BooK IX.ciliating schemes when propo'ed to men heated
L".vTwith disputation; both parties declaimed against

54 it with equal violence. The Protestants con-

demned it as a fytlem containing the groleft er-
rors of Popery, disguised with so little art, that
it could impose only on the most ignorant, or on
those who, by wilfully (hutting their eyes, fa-
voured the deception. The Papilts inveighed
against it, as a work, in which rome doctrines
of the church were impiously given up, others
meanly concealed, and all of them delivered in
terms calculated rather to deceive the unwary,
than to inflrut the ignorant, or to reclaim those
who were enemies to the truth. While the Lu-
theran divines fiercely attacked it, on one hand,
the general of the Dominicans, with no less
vehemence impugned it, on the other. But
at Rome, as soon as the contents of the Interim
came to be known, the indignation of the
courtiers and ecclefiafticks rose to the greatest
height. They exclaimed against the Emperor's
profane encroachment on the sacerdotal func-
tion, in presuming, with the concurrence of an
assembly of laymen, to define articles of faith,
and to regulate modes of worship. They com-
pared this rash deed to that of Uzziah, who,
with an unhallowed hand, had touched the ark
of God; or to the bold attempts of those Em-
perors, who had rendered their memory de-
teltable, by endeavouring to model the Chris-
tian church according to their pleasure. They
even affected to find out a resemblance between
the Emperor's conduct and that of Henry VIII.
and exprefled their fear of his imitating the
example of that Monarch, by usurping the title
as well as jurifdintion helonging to the head of
the church. All therefore, contended, with
one voice, that as the foundations of ecclefiafi-
cal authority were now' lhaken, and the whole
fabric ready to be overturned by a new enemy;
fime powerful method of dl'ence muff be

provided,
176

provided, and a vigorous refit'ance must beBooK IX.
made, at the beginning, before he grew too
formidable to be opposed. 154.

THE Pope, whose judgment was improvedThe fcnti-

by longer experience in great tranfadions, as mthe.,.
well as by a more extensive observation of hu- with rcgarl
man affairs, viewed the matter with more acutet° "
jdicernment, and derived comfort from the
very circumstance which filled them with ap-
prehension. He was allonilhed, that a Prince
of iuch superior sagacity as the Emperor,
should be 1o intoxicated with a single victory,
as to imagine that he might give iaw to man.
kind, and decide even in thole matters, with
regard to which they are most impatient of
dominion. He saw that, by joining any one
of the contending parties in Germany, Charles
might have had it in his power to have op-
pressed the other, but that the prefilmption of
success had now inspired him with the vain
thought of his being able to domineer over
both; he foretold that g fyltem, which all at-
tacked, and none defended, could not be of
long duration; and that, for this reason, there
was no need of his interposing in order to halten
its fall; for as soon as the powerful hand which
now upheld it was withdrawn, it would fink of
its own accord, and be fprgotten for ever (b).

THE Ernperor, fond of hisown plan, adheredl' Fnime

to his resolution of carrying it into full executi. tomplidiic
on. But though the Elesor Palatine, the Elec- tcr,,h "
tor of Brandenburg, and Malrice, influenced by
the fame considerations as formerly, seemed rea-
dy to yield implicit obedience to whatever lie
liould enjoin, he met not every where with a
like obsequious fubmillion. John Marquis of
Biandenburgh Anfpach, although he iad taken
(6) Sicid. 468. F. Paul, 271, 277. Pa^llv. ii, 64.

M 3 part

177

BqoK IX. part with great zeal in the war against the con.
W%*" federates of Smalkalde, refused to renounce doc.
3548. trines which he held to be sacred, and remind.

ing the Emperor of the repeated promires which
he had given his Protestant allies of allowing
them the free exercise of their religion, he claim-
ed, in consequence of there, to be exempted
from receiving the Interim. Some other Prin-
ces, also, ventured to mention the fame fcru-
ples, and to plead the fame indulgence. But
on this, as on other trying occasions, the firm-
ness of the Eletor of Saxony was most dif.
tinguifhed, and merited the highest praise.
Charles, well knowing the authority of his ex-
ample with all the Protestant party, laboured,
with the utmost earnefinefs, to gain his appro-
bation of the Interim, and by employing tome-
times promises of setting him at liberty, some.
times threats of treating him with greater harsh-
ness, attempted alternately to work upon his
hopes and fears. But he was, alike, regard-
]ess of both. After having declared his fixed
belief in the doctrines of the reformation, " I
cannot now, said he, in my old age, abandon the
principles, for which I early contended ; nor, in
order to procure freedom during a few declin-
ing years, will I betray that good cause, on
account of which I have suffered so much, and
am hill willing to susser. Better for me to en-
joy, in this solitude, the efleem of virtuous men,
together with the approbation of my own con-
science, than to return into the world, with the
imputation and guilt of apofacy, to disgrace and
embitter the remainder of my days." By this
magnanimous resolution, he let his countrymen
a pattern of conduci, so very different from that
which the Emperor wished to have exhibited
to them, that it drew upon him fresh marks
of his indignation. The rigour of his con-
finement was increased; the number of his ser-

vants

vants abridged; the Lutheran clergymen, whoBooK IX.
had hitherto been permitted to attend him, were k"J
dismissed; and even the books of devotion, '548.
which had been his chief consolation during a
tedious imprisonment, were taken from him ().
The Landgrave of Hesse, his companion in mif-
fortine, did not maintain the fame constancy.
His patience and fortitude were both so much
exhausted by the length of his confinement, that
willing to purchase freedom at any price, he
wrote to the Emperor, offering not only to ap-
prove of the Interim, but to yield an unreserved
firbmiifon to his will in every other particular.
But Charles who knew, that what course soever
the Landgrave might hold, neither his example
nor authority would prevail on his children or
fubjets to receive the Interim, paid no regard
to his offers. lie was kept confined as ftridly
as ever; and while he suffered the cruel mortifi-
cation of having his conduct set in contralt to
that of the Elector, he derived not the smallest
benefit from the mean ftep which exposcd him
to fich deserved censure (d).

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charleses 'fi.ugC

met with the molt violent oppolition to the In- againftre-
terim. These small common-wealths, the citizens ,ili"g the
of which were accustomed to liberty and inde-
pendence, had embraced the dodrines of the Re-
formation when first published with remarkable
eagerness; the bold spirit of innovation being pe-
culiarly suited to the genius of free government.
Among them, the Protestant teachers had made
the greatelt number of proselytes. The mods
eminent divines of the party were fettled there as
paltors. By having the direction of the schools
and other seminaries of learning, they had trained
up disciples as well inftrnued in the articles of
their faith, as zealous to defend them. Such per-

(c) Slcid. 462. (d) SlciJ. 462.

M 4 sons

BooK IX. sons were not to be guided by example, or sway.
"'v'd ed by authority, but having been taught to exa-

mine and to decide in matters of controversy,
thought that they were both qualified and enti-
tled tojudge for themselves. As soon as the con-
tents of the Interim were known, they, with one
voice, joined in refusing to admit it. Strafburg,
Conflance, Bremen, Magdeburgh, together with
many other towns of less note, presented remon-
firances to the Emperor, setting forth the irre-
gular and unconstitutional manner in which the
Interim had been enaged, and beseeching him
not to offer finch violence to their consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of doctrine and
worship, which appeared to them repugnant to
the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on so many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of there
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved if they could have been form-
ed into one body, lay To remote from each other,
that it was easy to oppress them separately, be-
fore it was possible for them to unite.

comelled IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor saw
ty violeneit to be requisite that his measures should be vi.

gorous, and executed with such rapidity as to al.
low no time for concerting any common plan of
opposition. Havinglaid down this maxim as the
rule of his proceedings, his firtt attempt was up-
on the city of Augsburg, which, though over-
awed by the pretence of the Spanish troops, he
knew to be as much dissatisfied with the Interim
as any in the Empire. He ordered one body of
there troops to seize the gates; he posted the reft
in different quarters of the city; and aufembling
Aug. 3. all the burgesses in the town, he, by his sole ab.

foluto

solute authority, published a decree abolifhingBooK IX
their present form of government, difbolving ail l'0V
their corporations and fraternities, and nominat- '54
ing a small number of persons, in whom he
veiled, for the future, the right of administration.
Each of the persons, thus chosen, took an oath
to observe the Interim. An at of power, so un-
precedented as well as arbitrary, which excluded
the body of the inhabitants from any Ihare in the
government of their own community, and filb-
jetted them to men who had no other merit than
their servile devotion to the Emperor's will, gave
general disgust but as they durst not venture
upon resistance, they were obliged to fibmit in
silence (e). From Augsburg, in which he left a
garrison, he proceeded to Uim, and new modell-
ing its government with the fame violent hand,
he seized such of their pastors as refused to sub-
scribe the Interim, committed them to prison,
and at his departure carried them along with him
in chains (f). By this feverity,he not only secured
the reception of the Interim in two of the most
powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft
what fiuch as continued refracory had to expect.
The effee of the example was as great as he
could have wished, and many towns, in order to
save themselves from the like vengeance, found
it neceflary to comply with what he enjoined.
This obedience, extorted by the rigour of au-
thority, produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the law,
as was barely sufficient to screen them from pu.
nifhment. Their preachers accompanied those ce-
remonies, the observation of which the Interim
prescribed, with such an explication of their ten-
dency, as served rather to confirm than to re-

(T) Slcid. 469.

(f) Sicid. 472;

move

BooK IX. move the scruples of their hearers with regard to
^VV^' them. The people, many of whom had grown
'548 up to mature years since the eflablilhment of the

reformed religion, and had been accultomed to
no other form of publick worship, beheld the
pompous pageantry of the popish service with
contempt or horror; and in moll places the Ro-
mifh ecclefiafticks who returned to take poflefli-
on of their churches could scarce be proterted
from insult, or their miniltrations from internup.
tion. Thus, notwithltanding the apparent com-
pliance of so many cities, the inhabitants being
accultomed to freedom, submitted with reluc-
tance to the power which now opprefled them.
Their underltandingas well as inclination revolt-
ed againfl the doetrines and rites imposed on
them; and though, for the present, they con-
cealed their indignation and resentment, it was
evident that these paflions could not always be
kept under restraint, but would break out at last
in effects proportional to their violence (g).

The Pope CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with
difhaiffes thz.

·

Council -thaving bended the flubboin spirit of the Ger-
fembled atmanstofuch general submission, departed for the
Bologna. Low-Countries, fully determined to compel the

citiesj which still flood out, to receive the In-
terim. He carried his two prisoners, the Elector
of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, along. with
him, either because he durst not leave them be-
hind him in Germany, or because he wished to
give his countrymen the.Flemings this illustrious
proof of the success of his arins, and tie extent
Stpt. 17. of his power. Before Charles arrived at Brufils

he was informed that the Pope's legates at Bo-
logna had difmifed the council by aen indefinite

(g) Mem. de Ribier. ii. 218. Sleid. 491.

prorogation,

prorogation, and that the prelates affembledBooK Ix.
there had returned to their refpetive countries. ,'/"
Neceifity had driven the Pope into this measure. 1548.
By the feceflion of those who had voted against
the translation, together with the departure of
others, who grew weary of continuing in a place
where they were not suffered to proceed to bufi-
ness, so few and such inconsiderable members
remained, that the pompous appellation of a
General Council could not, with decency, be
beflowed any longer upon them. Paul had no
choice but to dissolve an assembly which was
become the object of contempt, and exhibited
to all Christendom a most glaring proof of the
impotence of the Romilh fee. But unavoidable
as the measure was, it lay open to be unfavour-
ably interpreted, and had the appearance of
withdrawing the remedy at the very, time when
those for whose recovery it was provided, were
prevailed on to acknowledge its virtue, and to
make trial of its effect. Charles did not fail to
put this conftrucion on his conduct; and by
an artful comparison of his own efforts to sup-
press heresy, with Paul's scandalous inattention
to a point so essential, he endeavoured to render
the Pontiff odious to all zealous Catholicks. At
the fame time, he commanded the Prelates of
his faction to remain at Trent, that the Council
might (till appear to have a being, and might
be ready, whenever it was thought expedient,
to resume its deliberations for the good of the
church (b).

THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low-TThie Emr

Countries, besides gratify ing his favourite paflion hio,,, fti
of travelling from one part of his dominions tolip in the
another, was to receive Philip his only son, whoL^'.'c°"U

(A) Pallav. p, II, 7Z.

Boos IX. was now in the twenty first year of his age, and
.v. whom he had called thither, not only that he
,548- might be recognized by the States of the Ne-

therlands as heir apparent, but in order to facili-
tate the execution of a vafi scheme, the objec1
of which, and the reception it met with, shall be
hereafter explained. Philip, having left the go-
vernment of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
eldest son, to whom the Emperor had given the
Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, embark-
ed for Italy attended by a numerous retinue of
Spanish nobles (i). The squadron which escorted
him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithstanding his advanced age, insisted on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the son, which he had often discharged to-
Novem. 2s. wards the father. He landed safely at Genoa;

from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court

?49. in Brussels. The States of Brabant in the firit
APl place, and those of the other provinces in their

order, acknowledged his right of fitcceflion in
common form, and he took the customary oath
to preferveall their privileges inviolate (k). In
all the towns of the Low-Countries through
which Philip pafled he was received with extraor-
dinary pomp. Nothing that could express the
refpe6t of the people, or contribute to his amule-
ment was negleted; pageants, tournaments, and
publick fpecQacles of every kind were exhibited
with that expensive magnificence which coim-
mercial nations display, when, on any occasion,
they depart from their usual maxims of frugality.
But amidst these scenes of feflivity and pleafilre
Philip's natural severity of temper was difcerni-
ble. Youtli itself could not render him agreea-
ble, nor his being a candidate for power form
(i) Ochoa, Carolea, 362. (h) Haraci. annal. Brabant. 652.

him

him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty re-Boon IX-
serve in his behaviour, and discovered such ma. -r
nifelt partiality towards his Spanish attendants, '548'
together with such an avowed preference to the
manners of their country, as highly disgusted
the Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy,
which afterwards occasioned a revolution so
fatal to him in that part of his dominions (1).

CHARLES was long detained in the Nether-

lands by a violent attack of the gout, which re-
turned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken to a
great degree the vigour of his constitution.
He, neve thelefs, did not intermit his en-
deavours, to enforce the Interim. The inha-
bitants of Strafbourgh, after a long firuggle,
found ;- necessary to give obedience; thole of
Conllance, who had taken arms in their own
defence, were compelled by force not only to
conform to the Interim, but to renounce their
privileges as a free city, to do homage to Ser-
dinand as Archduke of Aultria, and as his vas-
fals to admit an Austrian governor and gar-
riSon (m). Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
and Lubeck were the only Imperial cities of
note that still continued refractory.

(I) Mem. de Ribier. ii. 29. L'Evefque Mem. de Card.
Granvelle, i. z2.

(m) Skid. 474, 491.

THE

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE.
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.
BOOK X.T T HI L E Charles laboured, with such

" V^ V

W unwearied industry, to overcome the

Thl' sobltinacy of the Proteitants, the effects of his
kchemes a-fteadinefs in the execution of his plan,
gai, tle were rendered less considerable by his rup-

ture with the Pope, which daily increased.
The firm resolution which the Emperor seemed
to have taken against restoring Placentia, to-
gether with his repeated encroachments on
the ecclesiastical jurifdiclion, both by the
regulations contained in the Interim, and
by his attempt to re-assemble a council at
Trent, exasperated Paul to the utmost, who,
with the weakncfs incident to old age, grew more

attached

attached to his family, and more jealous of hisBOK X
authority, as he advanced in years. Pushed onV
by these paflions, he made new efforts to draw '549.
the French King into an alliance against the Em-
peror (a). But finding that Monarch, notwith-
itanding his hereditary enmity to Charles, and
dread of his growing power, as unwilling as
formerly to involve himself in immediate holtili-
ties, he was obliged to contract his views, and
to think of preventing fiture encroachments,
since it was not in his power to inflict vengeance
on account of those which were palt. For this
purpose, he determined to recall his grant of
Parma and Placentia, and after declaring them to
be re-annexed to the holy fee, to indemnify Oc-
tavio by a new establishment in the ecclesiastical
Itate. By this expedient, he hoped to gain two
points of no small consequence; the security of
Parma, firfl of all, as the Emperor would be
cautious of invading thepatrimony of thechurch,
though he might seize without scruple a town
belonging to the house of Farnese; and in the
next place, rome chance of recovering Placentia,
as his solicitations to that effedt might decently
be urged with greater importunity, and would
infallibly be attended with more weight, when
he was confidered not as pleading the cause of
his family, but as an advocate for the interest of
the church. But while Paul was priding himself
in this device, as a happy refinement in policy,
Oltavio, an ambitious and high spirited young
man, who could not bear with patience to be
spoiled of one half of his territories by the rapaci-
oufnefs of his father-in-law, and to be deprived of
tht other by the artifices of his grand-father,
took meafuires in order to prevent the execution
of a plan fatal to his interest. Hle let out secretly

(a) Mem. de Ribier. ii. 230.

from

Boo" X.from Rome, and having first endeavoured to

-^ furprize Parma, which attempt was fruitrated
~5- by the fidelity of the governor to whom the

Pope had entrusted the defence of the town, he
made overtures to the Emperor of renouncing
all connections with the Pope, and depending
entirely on him for his future fortune. This
unexpetaed defe&ion of one of the Popes own
family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
almolt to madness, a mind peevifb with old
age; and there was no degree of severity to
which Paul might not have proceeded against
a grandson whom he reproached as an unnatu.
ral apolsate. But happily for Osavio, death
prevented his carrying into execution the harsh
resolutions which he had taken with refpe& to
him, and put an end to his pontificate in the
sixteenth year of his adminiltration, and the
eighty second of his age *.

As

Among many inffances of the credulity or weakness of

historians in attributing the death of illustrious personages
to extraordinary causes, this is one. Almost all the hiftori-
ans of the i6th centuryaffirm that the death of Paul III. was
occasioned by the violent paflions which the behaviour of his
grandson excited; that being informed, while he was airiug
himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of OAtavio's at-
tempt on Parma, as well as of his negotiations with the
Emperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continu-
ed some hours in a swoon, then fevered, and died within
three days. This is the account given of it by Thuanus,
lib. vi. 2 a . Adriani Iftor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and
by Father Paul, 280. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better in-
formed than any writer, with regard to the events which
happened in the papal court, and when not warped by
prejudice orfyftem, more accurate in relating them, agrees
with their narrative in its chief circumstances. Pallav. b. ii.
74. Paruta, who wrote his history by command of the fc-
nate of Venice, relates it in the fame manner. Hilforics
Vencz. vol.iv. 212. But there was no occafionto search
for any extraordinary cause to account for the death of an
old man of eighty-two. There remains an authentick ac-
count of this event, in which we find none of there mar-
vellous circumflances of which the historians are so fond.
''he cardinal of Ferrara, who wax cntruttcd with the as-

fairs

189

As this event had been long expeced, thereBooK x.

was an extraordinary concourse of Cardinals at \'V
RIome; and the various competitors having had S 50°
time to form their parties, and to concert their
measures, their ambition and intrigues protract-
ed the conclave to a great length. The Im-
perial and French factions firove, with emula-
tion, to promote one of their own number,
and had, by turns, the profpe6t of success. But
as Paul during a long Pontificate had raiscd
many to the purple, and thole chiefly persons
of eminent abilities as well as zealously de-
voted to his family, Cardinal Farnese had the
fairs of France at the Court of Rome, and M. D' U'rf:,
Henry's ambaffadorin ordinary there, wrote an account to
that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's
death. By these it appears, that Odavio's attempt to l1tr-
prize Parma was made on the twentieth of October; that
next day in the evening, and not while he was airing hirr-
f:lf in the gardens of Monte-Cavallo, the Pope received
intelligence of what he had done ; that he was seized with
tich a tr nfport of padion, and cried so bitterly that his
voice was heard in several apartments of the palace; the
i,ext day, however, he was so well as to give an audience to
thec Cardinal of Fcrrara, and to go through buiifefs of dif-
fcrent kinds; that Odavio wrote a letter to the Pope, net
i', Cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his relolution
o'f throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor; tha;
the Pope received this on the twenty-firft without any new
tImptcms of emotion, and returned an anfiver to it; that
,n the twenty-fecond of Ofober, the day on which the
Ca:rdinal of Ferrara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his
i:tlnal Ite of hcalrh. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 247. By a letter
of M. D'(Trfe, Nov. 5. it appears that the Pope was in fiila

i0ood health, that on the third of that month hehad cele-
brated the anniversary of his coronation with the ullfal to
le:nities. Ibidem 2S i. By another letter from the fame
pcloii, we learn that on the sixth of November a catarrh
(,r defliiion fell down on the Pope's lungs, with filch dan-
g'rons ;symptoms that his life was immediately delpaircd of.
Ibid. 2;2. And by a third letter, we are informed that he
C.ied November the tenth. In 1noIe of tlife letters is his
e!catl imputed to any extraordinary catfe. It appears that
niore than twenty c!ays elapsed between Oltavio's attempt
t11 Parma and the cdeath of his grandfather, and that thle
tiicale Uwas the natural eftcdt of old age, not one of thole
',Rafioncd by vi1l.ncee cf paflion.
VuL. 11f. N ccmmand

BOOK X.command of a powerful and united squadron,

"VVy by whose address and firmness he exalted to

F,550r 7.the Papal throne the Cardinal de Monte, whom
The eleai-Paul had employed as his principal legate in the
* oif J"liuscouncil of Trent, and truited with his most fe.

cret intentions. He assumed the name of Julius
Il. and in order to express his gratitude to-
wards his benefactor, the first aa of his admi-
niftration was toput O&avio Farnese in possession
of Parma. When he was told of the injury
which he did the Holy See by alienating a ter-
ritory of such value, he briikly replied, ' that
he would rather be a poor Pope, with the repu-
tation of a gentleman, than a rich one, with the
infamy of having forgotten the obligations con-
ferred upon him,and the promises which he had
made (b). But all the lustre of this candour or
generosity he quickly effaced by an acion most

His charac- hockingly indecent. According to an ancient
tcr and con-
duct. and eflablifhed practice, every Pope upon his

election claims the privilege of bestowing, on
whom he pleafes,the Cardinal's hat which falls to
be disposed of by his being vefied with the triple
crown. Julius, to the aflonilhment of the sacred
college, conferred this mark of diftinAion, toge-
ther with ample ecclesiastical revenues, and the
right of bearing his name and arms, upon one
Innocent, a youth of sixteen, born of obscure
parents, and known by the name of the Ape,
from his having been intruded with the care of
an animal of that species, in the Cardinal di
Monte's family. Such a prostitution of the high-
eft dignity in the church would have given of.
fence, even in those dark periods, when the cre-
dulous fuperalition ot the people emboldened ec.
clcfiialics to venture on the most flagrant viola.
tions of decorum. But in an enlightened age,
when by the progress of knowledge and philo-
sophy the.obligations of duty and decency were
better underiood, when a blind veneration for

(b) Mcm. de Ribier.

the

the Pontifical character was every where abated, Bo ox X.
and one half of Christendom in open rebellion 'V
against the Papal See,this acion was viewed with 1550'
horror. Rome was immediately filled with li-
bels and pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's
extravagant regard for such an unworthy object
to the most criminal palions. The Proteltants
exclaimed against the absurdities of supposing
that the infallible spirit of divine truth could
dwell in a breast so impure, and called more
loudly, than ever, and with greater appearance
of jullice, for the immediate and thorough Re-
formation of a church, the Head of which was a
disgrace to the Christian name(c). The reft of the
Pope's conduct was of a piece with this first fpe.
cimen of his dispositions. Having now reached
the summit of ecclesiastical ambition, hefeeme4
eager to indemnify himself, by an unrestrained
indulgence.of his desires, for the felf-denial or
diffinulation which he had thought it prudent to
praEife while in a Subordinate station. He be-
came careless, to so great a degree, of all feriou$
business, that he could seldom be brought t9
attend to it, but in cafes of extreme necefity,
and givingup himself to amusements and diflipa-
tion of every kind, he imitated the luxurious
elegance of Leo, rather than the severe virtue of
Adrian, the latter of which it was necessary to
display, in contending with a fe& which derivesd
great credit from the rigid and aultere manners
of its teachers (d).

THE Pope, how ready soever to fulfil his en- ms views

gagemFents to the family of Farnese, difcoveredi,d,,th,,-
no inclination to observe the oath, which each spat to tho
Cardinal had taken when he entered the con-gne'rl.
clave, that if the choice fliould fall on him, he
would immediately call the council to re-affume

(c() Sklid. 4 .
P4 . Pall, 281. Pallav. ii. 76. Thuan. lib.vi. lS.

(d) F. Paul, ibid.

its
N .

RooK X. its deliberations. Julius knew, by experience,

'oY -' how difficult it was to confine such a body of
3550' men within the narrow limits which it was the

interest of the church of Rome to prescribe; and
how easily the zeal of some members, the rash-
ness of others, or the suggestions of the Princes
on whom they depended, might precipitate a
popular and ungovernable assembly into forbid.
den inquiries,as.well as dangerous decisions. He
wished, for these -reasons, to have eluded the ob-
ligation of his oath, and gave an ambiguous an.
fwer to the first proposals, which were made to
:him by the Emperor, with regard to that matter.
But as Charles, either from his natural obitinacy
*in adhering to the measures which he had once
adopted, or from the mere pride of accomplish.
ing what was held to be almost imnpoflible, per-
sifted in his resolution of forcing the Protestants
to return into the bosom of the church : As lie
hiad persuaded himself that the authoritative de-
'cifions of the council might be employed with
efficacy in combating their prejudices; and in
consequence of that perfuiafion, solicited ear-
neftly that a new bull of convocation might be
issued, the Pope could not, with decency, reject
-that request. When Julius found that he could
not prevent the calling of a council, he endea-
'voured to take the merit of having procured the
-meeting of an assembly, which was the object of
firch general desire and expectation. A congre-
gation of Cardinals, to whom he referred the
consideration of what was ncceflary for refloring
. peace to the church, recommended, by his di.

iection, the speedy convocation of a council, as
the most effitulal expedient for that purpose
and as the new herelies raged with the greated
violence in Germany, they proposed Trentas the
-plice of its meeting, that by a near infpec1ion of
the evil, the remedy might be applied with
greater difcerniment and certainty of fiiccc(s-

'I'lie

The Pope warmly approved this advice, which BOOK X.
he himself had dilated, and lent nuncios to the _tO
Imperial and French courts, in order to make '5s5.
known his intentions ().

MEA N W HILE, the Emperor had summoned aA diet at

new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to enforce APoburg
the obiervation of the Interim, and to procure aliLcrim.
more authentic adt of the Empire, acknowledg-
ing thejulrdildiaion of the council, as well as
an explicit promise of conforming to its decrees.
He appeared there in person, together with his ,

.

son the Prince of Spain. Few of the Eleetors
were present, but all sent deputies in their
name. Charles, notwithstanding the despotic
authority with which he had given law in the
Empire during two years, knew that the spirit
of independence among the Germans was not
entirely filbdued, and for that reason took care
to over-awe the diet by a confiderab!e body of
Spanish troops which escorted him thither. The
first point, submitted to the consideration of
the diet, was the necessity of holding a council.
All the Popish members agreed, without diffi-
culty, that the meeting of that assembly (hould
be renewed at Trent, and promiled an implicit
acquiescence in its decrees. The Protestants,
intimidated and disunited, must have followed
their example, and the resolution of the diet
have proved unanimous, if Maurice of Saxony
had not begun at this time to disclose new in-
tentions, and to ad a part very different from
that which he had so long afumed.

BY an artful diflimulation of his own senti- Maurice be-

ments; by address in paying court to the Em-a ,iogn'I"-
pcrori and by the teeming zeal with which he gint the

) .mperor.
?') F. Paul, a8;. P4llav. ii. 77.

forwarded
N 3

BOoK X.forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
4/'"%had raised himself to the Eleeoral dignity; and

S550. having added the dominions of the eider branch

of the Saxon family to his own, was become the
mos powerful Prince in Germany. But his long
and intimate union with the Emperor had afford-
ed him many opportunities of observing narrowly
the dangerous tendency of his schemes. He saw
the yoke that was preparing for his country;
and from the rapid as well as formidable progress
of the Imperial power, was convinced that but
a few fleps more remained to be taken, in order
to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in Ger-
many, as he had become in Spain. The more
eminent the condition was to which he himself
had been exalted, the more solicitous did he na-
turally become to maintain all its rights and pri.
vileges, and the more did he dread the thoughts
of defcer.ding from the rank of a Prince almost
independent, to that of a vassal filbjet to the
willof a master. At the fame time, he perceived
that Charles, initead of allowing liberty of'con-
science, the promise of which had allured several
Protestant Princes to aifift him in the war against
the confederates of Smalkalde, was bent on ex.
acaing a rigid conformity to the doctrines and
rites of the Romish church. As he, notwith-
ilanding all the compliances which he had made
from motives of interest, or an excess of confi-
dence in the Emperor, was sincerely attached to
the Lutheran tenets, he determined not to be
a tame fpefator of the overthrow of a system
which he believed to be founded in truth.

rrhe politic THIS resolution, flowing from the love of
which influ liberty, or zeal for religion, was strengthened by
nced him. political and interested considerations. In that

elevated fiation, in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more extensive profpeds open-
ed to his view. His rank and power entitled

hinm

him to be the head of the Protestants in theBooK X.
Empire. His predeceflor, the degraded Elec- sru'
tor, with inferior abilities, and territories less IS55
considerable, had acquired such an ascendant
over the councils of the party; and Maurice
neither wanted discernment to fee the advantage
of this pre-eminence, nor ambition to aim at
attaining it. But he found himself in a fitua-
tion which rendered the attempt no less difficult
than the objet of it was important. On the
one hand, the connetion which he had formed
with the Emperor was so intimate, that he could
scarce hope to take any ftep which tended to
dissolve it, without alarming his jealousy, and
drawing on himself the whole weight of that
power, which had crushed the greatest confe-
deracy ever formed in Germany. On the other
hand, the calamities which he had brought on
the Proteltant party were so recent and so great,
that it seemed almost impoflible to regain their
confidence, or to rally and re-animate a body
of men, after himself had been the chief in-
ftrument in breaking their union and vigour.
These considerations were sufficient to have dif.
couraged any person of a spirit leTs adventurous
than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and
valtnefs of the enterprizes were allurements;
and he boldly resolved on measures, of which a
genius of an inferior order could have conceived
no idea, or would have trembled at the thoughts
of the danger which attended the execution of
them.

His pasions concurred with his interest inlThepinons

confirming this resolution ; and the refentmentph"'h ,i-
excited by an injury, which he suddenly felt,withl icfe.
added new force to the motives for opposing the
Emperor, which found policy fuggetted. Mau-
rice, by his authority, had prevailed on the Land-
grave of Hesse to put his person in the Emperor's

N 4 power,

BooK X.power, and had obtained a promise from the
^V'V Imperial minilters that he should not be de.

155C' tained a prironer. This had been violated in

the manner already related. The unhappy
Landgrave exclaimed as loudly againfi his son-
in-law as againfi Charles. The Princes of Hefle
required him incessantly to fulfil his engage-
ments to their father, who had loft his liberty
by trusting to him ; and all Germany fufpeted
him of having betrayed, to an implacable ene-
my, the friend whom he was molt bound to
protect. Roused by these solicitations and re-
proaches, as well as prompted by duty and as-
feetion to his father-in-law, Maurice had em-
ployed not only entreaties but remonflrances in
order to procure his release. All there Charles
bad disregarded; and the shame of having been
firtt deceived and then flighted by a Prince
whom he had served with zeal and fuccel-,
which merited a very different return, made
such a deep imprefion on Maurice, that lie
waited with impatience for an opportunity of
being revenged.

aTnheanton THE utmoff caution as well as delicacy were
2nd addrcsi
,with which requisite in taking every flep towards this end;
he cirr's as he had to guard, on the one hand, against
fchcmes. giving a premature alarm to the Emperor; while,

on the other, lbmething confiderabie and explicit
was necessary to be done, in order to regain the
confidence of the Protestant party. Maurice had
accordingly applied all his powers of addrees and
diflimulation to attain both these points. As he
knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to the
submission which he required to the Interim, he
did not hesitate one moment whether he should
eftablilh that form of doctrine and worship in his
dominions. But being sensible how odious it
was to his fubjeAts, instead of violently impoling
it on them by the mere terror of authority, as

had

had been done in other parts of Germany, heBooK X.
endeavoured to render their obedience a volun- ^
tary deed of their own. For this purpose, hene,'e
had assembled the clergy of his country at he Interim
Leipfick, and had laid the Interim before them, ' sa"ony.
together with the reasons which made it necef.
fary to conform- to it. He had gained some
of them by promises,. others he had wrought
upon by threats, and all were intimidated by
the rigour with which obedience to the In-
terim was extorted in the neighbouring provin-
ces. Even Melanalion, whose merit of every
kind entitled him to the first place among the
Protestant divines, being now deprived of the
manly counsels of Luther, which were wont to
inspire him with fortitude, and to preserve him
fleady amidst the dorms and dangers that
threatened the church, was seduced into un-
warrantable conceflions, by the timidity of his
temper, his fond desire of peace, and his ex-
ceffive complaisance towards persons of high
rank. By his arguments and authority, no
less than by Maurice's arts, the aflembly was
prevailed on to declare, that in points which
were purely indifferent, obedience was due to
the commands of a lawful superior. Founding
upon this maxim, no lets uncontrovertib!e in
theory, than dangerous when carried into prac-
tice, especially in religious matters, they pro-
ceeded to class, among the number of things in-
different, several doctrines, which Luther had
pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in the
]{omifh creed, as well as many of those rites
Vwhich diltinguifled the Reformed from the Po-
pifi worflip, and by consequence, they exhort-
ed their people to comply with the iEmperor's
injuntions concerning there particulars (f).

(f) Sleid. 48r. 485. J. Laur. Mofhemii Infiitutionum
-lift. Ecclcliafticx:, lib. iv. Hclmft. 1755. 4to. p. 748.

B3Y

BoOK X. By this dextrous conduct, the introduction
^VVo of the Interim excited none of those violent
1Makes 50.convulsions in Saxony, which it occasioned in
fefliotls of other provinces. But though the Saxons sub-
'r^teantiC mitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed
rcigion. againit Melanthon and his associates, as false

brethren, who were either so wicked as to
apostatize from the truth altogether; or ib
artful as to betray it by fubtlediftin&ions; or
so feeble-fpirited as to give it up from pufi.
lanimity and driminal complaisance to a Prince,
capable of sacrificing to his political interest,
that which he himself regarded as most fa-
cred. Maurice, being conscious what a colour
of probability his part condut gave to there
accusations, as well as afraid of losing entirely
the confidence of the Proteflants, iflued a de-
claration containing professions of his zealous
attachment to the Reformed religion, and of
his resolution to guard against all the errors
or encroachments of the Papal fee (g).
Atthe fame HAVING gone To far in order to remove the

Ethe Em fears and jealousies of the Proteltants, he found
pcror. it necessary to efface the imprefiion which such

a declaration might make on the Emperor. For
that purpose, he not only renewed his proftl.
sions of an inviolable adherence to his alliance
with him, but as the city of Magdeburg fill
persisted in rejecting the Interim, he under-
took to reduce it to obedience, and intfantly
set about levying the troops to he employed in
that fcrvice. This damped all the hopes which
the Protestants begun to conceive of Maurice,
in consequence of his declaration, and left them
more than ever at a loss to guels at his real in-
tentions. Their former suspicion and diltruft
of him revived, and the divines of Magdeburg

(')Slcid. 485.

filled Germany with writings in which theyBooK X.
represented him as the most formidable ene- V
my of the Protestant religion, who treache- 1550.
roufy assumed an appearance of zeal for its in-
terest, that he might more effecually execute
his schemes for its deltrucion.

THIS charge, supported by the evidence of Protefs

. againf the

recent faCts, as well as by his present dubious moe of
conduct, gained such universal credit, that proceding
Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in ii.
his own vindication. As soon as the re-af-
fembling of the council of Trent was proposed
in the diet, his ambassadors protelted that their
master would not acknowledge its authority,
unless all the points which had been already de-
cided there were reviewed, and confidered as
entire; unless the Protestant divines had a full
hearing granted them, and were allowed a de-
cifve voice in the council; and unless the Pope
renounced his pretensions to preside in the
council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and
absolved the bishops from their oath of obedi-
ence, that they might deliver their sentiments
with greater freedom. These demands, which
were higher than any that the Reformers had
ventured to make, even when the zeal of their
party was warmest, or their affairs most prof-
perous, counterbalanced, in some degree, the
effeA of Maurice's preparations against Magde-
burg, and kept the Proteltants in lufpenfe with
regard to his designs. At the fame time, he
had address enough to represent this part of his
conduA in such a light to the Emperor, that it
gave him no offence, and occasioned no inter-
ruption of the Itriet confidence which fibfifted
between them. What the pretexts were which
he employed in order to give such a bMd deola-
ration an innocent appearance, the contemporary
historians have not explained; that they impo-

fed

BooK X. fed upon Charles is certain, for he fiill conti.

C'"V'' nued to prosecute his plan as well concerning
1S5C' the Interim as the council, with the fame ar.

dour; and to place the fame confidence in Mau.
rice, with regaid to the execution of both.

The ciet TiHF Pope's resolution concerning the coun-
makc warcil not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
,'n ,he aity btufinel of the diet was to enforce the obferva.
t'A Magde-
burg, tion of the Interim. As the senate of Magde-

burg, notwithltanding various endeavours to
frighten or to sooth them into compliance, not
only perievered obstinately in their oppotition to
the Interim, but began to tfrengthen the for-
tifications of their city, and to levy troops in
their own defence, Charles required of the diet
that they would alTifl him in quelling this au-
dacious rebellion against a decree of the Em-
pire. Had the members of the diet been left
to at agreeably to their own inclination, this
demand would have been rejeced without he-
fitation. All the Germans who favoured, in
any degree, the new opinions in religion, and
many who were influenced by no other confide-
ration than jealousy of the Emperor's growing
power, regarded this effort of the citizens o:
Magdeburg, as a noble stand for the liberties of
their country. Even such as had not refolutioi.
to exert the fame spirit, admired the gallantry
of their-enterprize, and wished itfilccels. Bui
the presence of the Spanish troops, together
with 'the dread of the Emperor's difplcaiiic,
over-awed those who were present in the diet
to such a degree, that without venturing to
itter their own sentiments, they tamely ratidicl,
by their votes, whatever the Emperor was
p!eased to prelcribe. The rigorous (dccre.s,
whitl Charles had ifiued by his own autlloriry
rgainlt the Magdeburgcrs, were confirmed ; a
relolution was taken to raifi troops in order to
beolige the city in form i and pelitns wei c nam-

ed
20Cr

ed to fix the contingent in men or money to BOOK X.
be furnished by each state. At the fame time, '-
the diet petitioned that Maurice might be en-Appoint
trustec with the command of that army, toMu ricegc-
iwhich Charles gave his content with great ala-^''
crity, and with high encomiums upon the wis-
dom of the choice which they had made (b).
As Maurice conducted all' his fcherries with
profound and impenetrable secrecy, it is pro-
bable that he took no fep avowedly in older
to obtain this charge. The recommendation
of his countrymen was either purely acciden-
tal, or flowed from the opinion generally en-
tertained of hisgreat abilities; and neither the
diet had any foresight, nor the Emperor any
dread of the consequences which followed up-
on this nomination. Maurice accepted without
hefitatidn the trust committed to him, instantly
discerning the important advantages which he
might derive from it.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bulll Tiiec',lci

for the convocation of the council, observed all 'iur:,'
hlofe tedious forms which the court of Romele t 'c 'r'.nt
.an employ, with so much dexterity, to retard
any disagreeable meaflr-e. At last it was pub-Ul-cember,
lilled, and the council summoned to meet at
Trent on the first day of the enf(iing Month of
May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejeCted or disputed the authority and juit:i
dition which the Papal fee claims with respect
to general councils, he took care, in the pre-
a:mble of the bull, to afiert,, in the firongeft
terms, his own right, not only to call and pre-
lide in that aflembly, but to direct its proceed-
ings; nor would he soften thete expreflions, in
any degree, notwi.ttftanding the repeated so-
ilcitations of the Emperor, who foresaw what
offence they would give, and what conltruituio,
might be put on them. 'I'hey were centirei,
.ccordingly, iili great severity, by several

(h, Sicld. 5e'3, 51e

members

Book X.membersof the diet, but whatever disgust or
%-sVV fifpicion they excited, such absolute direction
'55' of all their deliberations had the Emperor ac-
Feb. 13. quired, that he procured a recess in which the

authority of the council was recognized, and
declared to be the proper remedy for the evils
which at that time afflicted the church ; all the
Princes and flates of the Empire, such as had
made innovations in religion, as well as those
who adhered to the fyilem of their forefatlers,
were required to fend their representatives to the
council; the Emperor engaged to grant a safe
conduct to such as demanded it, and td secure
them an impartial hearing in the council; lihe
promised to fix his residence in rome city of the
Empire, in the neighbourhood of Trent, that
he might protec the members of the council by
his presence, and take care that, by conducting
their deliberations agreeable to scripture and the
dotrine of the fathers, they might bring them
to a desirable issue. In this recess, the obfer-
vation of the Interim was more ltritly enjoin-
ed than ever, and the Emperor threatened all
who had hitherto neglected or refused to conform
to it, with the severest effects of his vengeance,
if they perfilted in their disobedience (i).

Anqoher DU'ING the meeting of this diet, a new at-
fruitless at-
tempt to tempt was made in order to procure liberty to
prowure th the Landgrave. That Prince no-wise recon-
Lndigrave
liberty. ciled by time to his situation, grew every day

more impatient of restraint. Having often ap-
plied to Maurice and the Eletorof Branden-
hurg, who took every occasion of soliciting the
Emperor in his behalf, though without any es-
fed, he now commanded his sons to summon
them, with legal formality, to perform what
was contained in the bond they had granted him,
by surrendering themselves to be treated with

(i) Sleid. 512. Thuan. lib. yi. 233. Goldafti Conitit.
Imperialcs, vol. ii. 340.

the fame rigour as the Emperor had used him. BOOK X.
This furnilhed them with a freflh pretext for'V"
renewing their application to the Emperor, to- '55 '
gether with an additional argument to enforce it.
Charles firmly resolved not to grant their re-
quest; though at the fame time, being extreme-
ly desirous to get rid of their incessant importu-
nity, he endeavoured to prevail on the Land-
grave to give up the obligation which he had
received from the two Electors. But that Prince
refusing to part with a security which he deemed
essential to his safety, the Emperor boldly cut
the knot which he could not untie; and by a
public deed annulled the bond which Maurice
and the Elecor of Brandenburg had granted, ab-
solving them from all their engagements to the
Landgrave. No pretension to a power so perni-
cious to society as that of abrogating at plea-
sure the most sacred laws of honour, and most
formal obligations of public faith, had hitherto
been formed by any but the Roman Pontiffs,
who, in consequence of their claim of infallibi-
lity, arrogate the right of dispensing with pre-
cepts and duties of every kind. All Germany
was filled with astonishment, when Charles as-
fumed the fame prerogative. The slate of sub.
jeaion, to which the Empire was reduced, ap-
peared to be more rigorous as well as intolera-
ble than that of the most wretched and enslaved
nations, if the Emperor by an arbitrary decree
might cancel those Iblemn contracts, which are
the foundation of that mutual confidence where-
by men are held together in social union. The
Landgrave himself now gave up all hores of re-
covering his liberty by the Elmperor's content,
and endeavouied to procure it by his own ad-
dress. But the plan which he had formed to
deceive his guards being discovered, such of his
attendants as he had gained to favour his
escape were put to death, and he was confined

in

Boos X.in the citadel of Mechlin, more closely than
1VI-0 ever (k).

1551.

ANOTHER tranfation was carried on during

C* lrl'ro. this diet, with refpea to an affair more nearly
curing the interesting to the Emperor, and which occasion.
Impcrial
,,wn for ed likewise a general alarm among the Princes
his ion Phi-of the Empire. Charles, though formed with

talents which fitted him for conceiving and con-
dutbing great designs, was not capable, as has
been observed, of bearing extraordinary fuccels.
Its operation on his mind was so violent and in.
toxicating, that it elevated him beyond what
was moderate or attainable, and turned his
whole attention to the purftit of vast but chi.
merica! objects Such had been the effect of
his victory over the confederates of Smalkalde.
He did not long reflt atisfied with the fubftan.
tial and certain advantages which were the re.
fult of that event, but despising there, as poor
or inconsiderable fruits of fich great success, he
had aimed at bringing all Germany to an uni-
formity in religion, and at rendering the Impe-
rial power despotic. These were objects ex-
tremely splendid, it mull be acknowledged,
and alluring to an ambitious mind ; the pur-
suit of them, however, was attended with ma-
nifeft danger, and the attainment of them very
precarious. But the fleps which he had already
taken towards them being accompanied with
such success, his imagination, warmed with
contemplating this valt design, overlooked or
despiscd all difficulties. As he conceived theex-
ccttion of his plan to be certain, he began to
be solicitous how he might render the poflellion
of filch an important acquisition perpetual in
his family, by tranlmitting the German Em-
pire, as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and his
duninions in Italy and the Low-Countries,

(A) Slcid. 504. 'lluanl.1. vi, 23.1, 235.

to
204

Countries, to his Ton. Having long revolved BOOK X.
this flattering idea in his mind, without commu- VY'.
nicating it, even to those ministers whom he '55'
most trusted, he had called Philip out of Spain,
in hopes that his presence would facilitate the
carrying forward the scheme.

GREAT obitacles, however, and such aSThe oblta-
would have deterred any ambition leTs accuf-cles tat

flood in its

tomed to overcome difficulties, were to be fr- way,
mounted. He had in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty, imprudently assisted in
procuring his brother Ferdinand the dignity of
King of the Romans, and there was no probabi
lity that this Prince, who was still in the prime
of life, and had a Ton grown up to the years of
manhood, would relinqui(h, in favour of his
nephew, the near profpe& of the Imperial
throne, which Charles's infirmities and declin-
ingllateof health opened to him. This did
not deter the Emperor from venturing to make
the proposition; and when Ferdinand, notwith-
flanding his profound reverence for his brother,
and obsequious fubmiflion to his will in other
instances, rejected it in a peremptory tone, he
was not discouraged by one repulse. He re-
newed his applications to him by his filter,
Mary Queen of Hungary and Bohemia, and
who, by her great abilities, tempered with ex-
treme gentleness of disposition, had acquired an
extraordinary influence over both the brothers.
She entered warmly into a measure, which
tended so manifestly to aggrandize the house of
Austria ; and flattering herself that Ihe could
tempt Ferdinand to renounce the reversionary
possession of the Imperial dignity for an imme-
diate ellablifhment, (he aflured him that the
Emperor, by way of compensation for his giv-
ing up his chance of fucceflion, would instant-
1y bestow upon him territories of very confi-

VOL. 11I. O derable

BOOK X.derable value, and pointed out in particular
LY% those of the Duke of Wurtemberg, which

1551' might be confiscated upon different pretexts.

But Ferdinand was more ambitious than to be
persuaded, by her address or intreaties, to
approve of a plan, which would have degraded
him from the higlhef rank among the Monarchs
of Europe, to that of a subordinate and de-
pendant Prince. He was at the fame time,
more attached to his children than to frustrate,
by a rash concession, all the high hopes in
profpec of which they had been educated.

His endca- NOTWITHSTANDING the immoveable firm-
mountthcie. ness which Ferdinand discovered, the Emperor

did not abandon his scheme. He flattered him.
seif that he might attain the object in view by
another channel, and that it was not impoffi.
ble to prevail on the Electors to cancel their
,former choice of Ferdinand, or at least to eleLt
Philip a second King of the Romans, fubftitut-
ing him as next in fuccefion to his uncle.
With this view he took Philip along with him
to the diet, that the Germans might have an
opportunity to observe and become acquainted
with the Prince, in behalf of whom he courted
their interest; and he himself employed all
the arts of address or insinuation to gain the
Eleccors, and to prepare them for lending a fa-
vourable ear to the proposal. But no sooner
did lie venture upon mentioning it to them,
than they, at once, saw and trembled at the
cont(clcqulces with which it would be attended.
They had long felt all the inconveniencies of
having placed at the head of the Empire, a
Prince whole power and dominions were 1t
extensive; if they Ihould now repeat the
folly, and continue the Imperial crown, like
an hereditary dignity, in the lame family,
they foresaw that they would give the ion ;i!
opportunity of carrying on that lyitem )t

oppircliion
206

oppreiflon, which the father had begun; and BooK X
would put it in his power to overturn whatever 'Y J
was yet left entire in the ancient and venerable '55'
fabric of the German constitution.

TH E character of the Prince, in whose favourphiiipscha-

this extraordinary proposition was made, ren.rae-r difa-
dered it fill less agreeable. Philip, though pof-ge Gecr-
sessed with an insatiable desire of power, was amans"
tfranger to all the arts of conciliating good-will.
Haughty, reserved and severe, he, inilead of
gaining new friends, disgusted the ancient and
most devoted partizans of the AufIrian interest.
He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the
language of the country, to the government of
which he aspired; nor would he condescend to
pay the Germans the compliment of accommo-
dating himself, during his residence among them,
to their manners and cultoms. He allowed the
Electors and most illustrious Princes in Germany
to remain in his pretence uncovered, affecting a
flately and ditant demeanour, which the greatest
of the German Emperors, and even Charles
himself, amidst the pride of power and vicory,
had never assumed (1). On the other hand, Ser-
dinand, from the time of his arrival in Germa-
ny, had studied to render himself acceptable to
the people, by a conformity to their manners,
which reemed to flow from choice; and his son
Maximilian, who was born in Germany, pof-
sessed, in an eminent degree, such amiable qua-
lities, as rendered him the darling of his coun.
trymen, and induced them to look forward to
his election as a most desirable event. Their
esteem and affection for him fortified the refolu-
tion which found policy had suggested; and de-
termined the Germans to prefer the popular vir-
tues of Ferdinand and his fun, to the stubborn

(/) Frediman Andrez Zulich Differtatio politico-Hifto-
rica de Navis politicis Caroli V. Lip{. 1706 4t. p. 2 1.

0 2 austerity

BooK X.aufterity of Philip, which interest could not sos-

ten, nor ambition teach him to disguise. All

Charis ob- the Electors, the ecclesiastical as well as secular,
ligedi t rconcurred in expressing such strong difapproba.
scheme. tion of the measure, that Charles, notwithitand.

ing the reluctance with which he gave up any
point, was obliged to drop the scheme as im-
pracicable. By his unseasonable perseverance
in pushing it, he not only filled the Germans
with new jealousy of his ambitious designs, but
laid the foundation of rivalihip and discord in
the Austrian family, and forced his brother Ser.
dinand, in felf-defence, to court the Eleetors,
particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to form
such connecions with them, as cut off all prof-
pec of renewing the proposal with fuccels.
Philip, foured by his disappointment, was sent
back to Spain, to be called thence when any
new scheme of ambition should render his pre-
fence necessary (m).

The Pope HAVING relinquished this plan of domeflick
and Empe- which ha
for form aambition which had long occupied and engrossed

rdfign tore him, Charles imagined that he would now have
ma andpialeifure to turn all his attention towards his grand

fc

. cheme of eflablifhing uniformity of religion in

the Empire, by forcing all the contending par.
ties to acquiesce in the decisions of the council
of Trent. But such was the extent of his do.
minions, the variety of connections in which
this entangled him, and the multiplicity of e-
vents to which there gave rife, as seldom allow-
ed him to apply his whole force to any one ob.
ject The machine which he had to condu&t
was so great and complicated, that an unforeseen
irregularity or obftru&ion in one of the inferior
wheels, often disconcerted the motion of the

(m) Sleid. 5oS. Thnan. 180, 238. Memoir. de Ribier.
ii. z;9, 281, 314. Adriaili Iftor. lib. viii, 507, 52C.

%¥[10[~:)

whole, and disappointed him of the most con BooK X.
fiderable effe&s which he expected. Such an -/V-
unlooked-for occurrence happened at this junc- 55.'
tare, and created new obstacles tothe execution
of his fchernes with regard to religion. Julius
ill. though he had confirmed OsQavio Farnese in
the poffelion of the dutchy of Parma, during
the firi effusions of joy and gratitude on his
promotion to the Papal throne, soon began to
repent of his own generosity, and to be appre-
henfive of consequences which either he did not
foresee, or had disregarded while the fcnfe of his
obligations to the family of Farnese was recent.
The Emperor still retained Placentia in his
hands, and had not relinquished his pretensions
to Parma as a fief of the Empire. Gonzaga,
the governor of Milan, having, by the part
which he took in the murder of the late Duke
Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the family
of Farnese, which he knew could never be for-
given, had for that reason vowed its destruction,
and employed all the influence, which his great
abilities as well as long services gave him with
the Emperor, in persuading him to seize Parma
by force of arms. Charles, in compliance with
his solicitations. and that he might gratify his
own desire of annexing Parma to the Milanese,
lifened to the proposal; and Gonzaga, ready to
take encouragement from the slightest appear-
ance of approbation, began to assemble troops,
and to make other preparations for the execu-
tion of his scheme.

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, oayloFt,-

found it necessary for his own safety, to increase thaefaftance
the garrison of his capital, and to levy foldiers°OFr ,,nco
for defending the reft of the country. But as
the expence of such an effort far exceeded' his
scanty revenues, he represented his situation to
the Pope, and implored that protection and as-
fiftance which was due to him: as a vatfal of the

0 3 church.

*\

BOOK X. church. The Imperial minister, however, had
V-'v< already pre-occupied the Pope's ear; and by
'55'. discoursing continually concerning the danger of

giving offence to the Emperor, as well as the
imprudence of supporting Octavio in an ufur-
pation so detrimental to the Holy See, had to-
tally alienated him from the family of Farnese.
Octavio's remonstrance and petition met, of
consequence, with a cold reception; and he,
despairing of any afliltance from Julius, began
to look round for protection from some other
quarter. Henry II. of France was the only
Prince powerful enough to afford him this pro-
teetion, and fortunately he was now in a fitua-
tion which allowed him to undertake it. He
had brought his tranfations with the two Bri-
tifh kingdoms, which had hitherto diverted his
attention from the affairs of the continent, to
such an issue as he desired. This he had es.
feeed partly by the vigour of his arms, partly
by his dexterity in taking advantage of the po.
litical faaions which raged in both kingdoms,
and rendered the counsels of the Scots violent
and precipitate, and the operations of the Eng.
lifh feeble and unrfeady. He had procured from
the English favourable conditions of peace for
his allies the Scots; he had prevailed on the
nobles of Scotland not only to affiance their
young Queen to his son the Dauphin, but even
to fend her into France, that (he might be edu-
cated under his eye; and had recovered Bou-
logne together with its dependancies which had
been conquered by Henry VIII.

wHth Iguer HAVING gained points of so much confe-
si. quence to his crown, and disengaged himself

with such honour from the burden of supporting
the Scots, and maintaining a war againit Eng-
land, Henry w;is now at full leisure to pursue
the mafuires which his hereditary jealousy of
the Emperor's power naturally fuggeited. He

liflcnet,

lifened, accordingly, to the first overtures BOOK X.
which Odavio Farnese made him; and embra- V
cing eagerly an opportunity of recovering foot- '551*
ing in Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty, in
which he promised to espouse his cause, and to
furnish him with all the assistance he delired.
This tranfadion could not be long kept secret
from the Pope, who foreseeing the calamities
which must follow if war were rekindled so near
the ecclesiastical state, immediately issued moni-
tory letters, requiring Octavio to relinquish his
new alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with
the requisition, he soon after pronounced his
fief to be forfeited, and declared war against him
as a disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as he
could not hope, with his own forces alone, to
subdue Octavio while supported by such a pow-
erful ally as the King of France, he had recourse
to the Emperor, who being extremely folici-
tous to prevent the eflablifhment of the French
in Parma, ordered Gonzaga to second Julius
with all his troops. Thus the French took the ccafrlon
field as the allies of Octavio; the Imperialists ofhhofiltics
as the protectors of the Holy See, and hostilities bcl an
commenced between them, while Charles and HLnry.
Henry themselves still affected to give out, that
they would adhere inviolably to the peace of
Crefpy. The war of arma was not diftinguilh-
ed by any memorable event. Many finall ren-
counters happened with alternate success; the
French ravaged part of the ecclesiastical territo-
ries; the Imperialists laid wafle the Parmesan;
and the latter, after having begun to befieoe
Parma in form, were obliged to abandon the
enterprize with disgrace (n).

BUT the motiona and alarm which this war, R''ardstlh
or the preparation for it, occasioned in Italy, the uoLci

(n) Adriani Iftor. lib. viii. ;o5, 514, 524. Sleid. I , .

Paruta, p. 220. Lettcre del Caro fcritte al nome dcl Card.
Farnefc, tom. ii. p. ii, &c.

0 4 prevented

BooK X. prevented moss of the Italian prelates from re.
^V'-^ pairing to Trent on the first of May, the day
'551. appointed for re-afiembling the council; and

though the Papal legate and nuncios retorted
thither, they were obliged to adjourn to the firfl
of September, hoping such a number might

ry prthen aemble, that they might with decency be.

tests againfgin their deliberations. At that time, about
tic c¢uncil.fixty prelates, mostly from the ecclesiastical

slate or from Spain, together with a few Ger-
mans, convened (o). The session was opened
with the accufomed formalities, and the fathers
were about to proceed to business, when the ab-
bot of Bellozane appeared, and presenting let-
ters of credence as ambassador from the French
King, demanded audience. Having obtained it,
he protested in Henry's name against an assem-
bly called at such an improper junEture, when
a war, wantonly kindled by the Pope, made it
impossible for the deputies from the Gallican
church to retort to Trent in safety, or to deli-
berate concerning articles of faith and discipline
with the requisite tranquillity ; he declared that
his mafler did not acknowledge this to be a ge-
neral oecumenick council, but must confider and
would treat it as a particular and partial con.
vention (p). The legate affeAed to despise this
protert; and the prelates proceeded, notwith-
Standing, to examine and decide the great points
in controversy, concerning the sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme unc-
tion. This measure of the French Monarch,
however, gave a deep wound to the credit of
the council, at the very commencement of its
deliberations. The Germans could not pay
much regard to an assembly, whose authority
the second Prince in Christendom had formally
disclaimed, or feel any great reverence for the
decisions of a few men, who arrogated to them-
felvcs all the rights belonging to the reprefenta-
(o) F. Paul. z68. ) Slcid. 58 8. Thuan. 282. F. Papl. 30l'

Lives

fives of the church universal, a title to which BooK x.
they had such poor pretensions. b$Y^

THE Emperor, neverthele(s, was firaining

his authority to the utmofi, in order to efla-
blilh the reputation and jurifdi&ion of the coun-
cil. He had prevailed on the three ecclefiafli- violene of
cal EleAors, the prelates of greatest power and ir"P'
dignity in the church, next to the Pope, to re-cecdings ·-
pair thither in person. He had obliged feveralrotf¢tan
German bishops of inferior rank to go to Trent
themselves, or to fend their proxies. He grant-
ed an Imperial safe conduc to the ambafladors
nominated by the Elector of Brandenburg, the
duke of Wurtemberg, and other Proteflant
states, to attend the council; and, exhorted
them to fend their divines thither, in order to
propound, explain and defend their doctrine.
At the fame time, his zeal anticipated the de-
crees of the council; and as if the Protestant
doctrines had already been condemned, he took
large fleps towards exterminating them. With
this intention, he called together the ministers
of Augsburg; and after interrogating them
concerning several controverted points, enjoin-
ed them to teach nothing with refped to there,
contrary to the tenets of the Romih church.
Upon their declining to comply with a requifi-
tion To contrary to the dilates of their confci-
ences, he commanded them to leave the town
in three days, without revealing to any person
the cause of their banishment; he prohibited
them to preach for the future in any of the
countries fuhje& to the Imperial jurifdicion;
and obliged them to take an oath that they
would punctually obey there injunctions. They
were not the only viAcims to his zeal. The
Protestant clergy, in most of the cities in the
circle of Swabia, were ejecced with the fame vio-
lence; and in many places, such magistrates as
had diflinguilhed themselves by their attach-

ment

BoOK X.ment to the new opinions, were dismissed with
'YV'- the most abrupt irregularity, and their offices

.'5s' filled, in confequenceof the Emperor's arbitrary

appointment, with the most bigotted of their ad-
verfaries. The Reformed worship was almost
entirely suppressed throughout that extensive
province. The ancient and fundamental privi.
leges of the free cities were violated. The peo-
ple were compelled to attend the ministration of
priests, whom they regarded with horror as ido.
laters; and to submit to the jurisdiction of ma-
giltrates, whom they detested as usurpers (q).

His cnde- THE Emperor, after this discovery, which
yours to
,liprt rthewas more explicit than any that he had hitherto
council. made, of his intention to subvert the German

constitution, as well as to extirpate the Protef-
November. tant religion, set out for Infpruck in the Tyrol.

He fixed his residence in that city, as by its si.
tuation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on
the confines of Italy, it appeared a commodious
flation, whence he might inspect the operations
of the council, and observe the progress of the
war in the Parmesan, without losing fight of the
occurrences that might happen in Germany (r).

The iegeof DURINO there transactions the siege of Mag-
Magde'bug'deburg was carried on with various success. At

the time when Charles proscribed the citizens
of Magdeburg, and put them under the ban of
the Empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined
all the neighbouring states to take arms against
them, as rebels and common enemies. Encou-
raged by his exhortations as well as promi(es,
George of Mecklenburg, a younger brother of
the reigning Duke, an active and ambitious
Prince, collected a considerable number of
those boldiers of fortune who had accompanied
Henry of Brunswick in all his wild enterprizes;
and though a zealous Lutheran himself, invad-

(q) Sleid. 5 16, 58. Thuan. 276. (r) Slid. 329.

ed

ed the territor es oT the Magdeburgers, hopingBoo, XC.
that, by the merit of this service, he might %V
procure rome part of their domains to be allot- 'S'S
ted to him as an establishment. The citizens,
unaccultomed as yet to endure patiently the ca-
lamities of war, could not be restrained from
rallying out in order to save their lands from be-
ing laid wafle. They attacked the duke of
Mecklenburg with more courage than conduEt,
and were repulsed with great slaughter. But
as they were animated with that unconquerable
spirit, which flows from zeal for religion, co-
operating with the love of civil liberty, far from
being disheartened by their misfortune, they
prepared to defend themselves with vigour. Ma-
ny of the veteran soldiers who had served in the
long wars between the Emperor and King of
France, crowding to their tfandards under able
and experienced officers, they acquired milita-
ry skill by degrees, and added all the advanta-
ges of that to the efforts of undaunted courage.
'he duke of Mecklenburg, notwithstanding the
severe blow which he had given the Magde-
burgers, not daring to invest a town firongly
fortified, and defended by such a garrison, con-
tinued to ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventu-Maurice

rers to his camp, Maurice of Saxony began tocomml,,of
be jealous of the power which he poilffcd by the army
being at the head of such a numerous body,je on tie
and marching towards Magdeburg with his ownf'-e.
troops, alfumed the supreme command of the
whole army, an honour to which his high rank
and great abilities, as well as the nomination of
the diet, gave him an indisputable title. With
this united force lie invelted the town, and be-
gan the siege in form; claiming great merit
with the Emperor on that account, as, from
his zeal to execute the Imperial decree, he was
exposing himself once more to the cenfurcs and

maledi 'tions

BooK X.maledictions of the party with which he agreed

s in religious fenciments. But the approaches to
'. S' the town went on slowly; the garrison inter.

rupted the besiegers by frequent sallies, in one
of which the duke of Mecklenburg was taken
prisoner, levelled part of their works, and cut
off the-fbiers in their advanced posts. While
the citizens of Magdeburg, animated by the
difcoufesof--their pastors, and the soldiers en.
couraged by the example of their officers, en-
dured all the hardships of a siege without mur-
muring, and defended themselves with the fame
ardour which they had at first discovered; the
troops of the besiegers aded with extreme re-
minlnefs, repining at every thing they suffered
in a service which they disliked, They broke
out, more than once, into open mutiny, de-
manding the arrears of their pay, which, as the
Germans contributed with great reluctance to-
wards defraying the expences of this war,
amounted to a considerable rum (s). Maurice,
too, had particular motives, though such as he
durtl not avow at that juncture, which induced
him not to push the siege with vigour, and
made him chute rather to continue at the head of
an army exposed to all the imputations which
his dilatory proceedings drew upon him, than to
precipitate a conquest which might have brought
him some accession of reputation, but would
have rendered it necessary to disband his forces.

The city A T las, the inhabitants of the town begin-
C rr nlcrs
o rui¢c. ning to susser ditlrefs from want of provisions,

and Maurice, finding it ilnpoffible to protrat
matters any longer without filling the Emperor
with filch suspicions as might have disconcerted
all his measures, he concluded a treaty of capi-
tulation with the city upon the following con-
Novemb.3. dicions; that the Magdeburgers (hould humbly

(J) 'lhuan. 277. ó1did. 514.

implore

implore pardon of the Emperor; that theyBooK X-
should not for the future take arms, or enter in-V
to any alliance againlt the house of Aultria; '5-
that they should submit to the authority of the
Imperial chamber; that they should conform to
the decree of the diet at Augsburg with refpea
to religion; that the new fortifications added to
the town should be demolished; that they
flould pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns, de-
liver up twelve pieces of ordnance to the Em-
peror, and set the Duke of Mecklenburg, toge-
ther with their other prisoners at liberty with-
out ran om. Next day their garrison marched
out, and Maurice took possession of the town
with great military pomp.

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were fet-Maurice's

tied, Maurice had held many conferences with"i auj.
Albert count Mansfeldt, who had the chief com-
mand in Magdeburg, and with count Heideck,
an officer who had served with great reputation
in the army of the league of Smalkalde, whom
the Emperor had proscribed on account of his
zeal for that cause, and whom Maurice had, not-
withstanding, secretly engaged in his service,
and admitted into the molt intimate confidence.
To them he communicated a scheme, which he
had long revolved in his mind, for procuring
liberty to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for
vindicating the privileges of the Germanic body,
and setting bounds to the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Imperial power. Having consulted
with them about the measures which might be
necessary for securing the success of such an ar-
duous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt secret alfur-
ances that the fortifications of Magdeburg Ihould
not be dcltroyed, and that the inhabitants (hould
neither be difiurbed in the exercise of their re-
ligion, nor be deprived of any of their ancient
i:nmunities. In ordcr to engage Maurice more

whlic!ughly

BOOK X-thoroughly from considerations of intereli to
%VS fulfil these engagements, the senate of Mag-
"5s' dcburg elected him their Burgrave, a dignity

which had formerly belonged to the electoral
house of Saxony, and which entitled him to a
very ample jurifdidion, not only in the city,
but in its dependencies (t).
Theadvan- THUS the citizens of Magdeburg, after en.

hages hede-

tried from during a siege of twelve months, and ftrug-
hinCgocwia- ghng for their liberties, religious and civil, with
tions with . . . ,,  . . , r
the Mgde-an invincible fortitude worthy of the cause in
brgers. which it was exerted, had at last the good for-

tune to conclude a treaty which left them in a
better condition than the reft of their coun-
trymen, whom their timidity or want of pub-
lick spirit had betrayed into such mean sub-
mifllons to the Emperor. But while a great
part of Germany applauded the gallant con-
du6c of the Magdeburgers, and rejoiced in
their having escaped the destruetion with which
they had been threatened, all admired Mau-
rice's address in the conduct of his negociation
with them, as well as the dexterity with which
he converted every event to his own advan-
tage. They saw, with amazement, that after
having affliAed the Magdeburgers during many
months with all the calamities of war, he was
at last, by their voluntary eletion, veiled with
supreme authority in that city which he had so
lately besieged; that after having been so long
the object of their invectives and satire as an
apoflate, and an enemy to the religion which he
professed; they seemed now to place unbounded
confidence in his zeal and good will (u). At the
fame time, the publick articles in the treaty of

(t) Sleid. 528. Thnan. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici
defcriptio per Scbaft. Beflelmcierum. ap. Scard. ii. 1 8.

(u) Arnoldi vita Maurit. apud Menken, ii. 1227.

capitulation

capitulation were so perfecly conformable toBooK X.
those which the Emperor had granted to the V
other Protestant cities, and Maurice took such 15S1.
care to magnify his merit in having reduced a
place which had defended itself with so much
obstinacy, that Charles, far from fufpecing any
thing fraudulent or collusive in the terms of ac-
commodation, ratified them without hesitation,
and abiblved the Magdeburgers from the fen-
tence of ban which had been denounced against
them.

THE only point that now remained to em-His expedi-

sentsor keep-

barrafs Maurice was how to keep together theingan army
veteran troops which had served under him, as°ofoo°
wvell as thole which had been employed in the
defence of the town. For this, too, he found
an expedient with singular art and felicity. His
fchcmes against the Emperor were not yet so
fully ripened, that he durst venture to disclose
them, and proceed openly to carry them into
execution. The winter was approaching, which
made it impossible to take the field immediately.
He was afraid that it would give a premature
alarm to the Emperor, if he should retain such
a considerable body in his pay until the season of
action returned in the spring. As loon then as
Magdeburg opened its gates, he sent home his
Saxon subjects, whom he could command to take
arms and reassemble, on the shortest warning, to
their own habitations; and at the fame time,
paying part oi the arrears, due to the mercenary
troops, who had followed his flandard, as well
as to the soldiers who had served in the garrilon,
he absolved them from their refpetive oaths of
fidelity, and disbanded them. But the moment
he gave them their discharge, George Duke of
Mecklenburg, who was now let at liberty, of-
sered to take them into his service, and to be-

come

BooK X.come surety for the payment of what was still
_Vr owing to them. As such adventurers were ac-
'55'. cuttomed often to change masters, they instant-

ly accepted the offer. Thus, these troops were
kept united, and ready to march wherever
Maurice ihould call them, while the Emperor,
deceived by this artifice, and imagining that
the Duke of Mecklenburg had hired them with
an intention to assert, by force of arms, his
claim to a part of his brother's territories, sus-
sered it to pass without observation, as if it had
been a matter of no consequence (x).

His addrers HAVING ventured to take there fleps which
in conceal-we
ing his i- were of so much consequence towards the exe-
tentions cution of his schemes, Maurice, that he might
from the
Emperor. divert the Emperor from observing their tenden-

cy too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions
which that mufl have excited, saw the neceflity
of employing some new artifice in order to en-
gage his attention, and to confirm him in his
present security. As he knew that the chief obh
ject of the Emperor's flicitude at thisjundure,
was how he might prevail with the Proteftaht
States of Gerrrany to recognize the authority
of the council of Trent, and to fend thither am-
baffadors in their own name, as well as depu-
ties from their refpetive churches, he took
hold of this predominating patfion in order to
amuse and deceive him. He affected a wonder-
ful zeal to gratify Charles in what he desired
with regard to this matter; he nominated
ambassadors, whom he impowered to attend
the council; he made choice of Melanc-
thon and fbme of the most eminent among his
brethren to prepare a contellion of faith, and to

(x) Thuan. 278. Strrv. corp. hist. Germ. i064. Arnoldi
vita Mauritii apud Menken, ii 2z27.

lay
220

ray it before that afembly. After his example, BooK X
and probably in consequence of his solicitations, '"v
the Duke of Wurtemberg, the city of Straf- '551.
burg, and other Protestant States appointed
ambalTadors and divines to attend the council.
They all applied to the Emperor for his fafe-con-
duot, which they obtained in the molt ample
form. This was deemed sufficient for the fe-
ciurity of the ambassadors, and they proceeede
accordingly on their journey; buta keparate safe-
conduRt from the council itself, was demanded
for the Protestant divines. The fate of John
Huls and Jerome of Prague, whom the council
of Constance, in the preceding century, had
condemned to the flames without regarding the
Imperial fafe-conducl which had been granted
them, rendered this precaution prudent and ne-
ceffary. But as the Pope was no less unwilling
that the Proteilants should be admitted to an
hearing in the council, than the Emperor had
been eager in bringing them to demand it, the
legate by promises and threats prevailed on the
fathers of the council to decline issuing a safe-
condudt in the fame form with that which the
council of Basil had granted to the followers of
Huls. 1 he Proteitants, on their part, infilled
upon the council's copying the precise words of
that infirument. The imperial ainbafadors in-
terpofed in order to obtain what would satisfy
them. Alterations in the form of the writ were
proposed; expedients were fiuggefled; protefis
;and counter protests were taken; the legate to-
gcther with his allociates laboured to gain their
point by artifice and chicane; the Proteflants ad-
hered to theirs with firmnets and obltinacy. An
account of every thing that pased in Trent was
rranfmitted to the Emperor at Inlpruck, who,
attempting'from an excels of zeal, or of confi-
dence in his own addrecs, to reconcile the cox-

VOL. 111. P tending

Boot X. tending parties, was involved in a labyrinth ot

V inextricable negociations. By means of this,
'55I' however, Maurice gained all that he had in

view; the Emperor's time was wholly engrossed,
and his attention diverted; while he had leisure
to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues,
and to finish his preparations before he threw off
the mask, and firuck the blow which he had ib
long meditated (z).

The affairs BUT previous to the history of Maurice's ope.
ofHungar 'rations, some account mutl be given of a new

revolution in Hungary, which contributed not
a little towards their producing such extraordi-
nary effecs. When .olyman, in the year 154r,
by a firatagem, which suited the base and infidi-
ous policy of a petty usurper, rather than the
magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived
the young King of Hungary of the dominions
which his father had left him, he had granted
that unfortunate Prince the country ot Tranfyl-
vania, a province of his paternal kingdom. The
government of this, together with the care of
educating the young King, for he fUill allowed
him to retain that title, though he had rendered
it only an empty name, he committed to the
Queen and Martinuzzi bishop ot Waradin,
whom the late King had appointed his sons guar-
dians and regents of his dominions, at a time
when those offices were of greater importance.
This co ordinate urifdiction occasioned the fame
dissentions in a small principality as it would
have excited in a great kingdom; an ambitious
young Queen, conscious of her capacity for go-
verning, and an high spirited prelate, contending
who should engross the greatest share in the
administration. Each had their pattizans among
the nobles, but as Martinuzzi, by his great ta-

(z) Slcid. zr6, 529. F. Paul. 323, 338. Thuan. z86.

lent
222

lents began to acquire the ascendant, IfabellaBooK x-
turned his own arts against him, and courted -V
the protection of the Turks. s551'

THE neighbouring bafhas, jealous of the Martinuzzi

fayours Ser*

bi(hop's power as well as abilities, readily pro- dinand'
mifed her the aid which she demanded, and pretei.fion

in that king-

would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to havedom.
given up to her the sole dire&ion of affairs, if
his ambition, fertile in expedients, had not fug-
gelled to him a new measure, and one that
tended not only to preserve, but to enlarge his
authority. Having concluded an agreement
with the Queen, by the mediation of rome of
the nobles who were solicitous to save their
country from the calamities of a civil war, he
secretly dispatched one of his confidents to Vi-
enna, and entered into a negociation with Ser-
dinand. As it was no difficult matter to per-
fuade Ferdinand that the fame man whose en-
mity and intrigues had driven him out of a
great part of his Hungarian dominions, might,
upon a reconciliation, become equally inltru-
mental in recovering them, he listened eagerly
to the first overtures of an union with that pre-
late. Martinuzzi allured him by such profpeas
of advantage, and engaged, with To much con-
fidence, that he would prevail on the most pow-
erful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms in
his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithftandinghis
truce with Solyman, agreed to invade Tran-
fylvania. The command of the troops defcined
for that service, consisting of veteran Spanish
and German soldiers, was given to Caftaldo
Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed by the
famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he strongly
resembled both in his enterprizing genius for
civil business, and in his great knowledge in the
art of war. This army, more formidable by
the discipline of the soldiers, and the abilities of

P ' the

Boor X.the general, than by its number, was power-
-v-' fully seconded by Martinuzzi and his fa(tion

'55'. among the Hungarians. As the Turkish Bafl.as,

the Sultan himself being at the head of his ar-
my on the frontiers of Persia, could not afford
the Qieen filch immediate or effeAual afliftance
as the exigency of her affairs required, (he
quickly loft all hopes of being able to retain any
longer the authority which (he poffefled as
regent, and even began to despair of her
son's tafety.

The Srfccfs MARTINUZZI did not susser this favourab!e
of his mca-
lies. opportunity of accomplilhing .his own designs

to pass unimproved, and ventured, whi e The
was in this slate of dejection, to lay before her
a proposal, which, at any other time, (he would
have rejeded with disdain. He represented how
impossible it was for her to resist Ferdinand's
victorious arms ; that even if the Turks should
enable her to make head against them, she
would be far from changing her condition to
the better, and could not confider them as de-
liverers, but as matters, to whose comman d
she must fuibmit; he conjured her, therefore,
as (he regarded her own dignity, the safety of
her ton, or the security of Christendom, rather
to give up Tranlylvania to Ferdinand, and to
make over to him her son's title to the crown of
Hungary, than to allow both to be ufirped by
the inveterate enemy of the Christian Faith.
At the fame time, he promited her, in Ferdi-
nand's name, a compensation for herself, as
well as fIr her son, suitable to their rank, and
pi)oportional to the value of what they were to
lacrilicc. llabella, desertcd by onme of her ad-
herents, dillrulting others, deltitute of friends,
and I'irrounlded by Callaldo's and Martinuzzi's
troops, lublcribed, though with a reluctant
Iha.ld, tllh;l harId conditions. Upon this, fli

lu rrendertl
224

filrrendered fiCch places of flrength as were ftiilBoo X.
in her poflellion, Ihe gave up all the ensigns of -¥V
roya'ty, particularly a crown of..gold, which, 5S''
as the Hungarians believed, had delcended from
Heaven, and conferred on him who wore it,
an undoubted right.to the throne. As fihe
could not bear to remain a private person, in
a country where she once enjoyed sovereign
power, Ihe instantly set out with her son for Si-
lefia, in order to take pofTefiion of the principa-
lities of Oppelen and Ratibor, the investiture
of which Ferdinand had engaged to grant her
son, and likewise to bestow out of his daughters
upon him in marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Appointed

·, . ; ' 'l r" - ~'

'

·- · r' rl ecove:-nor of

Martinuzzi, and after his example the reft otitat part f
the Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance '"ungar
to Ferdinand; who, in order to testify his ubjc, to
grateful sense of the zeal as well as success with ll '.i"a''
which that prelate had served him, atected to
dilingiifh him by every pofible mark of favour
and confidence. He appointed him governor
of Transylvania, with almotl unlimited autho-
rity; lhe ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatelt de-
ference to his opinion and commands hle en-
creased his revenues, which were already very
great, by new appointments; lie rnominated
him archbifhopof Gran, and prevailed on tlh
Pope to raise him to the dignity of a Cardinal.
All this oflentation of good-wil!, however, was
void of lincerity, and calculated to conceal fen-
timents the molt perfe'tly its reverle. Fcldi-
nand dreaded Martinuzzi's abilities dillrulled
his fidelity; and foresaw, that as his extensive
autlhority enabled him to check any attempt to-
wards circumscribing or abolilling the exten-
live privileges which the Hungarian nobles pot-
fef'ed, he would (tand forth, on every occasion,
the guardian of the liberties of his country,

P 3 ratlieh

225

BooK X. rather than at the part of a viceroy devoted
vV^ to the will of his sovereign.

'55'.

Ferdinand FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge
begins to tCafaldo, to watch his motions, to guard a-
3gainfthlm gains his designs, and to thwart his measures.

But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per-
ceive that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his
actions, or because he delpifed Ferdinand's in-
fiduous arts, assumed the direrion of tle war
against the Turks with his usual tone of autho-
rity, and conduted it with great magnani-
mity and no less success. He recovered some
places of which the Infidels had taken pofkf-
sion; he rendered their attempts to reduce
others abortive; and eflablifhed Ferdinand's
authority not only in Tianfylvania, but in the
Bannat of Temefwaer, and several of the coun-
tries adjacent. In carrying on there operations,
he othen differed in sentiments from Caftaldo
and his officers, and treated the Turkish pri-
foners with a degree of humanity, and even of
generosity, which Caftaldo loudly condemned.
This was represented at Vienna as an artful me-
thod of courting the friendship of the Infidels,
that, by securing their protection, he might
shake off all dependance upon the sovereign
whom he now acknowledged. Though Mar-
tinuzzi, in juflification of his own condut,
contended that it was impolitic to exasperate,
by unnecessary severities, an enemy prone to
revenge, Caftaldo'a accufiaions gained credit
with Ferdinand, prepoffefed already againfl
Martinuzzi, and jealous of every thing that
could endanger his authority in Hungary, in
proportion as he knew it to be precarious and
ill ellablifhed. Theie suspicions, Caflaldo con-
firmed and strengthened, by the intelligence
which he transmitted continually to his confi-
dents at Vienna. By misrepresenting what

was

was innocent, and putting the worst conftruti- BooK X.
on on what seemed dubious in Maitinuzzi's V
conduct; by imputing to him designs which '155'
he never formed, and charging him with asti-
ons of which he was not guilty; he at last
convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to pre-
serve his Hungarian crown, he must cut off that
ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing
that it would be dangerous to proceed in the re-
gular course of law againfi a subject of such
exorbitant power, as enabled him to set his so-
vereign at defiance, determined to employ vio-
lence, in order to obtain that satisfaction, which
the laws were too feeble to afford him.

HE ifiled his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, Te is'a as-

who willingly undertook that infamous service. hiscdbm-
Having communicated the design to some Ita- 'and.
lian and Spanish officers whom he could trust,
and concerted with them the plan of executing
it; they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early Dc. g.
one morning, under pretence of presenting to
him some dispatches which were to be sent off
immediately to Vienna; and while he perused
a paper with attention, one of their number
struck him with his poniard in the throat.
The blow was not mortal; Martinuzzi started
up with the intrepidity natural to him, and
grappling the assassin, threw him to the ground;
but the other conspirators rushing in, an old
man unarmed, and alone, could not long sus-
tain such an unequal conflict, but funk under
the wounds which he received from ot many
lands. The dread of the foreign troops re-
rtrained the Transylvanians from rising in arms
in order to take vengeance on the murderers Th, -e
of a prelate who had long been the objee (cf, that vio-
their love as well as veneration. They fpokct:l"" a0"'
of the deed, however, with horror and exe
oration; and exclaimed againfi Ferdinand,
whom neither gratitude for recent and iipor-

P 4 tant

Boox Xtant services, nor reverence for a character con.
^^V' ~fide: -J as sacred and inviolable among chriti.

5 ans, could retrain from lledding the blood of

a man, whofc only crime was attachment to his
native country. The nobles, detesting the jea-
lous as well as cruel policy of a court, which,
upon uncertain and improbable surmises, had
given up a person no less conspicuous for his
merit than his rank, to be butchered by aifar.
fins, either retired to their own estates, or if
they continued with the Aultrian army, grew
co!d to the service. The Turks, encouraged
by the death of an enemy whose abilities they
knew and dreaded, prepared to renew holtili-
ties early in the spring; and infPead of the fe-
curity which Ferdinand had expeLed from the
removal of Martinuzzi, it was evident that his
territories in Hungary were about to be attack-
ed with greater vigour, and defended with less
zeal than ever (a).

Maurice MEANWHILE, Maurice having almost si-
'trt;the ofniflied his intrigues and preparations, was on

protession ofn t L
the french the point of declaring his intentions openly, and
Aking. of taking the field againil the Emperor. His

first care, afrer he came to this relblution, was
to difcraim that nariow and bigotted maxim of
the confederates of Smalkalde, which had led
them to Ihun all connection with foreigneis.
He had observed how fatal this had been to
their cauf ; and inftru^tcd by tleir error, he
was as eager to court the protection of Henry
1I, as they had been lulicitous to prevent tle
interposition of Francis I. Happily for him he
found Henry in a dilpofition to li'ten to the firit
overture on his part, and in a iituation which
enabled him to bring the whole force of the

(a) Slcid. c3g. Thuan. lib. ix. &o9, &c. Ifltanhaffi

Ilift. Reg. Hungarici lib. xvi. is9, &c. Meni. de Ribicr.
ii. H87. Natalis Comitis Hiftoria, lib. iv. 84, &c.

Frencl

French-monarchy into aAion. Henry had longBooK X.
oblerved the progress of the Emperor's arms V'
with jealousy, and wished to diltinguifh himself '55'
by trying his strength against the lame enemy,
whom it had been the glory of his father's
reign to oppose. He had laid hold on the first
opportunity in his power, of thwarting the Em-
peror's designs, by taking the Duke of Parma
under his protection; and hostilities were al-
ready begun, not only in that dutchy, but in
Piedmont. Having terminated the war with
England by a peace, no less advantageous to
himself than honourable for his allies the
Scots, the restless and enterprizing courage of
his nobles was impatient to display itself on
btme theatre of action more conspicuous than
the petty operations in Parma or Piedmont
afforded them.

JoIIH DE FIESSE, bishop of Bayonne, whomn;is treaty

Henry had sent into Germany, under pretencewih him.
of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was
epowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his associates. As it would have
been very indecent in a King of France to
have undertaken the defence of the Proteltant
church, the interests of religion, how much so-
ever they might be affected by the treaty, were
not once mentioned in any of the articles. Re-
ligious concerns they pretended to commit en-
tirely to the disposition of divine providence;
the only motives afligned for their present con-
federacy againfs Charles, were to procure the
Landgrave liberty, and to prevent the fubverli-
on of the ancient conltitution and laws of the
German Empire. In order to accomplish there
ends, it was agreed, that all the contracting
parties should, at the fame time, declare war
against the Emperor; that neither peace nor
truce should be made but by common conlent,

nor

229

BooK X.nor without including each of the confede.
'V' rates; that, in order to guard against the in.

'551' conveniencies of anarchy, or of pretensions

to joint command, Maurice should be acknow.
ledged as head of the German confederates,
with absolute authority in all military affairs;
that Maurice and his afociates ihould bring
into the field seven thousand horse, with a pro-
portionable number of infantry; that towards
the fubfilience of this army, during the three
first months of the war, Henry should contri.
bute two hundred and forty thousand crowns,
and afterwards sixty thousand crowns a month,
as long as they continued in arms; that Henry
should attack the Emperor on the fide of
Lorrain with a powerful army; that if it were
found requisite to elest a new Emperor, such a
person Should be nominated as (hall be agree.
able to the King of France (b). This treaty
was concluded on the fifth of Oftober, some
time before Magdehurg fiurrendered, and the
preparatory negociations were conducted with
such profound secrecy, that of all the Princes
who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice commu-
nicated what he was carrying on to two only,
John Albert, the reigning duke of Mecklen-
burg, and William of Hesse, the Landgrave's
eldelt son. The league itself was no less anxi-
oufly concealed, and with such fortunate care,
that no rumour concerning it reached the ears
of the Emperor or his minilters, nor do they
seem to have conceived the most distant fufpi-
cion of such a tranfiation.

Snlicrit the AT the fame time Maurice, with a folicituide
3id ( f Ed- ,irAVi.ofWhich was careful to draw tome acceflion of
rLI.lntl. firength from every quarter, applied to Ed-

(b) Recucil des Traitez, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279,

ward

ward VI. of England, and requested a fubfidyBooK x.
of four hundred thousand crowns for the sip- .YN,
port of a confederacy, formed in defence of '55
the Protestant religion. But the faftions which
prevailed in the English court during the mino-
rity of that Prince, and which deprived both
the councils and arms of the nation of their
wonted vigour, left the English ministers nei-
ther time or inclination to attend to foreign
affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that
aid, which their zeal for the Reformation would
have prompted them to grant him (c).

MAURICE, however, having secured theDemnds

protetion of such a powerful Monarch as°tonce
Henry II. proceeded with great confidence, Landgrave
but with equal caution, to execute his plan. tlbrt.1C'.
As he judged it necessary to make one effort
more, in order to obtain the Emperor's con-
sent, that the Landgrave should be set at li-
berty, he sent a solemn embassy, in his ownDcember.
name, and in that of the Eector of Branden-
burg, to Infpruck. After resuming, at great
length, all the fats and arguments upon which
they founded theirclaim, and representing, in
the firongeft terms, the peculiar engagements
which bound them to be so afliduous in their
solicitations, they renewed the request in be-
half of the unfortunate prisoner, which they
had so often preferred in vain. The Eledor
Palatine, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the Dukes
of Mecklenburg, the Duke of Deuxponts, the
Marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and the
Marquis of Baden, by their ambafadors, con-
curred with them in their suit. Letters were
likewise delivered to the fame effeR from the
King of Denmark, the Duke of Bavaria, and
the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the King of
the Romans, moved with companion towards

(c) Burnct' Hist. of the Reform. vol. ii Append. 37 the

the

BoOK X.the Landgrave, in his wretched situation, or
'"-~ influenced, perhaps, by a secret jealousy of

'55-' his brother's power and designs, which since

his attempt to alter the order o fucceflion in
the Empire, he had come to view with other
eyes, and dreaded to a great degree, joined il
this application.

BUT Charles, confant to his own fyifem,

with regard to the Landgrave, eluded a de-
mand urged by fiich powerful intercessors;
and having declared that he would communi-
cate his resolution concerning the matter, to
Maurice, as soon as he arrived at Infpruck,
where he was every day expected, he did not
deign to descend into any more particular ex-
plication of his intentions (d). This applica-
tion, though of no benefit to the Landgrave,
was of great advantage to Maurice. It served
to justify his subsequent proceedings, and to
demonarate the necessity of employing arms in
order, to extort that equitable conceflion, which
his mediation or intreaty could not obtain. It
was of use, too, to confirm the Emperor in
his security, as both the solemnity of the ap-
plication, and the solicitude with which so
many Princes were drawn in to enforce it, led
him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his
hopes of rebtoring the Landgrave to liberty,
in gaining his consent to dilmnifs him.

2. MA URICE employed artifices still more refined
.o,,GIteso to tconceal his machinations, to amule the itm-

;lcl~l3' peror, and to gain time. He affected to be more

fblicitous than ever to find out some expedient
fir removing the difficulties with regard to the
fife conduc for the Protestant divines appointel
to attend the council, so that they might lepair

(d) Slcid. 53. Thuain.lib. viii. 280.

thithc,

thither with safety. His ambassadors at TrentRooK X.
had frequent conferences concerning this matter V
with the Imperial ambassadors in that city, and 15S5'
laid open their sentiments to them with the ap-
pearance of the mofl unreserved confidence. He
was willing, at lafd, to have it believed, that lie
thought all differences with refpeet to this pre-
liminary article were on the point of being
adjiuled; ant in order to give credit to this opi-
nion, he commanded Melanlhon together with
his brethren to fct out on their journey to Trent.
At the fame time, he held a clufe correspondence
with the Imperial court at Jnfpruck, and renew-
ed on every occasion his profeflions of fidelity
and attachment to the Emperor. He talked
continually of his intention of going to Infprucl
in person; he ordered a house to be hired for
him in that city, and to be fitted up with the
greate ldifpatch for his reception (e).

BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was inThe Eif.r-

the arts of deceit, and impenetrable as he thought '%cdot-e
the veil to be under which he concealed his le-fiipi,;ionn
signs, there were several things in his conduct" "J' ;

hliich alarmed the Emperor amidst his fecurity,on.
and tempted him frequently to fufpeRt that hie
was meditating something extraordinary. As
these suspicions took their yile from circumfiances
inconsiderable in themselves, or of an ambiguous
as well as uncertain nature, they were more than
counterbalanced by Maurice's address; and the
Emperor would not, lightly, give up his conii-
dence in a man, whom lie had once trultled and
loaded with favours. One particular alone fierm.
ed to be of fiich conikquencc, that he thought
it ncceffary to demand an explanation with re-
gard to it. The troops, which George of Meek.

(t) Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Mlenken, ii. 12zg.

li(-bl.t'I

Boos X. lenburg had taken into pay after the capitulation
v^'V of Magdeburg, having fixed their quarters in

cS5' Thuringia, lived at discretion on the lands of the

rich ecclesiastics in their neighbourhood. Their
license and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exactions, complained
loudly to the Emperor, and represented them as
a body of men kept in readiners for some defpe-
rate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by exte.
nuating the enormities of which they had been
guilty, partly by representing the impollibility
of disbanding there troops, or of keeping them
to regular discipline, unless the arrears frill due
to them by the Emperor were paid, either re-
moved the apprehensions which this had occafi.
oned, or as Charles was not in a condition to fa-
tisfy the demands of there soldiers, obliged him
to be silent with regard to the matter (f).

Mraulice T H E time of action was now approaching.
Fr PaOn,. Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of

Brandenburg to Paris, in order to confirm his
league with Henry, and to haften the march of
the French army. He had taken measures to
bring his own fubjecs together on the first fum-
mons; he had provided for the security of Sax-
ony while he should be absent with the army;
and he held the troops in Thuringia, on which
he chiefly depended, ready to advance on a mo-
ment's warning. All these complicated opera-
tions were carried on without being discovered
by the court at Infpruck, and the Emperor re-
mained there in perfect tranquillity,bufied entire-
ly in counter-acting the intrigues of the Pope's
legate at Trent, and in fettling the conditions on
which the Protestant divines should be admitted
into the council, as if there had not been any
tranfation of greater moment in agitation.

(f) Sleid, 49. Th11an. 33g.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, whofeBooK x.

sagacity in observing the conduct of all around iYL
him, commonly led him to an excess of dirtruft, '
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed
to infatuation. But besides theexquifite addretscircm-
with which Maurice concealed his intentions, '

n-

two circumstances contributed to the delufion.tributd to
The gout returned upon Charles soon after hisEm?¢,r,,
arrival at Infpruck, with an encreafe of violence,
and his constitution being broken by such fre-
quent attacks, he was feldotn able to exert his
natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs
with his ulual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bilhop of Arras, his prime miniiter,
though one of the most subtle flatefmen of that,
or perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the
dupe of his own craft. He entertained such an
high opinion of his own abilities, and held the
political talents of the Germans in such con-
tempt, that he despised all the intimations given
him concerning Maurice's secret machinations,
or the dangerous designs which he was carrying
on. When the Duke of Alva, whose dark sus- and his
picious mind harboured many doubts concerninomg"'in"
the EleAor's sincerity, proposed calling him im-
mediately to court to answer for his conduCt, he
replied with great scorn, that there apprehenfi-
onsweregroundlefs, and that a drunken Ger-
man head was too gross to form any scheme
which he could not easily penetrate and baffle.
Nor did he afflme this peremptory tone merely
from confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's miniflers, and received
fiom them frequent and minute information con-
cerning all their malter's motions. But through
this very channel, by which he expected to gain
access to all Maurice's counsels, and even to his
thoughts, fich intelligence was conveyed to him
as compleated his deception. Maurice fortunately

dilcovered

Boor, X.difcovered the correspondence of the two trai-
'V' tors with Granvelle, and inltead of punillirng
l52'. them for their crime, he dexterously availed

hirnfelf of their fraud, and turned his own arts
againfl the bilhop. He affected to treat thele
ministers with greater confidence than ever; he
admitted them to his consultations, and seemed
to lay open his heart to them; and taking care
all the while to let them be acquainted with no-
thing but what it was his interest should be
known, they transmitted to Inlpruck such ac-
counts as possessed Granvelle with a firm belief
of his Sincerity and good intentions (g). The
Emperor himself, in the fulness of security, was
so little moved by a memorial, in the name of
the ecclesiastical Elecors, admonishing him to
be on his guard against Maurice, that he made
light of this intelligence; and his anfver
to them abounds with declarations of his entire
and confident reliance on the fidelity as well as
attachment of that Prince (/).

!allrice A T last Maurice's preparations were com-
r.a;: CS the
icld aoainapleated, and he had the fatisfacion to find that
Emr Kinpc- his intrigues and designs were flill unknown.

But, though now ready to take the field, lie did
not lay alide the arts which he had hitherto
employed; and by one piece of craft more, he
deceived his enemies a few days longer. He
gave out, that he was about to begin thatjour-
ney to Infpruck of which lie had ib o'ten talk-
ed, and he took one of the minitiers whom
Granvelle had bribed to attend him thither.
After travelling post a few flages, he pretended
to be indisposcd by the fatigue of the journey,
and.difpatching the l(ilpected miniller to make
his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and
to allure him that he would be at Inlpruck within
a few days; as loon as this spy on his a3tions was
gone, lie mounted on horseback, rode flll lisptd

(X) Melvil. Mcmoiirs, ful. edit. p. x2. (h) Skid. s 35.

tow arls

towards Thuringia, joined his army which BOOK X.
amounted to twenty thousand foot and five "V
thouland horse, and put it immediately in mo- '552'
tion *.

AT the fame time he publi(hed a manifefltopubii;es

containing his reasons for taking arms. Thefea flniefto
were three in number; That he might fecurehis cc;n-
the Proteflant religion, which was threateneddua'
with immediate deltrudion; That he might
maintain the constitution and laws of the Em-
pire, and save Germany from beinglilbjeted to
the domination of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hesse from
the miseries of a long and unjust imprisonment.
By the first, he rouzed all the favourers of the
Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal
as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by
oppreflion. By the second, he interested all the
friends of liberty, Catholicks as well as Pro-
teflants, and made it their interest to unite with
him in alerting the rights and privileges com-
mon to both. The third, betides the glory
which he acquired by his zeal to fulfil his en-
gagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become
a cause of general concern, not only from the
companion which the Landgrave's sufferings ex-
cited, but from indignation at the injustice and
rigour of the Emperor's proceedings againit him.
'Together with Maurice's manifesto, another
appeared in the name of Albert, Marquis of
BIrandenburgh Culmbach, who hadjoined him
with a body of adventurers whom he had drawn
together. The fame grievances which Maurice
had pointed out are mentioned in it, but with

* Mclv. Mem. . p. . These circumflances, concerning
the Saxon ministers whom Granvelle had bribed, are not
mentioned by the German historians; but, as Sir James
Mclvil received his information from the E:letor Palatine,
aid as they arc perfcttly agreeable to the rcft of Mauiice's
oiiduilt, they may be confidered as autielltick.
VOL. 111. Q. ar

BOOK X. an excess of virulence and animosity, suitable to
'vV"' the character of the prince in whose name it

'552. was publilhed.

He is THE King of France added to these a mani.
powerfully yfetf in his own name; in which, after taking
supported by
the French notice of the ancient alliance between the French
K"ng. and German nations, both descended from the

fame ancestors , and after mentioning the appli-
cations, which, in consequence of this, tome
of the molt illustrious among the German Prin.
ces had made to him for his protection; he de-
clared that he now took arms to re-establish dhe
ancient conltitution of the Empire, to deliver
some of its princes from captivity, and to secure
the privileges and independence of all the mem-
bers of the Gerranick body. In this manif:fto,
Henry assumed the extraordinary title of Pro.
telor of the Liberties of Germany, and of its
captive Princes; and there was engraved on it
a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom, placed
between two daggers, in order to intimate to
the Germans, that this blelling was to be ac-
quired and secured by force of arms*.

Mopratios MAURICE had now a very different part to
in the field. a&t, but his flexible genius was capable of ac-

commodating itlelf to every situation. The
moment he took arms, he was as bold and en-
terprizing in the field as he had been cautious
and crafty in the cabinet. He advanced by
rapid marches towards the Upper Germany.
All the towns in Hi. way opened their gates to
him. He reinflated the magifirates whom the
Emperor had deposed, and gave poffelion of
the churches to the Proteltant minitiers whom
lie had ejeted. He directed his march to Augl:
burg, and as the Imperial garrison which xvas
* Slid. 549. Thuan. lib. x 339. Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 371l

too

too inconsiderable to think of defending it, re- Boon X.
tired immediately, he took poffefion of that kVo
great city, and made the fame changes there pi52.
as in the towns through which he had paifed.

No words can express the Emperor's astonish- The Em.

ment and consternation at events lo unexpe-t- o 'fe
ed. He saw a great number of the Germanand iftrcCi.
Princes in arms againit him, and the reft ei-
ther ready to join them, or wishing success to
their enterprize. He beheld a powerful Monarch
united with them in close league, seconding
their operations in person at the head of a for-
midable army, while he, through negligence
and credulity, which exposed him no less to
scorn than to danger, had neither made, nor was
in condition to make, any effe6tual provision
either for crushing his rebellious fubjecs, or re-
sifting the invasion of the foreign enemy. Part
of his Spanish troops had been ordered into
Hungary against the Turks; the reft had
marched back to Italy upon occasion of the war
in the dutchy of Parma. The bands of veteran
Germans had been dismissed, because he was
not able to pay them; or had entered into
Maurice's service after the siege of Magdeburg;
and he remained at Infpruck with a body of fol-
diers scarce itrong enough to guard his own
person. His trealfiry was much exhausted, as
his army was reduced. He had received no
remittances for rome time from the new world.
He had forfeited all credit with the merchants
of Genoa and Venice, who refused to lend him
money, tho' tempted by the offer of exorbitant
interet*. Thus, Charles, though undoubtedly
the molt considerable potentate in Christendom,
and capable of exerting the greatest strength,
(as his power, though violently attacked, was

· Sleid. 55. Thuan. 342.

Q z it ill

BOOK X.flill unimpaired,) found himself in a fituationr
^-L^ which rendered him unable to make such a fud.

1552' den and vigorous effort as the juncure required,

and was necessary to have saved him from the
present danger.

urna- IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on

yours to
gain time negociating; the only resource of those who
bya negoci-ate conscious of their own weakness. But think-
atlon.

ing it inconfiltent with his dignity to make the
firit advances to fubjeis who were in arms
againit him, he avoided that indecorum by em-
ploying the mediation of his brother Ferdi-
nand. Maurice, confiding in his own talents to
condu&t any negociation in such a manner as to
derive advantage from it, and hoping that by
the appearance of facility in hearkening to the
first overture of accommodation, he might
amuse the Emperor and tempt him to flacken
the ativity with which he was now preparing
to defend himself, readily agreed to an inter-
view with Ferdinand in the town of Lintz in
Aultria: and having left his army to proceed on
its march under the command of the Duke of
Mecklenburg, he repaired thither.

rrogrcfs THE King of France pun&ually fulfilled his
of the
S'ech Ar- engagement to his allies He took the field
my. early with a numerous and well appointed ar-

my, and marching directly into I orrain, Toui
and Verdun opened their gates at his approach.
His forces appeared next before Metz, and that
city, by a fraudulent flratagem of the Conltable
Montmorency, who having obtained permillion
to pass through it with a (mall guard, introdu.
ced as many troops as were fifficient to over-
power the garrison, was likewise seized without
blood(hed. Henry made his entry into all these
towns with great pomp; he obliged the inhabi-
tants to swear allegiance to him, and annextd
the(e important conqucfs to the Frenchl Mo-

jiarchy.

narchy He left a strong garrison in Metz. From BOOK X.
thence he advanced towards Alsace, in order to V
attempt new conquests, to which the success that 1552.
had hitherto attended his arms invited him*.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce The Ne.

any accommodation. Maurice, when he con- b t"iafSh
fticed to it, seems to have had nothing ilnEmperor
view but to amuse the Emperor; for he made r f Uno
filch demands both in behalf of his confederates, Etrfc:.
and their ally the French King, as he knew
would not be accepted by a prince, too haughty
to filbmit, at once, to conditions dilcated by an
enemy. But, how firmly soever Maurice adher-
ed, during the negociation, to the interests of his
afbciates, or how tfeadily soever he kept in view
the objects which had induced him to take arms,
he often professed a firong inclination to termi-
nate the differences with the Emperor in an ami-
cable manner. Encouraged by this appearance
of a pacific disposition, Ferdinand proposed a
second interview at Paflau, on the twenty-fixth
of May, and that a truce flmould commence on
that day, and continue to the tenth of June, in
order to give them leisure for adjusting all the
points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the Maurice

ninth of May, which had now advanced to Gun. a',,,s1, [,-
delingen. He put his troops in motion nexti'Pruk.
morning; and as sixteen (lays yet remained for
action before the commencement of the truce,
he relblved, during that period, to venture up-
on an enterprize, the fuiccefs of which would be
f) decisive, as would render the negociations at
'affau extremely hort, and entitle him to treat
upon his own terms. He foresaw that the prof-
I'le, of a cessation of arms, which was to take
place bo soon, together with the opinion of his

* Thlan. 3,9.

Q. 3 earneniecfs

vVu" had artfully amused Ferdinand, could not fail

,552. of inspiring the Emperor with flch faire hopes,

that he would naturally become remiss, and re-
lapse into rome degree of that security, which
had already been so fatal to him. Relying on
this conjecture, he marched directly towards In.
fpruck, and advanced with the most rapid moli-
on that could be given to To great a body of
troops. On the eighteenth he arrived at F'ieflen.a
pofi of great conquence, at the entrance into
the Tyrolefe. There he found a body of eight
hundred rnen,whom theEmperor had assembled,
firongly entrenched, in order to oppose his pro.
grefs. He attacked them inflantly with such vi-
olence and impetuosity, that they abandoned
their lines precipitately, and falling back on a
second body pofled near Ruten, communicated
to those troops the pannick terror with which
they themselves had been seized, To that they
likewise took to flight after a feeble refinance.

Takes ELATED with this success, which exceeded
the casile
or F.hren- his molt sanguine hopes Maurice pafled on to
bcrgh. Ehrenbergh, a cattle situated on an high and

sleep precipice, which commanded the only pas(
through the mountains. As this fort had been
surrendered to the Proteflants, at the beginning
of the Smalkaldic war, hecaufe the garribon was
then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, fenfi-
ble of its importance, had taken care, at this
junEture, to throw into it a body of troops sus-
ficient to maintain it againfl the greatelf army.
But a Ihepherd, in purlluing a goat which had
firayed from his flock, having discovered an un-
known path, by which it was poflible to arcend
to the top of the rock, came with his feafonalble
piece of intelligence to Maurice. A small band
of chosen foldieis, under the command of Gcoige
of Metcklenburgh, was inllantly ordered to fl-

low

THE REIGN OF THE
242

low this guide. They set out in the evening,BooK X.
and clambering up the rugged track with infi- i_:
nite fatigue as well as danger, they reached the 552'
summit unperceived ; and at an hour which had
been concerted, when Maurice began the assault
on the one fide of the caltle, they appeared on
the other, ready to scale the walls, which were
feeble in that place, because it had been hither-
to deemed inaccefiible. The garrison, struck
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quar-
ter where they had thought themselves perfectly
secure, immediately threw down their arms.
Maurice, almost without bloodshed, and, which
was of greater consequence to him, without loss
of time, took pofieliion of a place, the reduc-
tion of which might have retarded him long,
and have required the utmolt efforts of his
valour and skill *

MAURICE was now only two days marchA mutiny

from Infpruck, and without losing a moment he 'f hi re-
ordered his infantry to advance thither, havingtards his
left his cavalry, which was unfeiviceable in that marh'
mountainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the
mouth of the pass. He propoled to advance with
filch rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of the
lots of Ehrenbergh, and to firprize the Emperor
together with his attendants in an open town in-
capable of defence. But just as his troops began
to move, a battalion of mercenaries mutinied,
declaring that they would not fsir until they
had received the gratuity, which, according
to the cuflom of that age, they claimed as the
recompense due to them for having taken a
place by assault. It was with great difficulty, as
well as danger, and not without some confidera-
ble loss of time, that Maurice quieted this in-

*Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123.

Q4 furrecion,

BoOKX.furretion, and prevailed on tle soldiers to fol-
"v' low him to a place where he promised them fuich

1552 rich booty as would be an ample reward for all

their services.

The Em- To the delay occasioned by this unforeseen ac-
perot flies
Prconfon cident, the Emperor owed his safety. He was
from Ins- informed of the approaching danger late in the
'ruk'. evening, and knowing that nothing could save

him but a speedy flight, he instantly left In-
fpruck, without regarding the darkness of the
night, or the violence of the rain which happen-
ed to fall at that time; and, notwitlhfanding Iis
being so much debilitated by the gout, that he
could bear no motion but that of a litter, he tra-
velled by the light of torches, taking his way
over the Alps, by roads almost impaflible. His
courtiers and attendants followed him with equal
precipitation, some of them on such horses as
they could hastily procure, many of them on
foot, and all in the utmost confusion. In this
miserable plight, very unlike the pomp with
which Charles had appeared during the five pre-
ceding years as the conqueror of Germany, ih
arrived at length with his dejeed train at Vil-
lach in Carinthia, and scarce thought himself le
cure even in that remote inacceflible corner.

ntrs'hatu MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours aftcr
town. the Emperor and his attendants had left it,

and, enr.,ged that the prey should escape out (;
his hands when he wasjult ready to fcize it, lie
pursued them ibme miles; but finding it impof-
lible to overtake persons, to whom their lear
gave speed, he returned to the town, and abail-
doned all the Emi,eror's baggage and that of his
ministers to be plundered by the soldiers; while
he preserved untouched every thing belonging
to the King of the Romans, ether because he
had formed some friendly connecion with

that

that Prince, or because he wished to have itBooK X.
believed that such a connetion ftibfited be-L-'"
tween them. As there now remained only '52z
three days to the commencement of the truce,
(with such nicety had Maurice calculated his
operations) he set out for Paffau, that he might
meet Ferdinand on the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Jnfpruck, he withdrewThc Em-

the guards placed on the degraded EleCtor oftP'llefieaor
Saxony, whom, during five years, lie had car-a' .aony

a liberty.

ried about with him as a prisoner; and set him y'
entirely at liberty, either with an intention to
embarrass Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and dig-
nity, or from a sense of the indecency of de-
taining him a prisoner, while he liiinfelf run
the rifque of being deprived of his own liber-
ty. But that Prince, feeing no way of efcap-
ing, but that which the Emperor took, and ab-
horring the thoughts of falling into the hands
of a kinsman, whom he justly confidered as
the author of all his misfortunes, chore rather
to accompany Charles in his flight, and to ex-
peA the final decision of his fate from the
treaty which was now approaching.

THIS was not the only effet which Mau-T h'

ounci l

co iF

rice's operations produced. It was no fooner'rrent
known at Trent that he had taken arms, than b,,'k tp in

great c( nl-

a general consternation had seized the fatheisniernatio.
of the council. The German prelates imme-
diately returned home, that they might provide
for the safety of their territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone ; and the
legate, who had hitherto disappointed all the
endeavours of the Imperial ambafadors to pro-
cure for the Proteflant divines an audience in
the council, laid hold with joy on such a plau-
ible pretext for dilinilling an afnimbly, which

he

245

BOOK X, he had found it so difficult to govern. In a

v"b. congregation held on the twenty-eighth of April,
'5s a decree was ifTued for proroguing the council

during two years, and appointing it to meet at
the expiration of that time, if peace were then
re-established in Europe *. This prorogation
however, continued no less than ten years; and
its proceedings, when re-assembled in the year
one thouland five hundred and fixty-two, fall
not within the period prescribed to this history.

The es- THE convocation of this assembly had been
sea of its so patfionately desired by all the states and Prin-
decrees. ces in Christendom, who, from the wildom and

piety of prelates representing the whole body of
the faithful, expected some charitable and effi-
cacious endeavours towards comporing the dif-
fenfions which unhappily had arisen in the
church. But the several popes, by whose au-
thority it was called, had other objects in view;
and, exerting all their power or policy to attain
these, acquired, by the abilities as well as ad-
dress of their legates, by the ignorance of ma-
ny of the prelates, and by the servility of the
indigent Italian bishops, such influence in the
council, that they dilcated all its decrees, and
framed them, not with an intention to restore
unity and concord to the church, but to efla-
blilh their own dominion, or to confirm these
tenets, upon which they imagined that domini-
on to be founded. Doctrines which had hi-
thlrto been admitted upon the credit of tradi-
tion alone, and received with some latitude of
interpretation, were defined with a fcrupuloius
nicety, and confirmed by the faniion of au-
thority. Rites, which had formerly been ob-
served only in deference to custom supposed to
he ancient, were eflablifhed by the decrees of
tle church, and declared to be essential parts

* F. Paul, 353-

or

of its worship. The breach, instead of being BooK x.
closed, was widened, and made irreparable. In o'r'
place of any attempt to reconcile the contend- '152
ing parties, a line was drawn with such fludied
accuracy, as ascertained and marked out the
dittinAion between them. This fill serves
to keep them at a distance; and muff, with-
out some signal interposition of divine Provi-
dence, render the Separation perpetual.

OUR knowledge of the proceedings of thischara.erof

assembly is derived from three different au-.an ,, this
thors. Father Paul of Venice wrote his history council
of the Council of Trent, while the memory of
what had passed there was recent, and Come who
had been members of it were fill alive. He
has exposed the intrigues and artifices by which
it was conduCted, with a freedom and severity
which have given a deep wound to the credit
and reputation of the Council. He has de-
fcribed its deliberations, and explained its de-
crees, with such perspicuity and depth of
thought, with such various erudition and fiich
force of reason, as have juflly entitled his work
to be placed among the molt admired hiflorical
compositions. About half a century thereafter,
the Jesuit Pallavicini published his hiltory of
the council, in opposition to that of Father
Paul, and, by employing all the force of an
acute and refining genius to invalidate the cre-
dit, or to confute the reasonings of his antago-
nift, he labours to prove, by artful apologies lor
the proceedings of the council, and fuLbtile in-
terpretations of its decrees, that it deliberated
with impartiality, and decided with judgment
as well as candour. Vargas, a Spanifhi doctor
of laws, who was appointed to attend the Im-
perial ambafladors at Trent, sent the biflop of
Arras a regular account of the traniactions
there, explaining all the arts which the Legate
employed to influence, or over-awe the council.

His

BooK X. His letters have been published, in which he in-
`VV veighs against the Papal court with that asperity

of cenfire, which was natural to a man whose
situation enabled him to observe its arts tho.
roughly, and who was obliged to exert all his
attention and talents, in order to disappoint
them. But, whichsoever of there authors an
intelligent person takes for his guide, in form-
ing a judgment concerning the spirit of the
council, he mufi discover so much ambition as
well as artifice among some of the members,
so much ignorance and corruption among
others; he muff ohferve fuich a large infusion
of human policy and paflions, but such a scanty
portion of that simplicity of heart, fantity of
manners, and love of truth, which alone qua-
lify men to determine what doctrines are wor-
thy of God, and what worship is acceptable to
him; that he will find it no easy matter to
believe, that any extraordinary influence of
the Holy Gholt, hovered over this assembly,
and dictated its decrees.

rtench en- WHILE Maurice was employed in negocia-
devour toting with the King of the Romans at Lintz, or
rfburgh. in making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol,

the French King had advanced into Alsace as
far as Strafburgh ; and having demanded leave
of the Senate to march through the city, ie
hoped that by repeating the fame fraud which
he had practised at Metz, he might render
himself matier of the place, and by that means
secure a passage over the Rhine into the heart
of Germany. But the Strafburghers, inftrueted
and put on their guard by the credulity and
misfortune of their neighbours, shut their gates;
and having assembled a garrison of five thouland
soldiers, prepared their fortifications, razed tlle
houses in their fiiburbs, and determined to de-
fend themselves to the utmost. At the llime
time they sent a deputation of their moll rtl-

1peclable

pedable citizens to the King, in order to divert BooK X.
him from making any holtile attempt upon them. 4v
The Elector of Treves and Cologn, the Duke 's52-
of Cleves, and other Princes in the neighbour-
hood, interposed in their behalf; beseeching
Henry that he would not forget so soon the title
which he had generously assumed; and, inflead
of being the Deliverer of Germany, be-
come its Oppressor. The Swiss cantons second-
ed them with zeal, soliciting Henry to lpare a
city which had long been connected with their
community in friendship and alliance.

POWERFUL as this united intercession was,But without

it would not have prevailed on Henry to foregofuccc"s
a prize of so much value, if he had been in a
condition to have seized it. But, in that age,
the method of fubfifling numerous armies at a
distance from the frontiers of their own country,
was imperfetly underflood, and neither the re-
venues of Princes, nor their experience in the
art of war, were equal to the great and compli-
cated efforts which such an undertaking requi-
red. The French, though not far removed
from their own country, began already to susser
for want of provilions, and had no sufficient ma-
gazines collected to flipport them, during a
siege, which must necessarily have been of great
length *. At the fame time, the Queen of
Hungary, governess of the Low-Countries, had
aflembled a considerable body of troops, which,
under the command of Martin de Roiffem, laid
waste Champagne, and threatened the adjacent
provinces of France. These concurring cir-
cum(tances obliged the King, though with re-
luctance, to abandon the enterprize. But being
willing to acquire some merit with his allies, by
this retreat which he could not avoid, he pre-
tended to the Swiss that he had taken the refolu-
tion merely in compliance with their requefl: 1-;
Thuai,. 351, 35z. -1 Slcid 557. Brantome,to . vii. 39

and

BooK X.and then, after giving orders that all the horses

in his army should be led to drink in the Rhine,
5 as a proof of his having pushed his conqueats

so far, he marched back towards Champagne.

The 'npc- WHILE the French King and the main army
ratiuns of
Albert of Of the confederates were thus employed; Albert
Branden- of randenburgh was entrusted with the com-

mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,
confifling chiefly of mercenaries who had resort-
ed to his standard, rather from the hope of plun-
der, than the expectation of regular pay. That
Prince, feeing himfclf at the head of such a
number of desperate adventurers ready to follow
wherever he should lead them, soon began to
disdain a ltate of subordination, and to form such
vast schemes of aggrandizing himself, as seldom
occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war or violent factions rouze them to bold
exertions, by alluring them with immediate
hopes of success. Full of these aspiring thoughts,
Albert made war in a manner very different
from the other confederates. He endeavoured
to spread the terror of his arms by the rapidity
of his motions, as well as the extent and rigour
of his devastations; he exated contributions
wherever he came, in order to amass such a
fum of money, as would put it in his power
to keep his army together; he laboured to get
poffeflion of Nurembergh, Ulme, or some other
of the free cities in Upper Germany, in which,
as a capital, he might fix the feat of his power.
But, finding there cities on their guard, and in
a condition to resist his attacks, he turned all
his rage against the popith ecclefialticks, whore
territories he plundered with such wanton and
mercilels barbarity, as gave them a very un-
favourable imprellion of the spirit of that re-
formation in religion, with zeal for which he
pretendcd to be animated. The bishops of

Bambcrgh

Bambergh and Wurtzburg, by their situation, BooK X.
lay particularly exposed to his ravages; he obli- _V*
ged the former to transfer to him, in proper- 152'
ty, almost one half of his extensive diocele;
and compelled the latter to advance an immense
film, in order to save his country from ruin and
desolation. During all these wild sallies, Albert
paid no regard either to Maurice's orders, whose
commands, as Generaliflimo of the league, he
had engaged to obey, or to the remonltrances
of the other confederates; and manifestly dif-
covered that he attended only to his own pri-
vate emolument, without any solicitude about
the common cause, or the general objects
which had induced them to take arms*.

MEANWHILE, Maurice having ordered hisThenegoci-

army to march back into Bavaria, and havingp:ce at
published a proclamation enjoining the Luthe-Pairau.
ran clergy and inftrudors of youth, to refiume
the exercise of their functions in all the cities,
schools, and universities, from which they had
been ejected, met Ferdinand at Palfau on the
twenty-fixth day of May. As matters of the
greatest conlequence to the future peace and in-
dependance of tl;. Empire were to be fettled
in this congress, the eyes of all Germany were
fixed upon it. Betides Ferdinand and the Im-
perial ambafTadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the
bishops of Saltzburgh, and Aichfladt, the mi-
nifters of all the Eleors, together with depu-
ties from most of the considerable Princes and
free cities, resorted to Paffau. Maurice, in
name of his afiociates, and the King of the
Romans, as the Emperor's representative, open-
ed the negociation. The Princes who were
present, together with the deputies of filch as
were absent, acted as intercelilrs or mediators
between them.

Slcid. 56r. Thuan. 37. M

ILMAURICE,

. MAURICE, in a long discourse, explained
the motives of his own conduct. After having
s enumerated all the unconltitutional and opprelt
i-five acds of the Emperor's adminifiration, he,
agreeably to the manifesto which he had pub-
lithed when he took arms against him, limited
his demands to three articles. That 'the Land-
grave of Hesse should be immediately set at li-
berty ; That the grievances in the civil govern-
ment of the Empire should be redressed; and
that the Protetfants fhouid be allowed the pub-
lick exercise of their religion without moleflati.
on. Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors
discovering their unwillingness to gratify him
with regard to all these points, the mediators
wrote a joint letter to the Emperor, beseeching
him to deliver Germany from the calamities
of a civil war, by giving such fatisfation to
Maurice and his party as might induce themrto
lay down their arms; and at the fame time they
prevailed upon Maurice to grant a prolongation
of the truce for a short time, during which they
undertook to procure the Emperor's final an-
fwer to his demands.

Powerfully THIS request was presented to the Emperor
by the rin-n the name of all the Princes of the Empire,
'E mif 'he Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of fuich

as had lent a hand to forward his ambitious
schemes, as well as of those who had viewed
the progress of his power with jealousy and
dread. The uncommon and cordial unanimi-
ty with which they concurred at this juncture,
in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in re-
commending peace, flowed from different cau-
fes. Such as were most attached to the Roman
catholick church could not help observing that
the I'roteftant confederates were at the head of
a numerousarmy, while the Emperor was but
just beginning to provide for his own defence.

They

252
BOOK A

I 552.

The terms
which Mai
rice fro-
polktd

They foresaw that great efforts would be requir-Book X.
ed of them, and would be necessary on their " ,
part, in order to cope with enemies, who had t52.
been allowed to get the start so far, and to at-
tain such formidable power. Experience had
taught them, that the fruit of all these efforts
would be reaped by the Emperor alone, and
the more compleat any victory proved which
they should gain, the fatter would they bind
their own fetteór and render them the more in-
tolerable. These considerations made them
cautious how they contributed a second time,
by their indiscreet zeal, to put the Emperor in
poffefion of power which would be fatal to the
liberties of their country. Notwithltanding the
implacable fierceness of the spirit of bigotry in
that age, they chore rather that the Protestants
should acquire that security for their religion
which they demanded, than, by assisting
Charles to oppress them, to give fiuchadditional
force to the Imperial prerogative, as would
overturn the constitution of the Empire. To
all there considerations, the dread of feeing Ger-
many laid waite by a civil war added 'new force.
Many states of the Empire already felt the de-
flrutive rage of Albert's arms, others dreaded
it, and all wished for an accommodation be-
tween the Emperor and Maurice, which they
hoped would save them from that cruel scourge.

SUCH were the reasons that induced so many'Thmotive

Princes, notwithstanding the variety of theirflucnced the
political interests, and the opposition in theirEmP'r°r '
religious sentiments, to unite in recommending turc.
to the Emperor an accommodation with Mau.
rice, not only as a salutary, but as a necessary
measure. The motives which prompted Charles
to desire it were not fewer or of less weight.
He was perfectly sensible of the advantage
which the confederates had acquired through

VOL. III. R his

BOOK X. his own negligence ; and he now felt the infuf.
SV ficiency of his own resources to oppose them
552- His Spanish fubjeqts, disgusted at his long ab-

fence, and weary of endless wars, which were
of no benefit to their country, refused to fur.
nifh him any considerable supply either of men
or money; and although he might hope by
his address or importunity to draw from them
at last more effectual aid that, he knew, was
too distant to be of any service in the present
exigency of his affairs. His treasury was drain-
ed; his veteran forces were dispersed, or dit:
banded, and he could not depend much either
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied
soldiers whom he was collecting. There was
no hope of repeating with success the fame ar.
tifices which had weakened and ruined the
Smalkaldic league. As the end at which he
aimed was now known, he could no longer em.
ploy the specious pretexts, which had formerly
concealed his ambitious designs. Every Prince
in Germany was alarmed and on his guard; and
it was vain to think of blinding them a ic-
cond time to such a degree, as to make one
part of them infiruments to enslave the other.
The spirit of a confederacy, whereof Maurice
was the head, experience had taught him to be
very different from that of the league of Smal-
kaldle; and from what he had already felt, he
had no reason to flatter hirfelf that its counci!;
would be as irrefolure, or its efforts as timnid
and feeble. If he should refblve on continuing
the war, he might lay his account that the m0ol
Confiderah!e states in Germany would take part
in it againlt him ; and a dubious neutrality was
the utmoit he could expect from the recl.
While the confederates found full employment
for his arms in one quarter, the King of France
would seize the fa;vcurable opportunity, and
puLh on his operations in another, with al-

noO

most certain success. That Monarch had al-Boor. X,
ready made conquests in the Empire, which he "VI
was no less eager to recover, than impatient to s55
be revenged on him for aiding his malecontent
fubjeds. Tho' Henry had now retired from
the banks of the Rhine, he had only varied the
scene of hostilities, having invaded the Low-
Countries with all his forces. The Turks,
routed by the solicitations of the French King,
as well as flimulated by resentment againfl Ser.
dinand for having violated the truce in Hun-
gary, had prepared a powerful fleet to ravage
the coasts of Naples and Sicily, which he had
left almost defenceless, by calling thence the
greatef part of the regular troops to join the
army which he was now assembling.

F RDINAND, who went it perfori to Villaclh; rerd;in'

in order to lay before the Emperor the refultr;omo'm,
of the conferences at Paflau, had likewise rea-~C,,,""o-
sons peculiar to himself for desiring an accom-
modation. These prompted him to second,
with the greatest earoeftnefs, the arguments
which the Princes, assembled there, had em-
ployed in recommending it. He had observed,
not without secret fatisfaAion, the fatal blow
which had been given to the despotic power,
which his brother had usurped in the Empire;
He was extremely solicitous to prevent Charles
from recovering what he had loft, as he foresaw
that he would immediately resume with fresh
eagerness, and a better chance of success, his fa-
vourite scheme of tranfinitting that power to
his Ton, by excluding him from the right of fuc-
celiion to the Imperial throne. On this ac-
count, he was willing to contribute towards cir-
cumfcrihing the Imperial authority, in order to
render his own ponffefion of it certain. Besides,
Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Tranfylva-
nia, and still more at the fraudulent arts by

R 2 which

Bool X. which it had been seized, had ordered into the

v'r field an army of an hundred thousand men,
1552' which having defeated a great body of Ferdi-

nand's troops, and taken several places of im-
portance, threatened not only to complete the
conquest of the province, but to drive him out
of that part of Hungary which was flill fubjeat
to his jurifdition. He was unable to relit
such a mighty enemy; his brother, while en-
gaged in a domestic war, could afford him no
aid ; and he could not even hope to draw from
Germany the contingent either of troops or
money, usually furnished to repel the invasions
of the Infidels. Maurice, having observed Ser-
dinand's perplexity, with regard to this last
point, had offered, if peace were re-established
on a secure foundation, that he would march
in person with his troops into Hungary to his
assistance. Such was the effect of this well-
timed proposal, that Ferdinand, deltitute of
every other profpeA of relief, became the molt
zealous advocate the confederates could have
chosen to urge their claims, and there was
scarce any thing that they could have demanded
which he would not have chosen to grant, ra-
ther than to have retarded a pacification, to
which he trufled as the only means of saving
his Hungarian crown.

C'tcc$m WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering
hich re- an accommodation eligible, it might have been
tard it expeced that it would have immediately ta-

ken place. But the inflexibility of the Empe-
ror's temper, together with his unwillingness to
relinquish, atonce, objeets which he had long
pursued with such earnestness and afiduity,
counterbalanced, for some time, the force of
all the motives which disposed him to peace,
and not only put that event at a distance, but
eemned to render it uncertain. When Mau-
rice's demands, together with the letter of the

mr:3 iatorE

mediators at Paf'au, were presented to him, heBooK X.
peremptorily refused to redress the grievances %V
which were pointed out, nor would he agree 1552
to any stipulation for the immediate security of
the Proteltant religion, but proposed referring
both these to the determination of a future diet.
On his part, he required that instant repara-
tion flould be made to all who, during the pre-
sent war, had suffered either by the licentious-
ness of the confederate troops, or the actions
of their leaders.

MAURICE, who was well acquainted with Maurice's

the Emperor's arts, immediately concluded thato, e ns
he had nothing in view in there overtures butscilita""it
toamufe and deceive; and therefore, without
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau
abruptly, and joining his troops, which were
encamped at Mergentheim, a city in Franco-
nia, belonging to the knights of the Teutonic
order, he put them in motion, and renewed
hoflilities. As three thousand men in the Em-
peror's pay had thrown themselves into Frank-
fort on the Maine, and might from thence in-
felt the neighbouring country of HefTe, he
marched towards that city, and laid liege toJUly '7.
it in form. The brilknefs of this enterprize,
and the vigour with which Maurice carried on
his approaches against the town, gave such an
alarm to the Emperor, as disposed him to lend
a more favourable ear to Ferdinand's arguments
in behalf of an accommodation. Firm and
haughty as his nature was, he found it necefTary
to bend, and signified his willingness to make
concessions on his part, if Maurice, in return,
would abate somewhat of the rigour of his de-
nmands. Ferdinand, as Coon as he perceived
that he began to yield, did not defilf from his
ilnportunities, until he prevailed on him to de-
clare what was the utmolt that he would grant
for the security of the confederates. Having

R 3 gained

BoOK X. gained this difficult point, he intantly dispatched
Sv~ ,a messenger to Maurice's camp, and importing

5s52, to him the Emperor's final resolution, conju.

red him not to frustrate his endeavours for the
re-establishment of peace; or, by an unfeafona.
ble obstinacy on his fide, to disappoint the
wishes of all Germany for that salutary event.

Mauricede- MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous
ccommo- situation of his affairs, was strongly inclined to
dation. liften to his advice. The Emperor, though

over-reached and furprized, had now begun to
aflemble troops, and how flow soever his mo-
tions might be, while the first effecds of his con-
fiernation remained, he was sensible that Charles
must at last at with vigour proportional
to the extent of his power and territories, and
lead into Germany an army formidable by its
numbers, and lill more by the terror of his
name, as well as the remembrance of his past
victories. He could scarce hope that a confede-
racy, composed of so many members, would
continue to operate with sufficient union and
perfcverance to refit the confitent and well di.
Teeed efforts of an army, at the absolute difpo-
fal of a leader accustomed to command and to
conquer. He felt already, although he had not
hitherto experienced the (hock of any adverse
event, that he was the head of a disjointed
body. He saw fiom the example of Albert of
Brandenburgh, how difficult it would be, with
all his address and credit, to prevent any parti-
cular member from detaching hinfclf from the
whole, and how impcffible to recall him to his
proper rank and subordination. This filled
him with apprehensions for the common cause.
Another consideration gave him no less disquiet
with regard to his own particular interests. By
setting at liberty the degraded Elector, and by
repealing the a& depriving him of his heredita-
ry honours and dominions, the Emperor had

it

it in his power to wound him in the most fen-BooK X.
fible part. The efforts of a Prince beloved by
his ancient fubjecs, and revered by all the Pro- '552.
teftant party, in order to recover what had
been unjuflly taken from him, could scarce have
failed of exciting commotions in Saxony, which
would endanger all that he had acquired at the
expence of so much diffimnulation and artifice.
It was no lets in the Emperor's power to render
vain all the solicitations of the confederates in
behalf of the Landgrave. He had only to add
one at of violence more to the injustice and ri.
gour with which he had already treated him i
and he had accordingly threatened the sons of
that unfortunate Prince, that if they persisted
in their present enterprize, inflead of feeing
their father restored to liberty, they should
hear of his having suffered the punishment
which his rebellion had merited .

HAVING deliberated upon all these pointsThe ceate

with his associates, Maurice thought it moreoflilel
prudent to accept of the conditions offered,rPaTau.
though less advantageous than those he had pro-
posed, than again to commit all to the doubt-
ful issue of war t. He repaired forthwith to
Pafau, and signed the treaty of peace; of
which the chief articles were, That before the
twelfth day of Augult, the confederates fhaU
lay down their arms, and disband their forces;
That on or before that day, the Landgrave (hall
be set at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his
castle of Rheinfels; That a diet (hall be held
within fix months, in order to deliberate con-
cerning the most proper and effecual method
of preventing for the future all disputes and
diflentions about religion ; That, in the mean
tine, neither the Emperor nor any other 1Pi ince,
* Slid. 571. Sleid. Hist. 563, &c. Thuan. lib. x. 350, &c.

RI 4 hilall,

BoOK X.fhall, upon any pretext whatever, offer any in-
' v"' jury or violence to such as adhered to the con-

]552. session of Augsburg, but allow them to enjoy

the free and undilhlrbed exercise of their re.
ligion; That the Protestants, in return, (hall
not molest the Catholicks either in the exercise
of their ecclefiafical jurisdiction, or in per.
forming their religious ceremonies; That the
Imperial chamber (hall administer juflice im.
partially to persons of both parties, and Pro-
teflants be admitted indiscriminately with the
Catholicks to fit judges in that court; That if
the next diet should not be able to terminate
the disputes with regard to religion, the ftipu.
lations in the present treaty, in behalf of the
Protestants, (hall continue for ever in full force
and vigour; That none of the confederates
shall be liable to any antion on account of what
had happened during the course of the war;
That the consideration of those encroachments
which had been made, as Maurice pretended,
upon the constitution and liberties of the Em-
pire, shall be remitted to the approaching diet;
That Albert of Brandenburgh shall be compre-
hended in the treaty, provided he .hall accede
to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth
of August *

R.ae~cns SuJCie was the memorable treaty of Paffau,
pc. 'ni that overturned the vaftfabric, in ereting which
rpol the Charles had employed so many years, and had
cnndu&t of
.auice. exerted the utmost of his power and policy;

which annulled all his regulations with regard
to religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering
the Imperial authority absolute and hereditary
in his family; and established the Protestant
church, which had hitherto subsisted precarious-
ly in Germany, through connivance, or by ex-
pedients, upon a firm and secure basis. Mau-

* ccnlil del Traitcs, ii. 26 .

rice

rice reaped all the glory of having concerted BooK X.
and compleated this unexpe&ed revolution. It sV
is a singular circumstance, that the Reformati- '52'
on should be indebted for its security and full
establishment in Germany, to the fame hand
which had formerly brought it to the brink of
deftrusion, and that both events should have
been accomplished by the fame arts of diflimu-
lation. The ends, however, which Maurice
had in view, at these different junctures, seem
to have been more attended to than the means
by which they attained them; and he was now
as universally extolled for his zeal and publick
spirit, as he had lately been condemned for his
indifference and intereffed policy. It is no less
worthy of observation, that the French King,
a monarch zealous for the Catholick faith,
should, at the very time he was persecuting his
own Protestant fubjeAs with all the fierceness
of bigotry, employ his power in order to pro-
te&t and maintain the Reformation in the Em-
pire; and that the league for this purpose,
which proved so fatal to the Romish church,
should be negociated and signed by a Roman
catholick bishop. So wonderfully doth the wis-
dom of God superintend and regulate the ca-
price of human paflions, and render them sub-
servient towards the accomplithment of his own
purposes !

LITTLE attention was paid to the interetsLittle atten-

of the French King during the negociations at the Fr'chi
Paffau. Maurice and his associates, having ishi'
gained what they had in view, discovered no
great solicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps,
they reckoned to be over-paid, by his acquifi-
tions in Lorrain, for the affiflance which he
had given them. A short clause, which they
procured to be inserted in the treaty, import-
ing that the King of France might comm,,ni-

cate

BooK X.cate to these confederates his particular preten.
'-""v' sions or causes of hostility, which they would

3552. lay before the Emperor, was the only sign that

they gave of their remembering how much
they had been indebted to him for their fuc.
cess. Henry experienced the fame treatment
which every Prince who lends his aid to the
authors of a civil war may exped. As soon
as the rage of faction began to subside, and
any profpeE of accommodation began to open,
his services were forgotten, and his associates
made a merit with their sovereign, of the in-
gratitude with which they abandoned their pro.
tector. But how much soever Henry might be
enraged at the perfidy of his allies, or at the
impatience with which they hastened to make
their peace with the Emperor at his expence,
he was perfecty sensible that it was more his
interelt to keep well with the Germanick body,
than to resent the indignities offered him by
any particular members of it. For that reason
he dismissed the hostages which he had re-
ceived from Maurice and his aflociates, and as-
feEted to talk in the fame firain, as formerly,
concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient
constitution and liberties of the Empire.

T 11 E

# BOOK XI.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XL
A S Soon as the treaty of Pafhau was signed BooK Xr.

Maurice, in consequence of his engage- wvV

ments with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary 's 2-
at the head of twenty thousand men. But the Mauicc
valf superiority of the Turkish armies, the fre- marchcs in-
quent mutinies, both of the ,panifh and Ger- aina'th:
man soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay, ur.
together with the distentions between Maurice
and Caftaldo, who was piqued at being obliged
to resign the chief command to him, prevented
his performing any thing in that country wor-
thy of his former fame, or of great benefit to
the King of the Romans *.

* Iftuanhaffi Hist, Hungar. 228. Thuan. lib. x. 37'.

Wi; rx

BooK XI. WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the
~ " 'Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
*The 5Lan- under his command, and marched back into his
gc of own country, that he might be ready to receive
Jitc, rC-
c< ers hi his father upon his return, and give up to him
libety. the reins of government, which he had held

during his absence. But fortune was not yet
weary of persecuting the Landgrave. A batta-
lion of mercenary troops, which had been in
the pay of Hefle, being leduced by Reifenberg
their colonel, a soldier of fortune, and ready
to engage in any enterprize, secretly withdrew
from the young Prince as he was marching
homewards, and joined Albert of Branden.
burgh, who itill continued in arms against the
Emperor, refuting to be included in the treaty
of Paffau. Unhappily for the Landgrave, an
account of this reached the Netherlands, just as
he was dismissed from the citadel of Mechlin
where he had been confined, but before he had
got beyond the frontiers of that country. The
Queen of Hungary, who governed there in her
brother's name, incensed at such an open viola.
tion of the treaty to which he owed his liberty,
commanded him to be arrested, and committed
him again to the cuflody of the fame Spani(h
captain who had guarded him for five years
with such revere vigilance. Philip beheld all
the horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and
his spirits subsiding in the fame proportion as
they had risen during the short interval in
which he had enjoyed liberty, he funk into
despair, and believed himself to be doomed to
perpetual captivity. But the matter being ex-
plained to the Emperor's full fatisfaaion, that
the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries could ie
imputed neither to the Landgrave nor to his
son, he gave orders for his release; and Philip
at last obtained the liberty for which he so long

languihed.

languished *. But though he recovered hisBooK XI.
freedom, and was reinstated in his dominions,
his sufferings seem to have broken the vigour, 'S52
and to have extinguished the activity of his
mind: From being the boldest as well as moil
enterprizing Prince in the Empire, he became
the molt timid and cautious, and passed the re-
mainder of his days in a pacific indolence.

THE degraded Elecor of Saxony, likewise Likewe

procured his liberty, in consequence of theofsaXony.
treaty of Paffau. The Emperor having been
obliged to relinquilh all his schemes for extirpa-
ting the Protestant religion, had no longer any
motive for detaining him aprifoner, and being
extremely solicitous, at that juncture, to reco-
ver the confidence and good will of the Ger-
mans, whose afliltance was essential to the fuc-
cess of the enterprize which he meditated
against the King of France, he, among other
expedients for that purpose, thought of releasing
from imprisonment a Prince whose merit enti-
tled him no less to esteem, than his sufferings
rendered him the object of compaflion. John
Frederick took poffefion accordingly of that
part of his territories which had been reserved
forhim, when Maurice was invested with the
Eleeoral dignity. As he continued to display
in this situation, the fame virtuous magnanimi-
ty, for which he had been conspicuous in a
moreprofperous and splendid state, and which
he had retained amidst all his sufferings, he
lived several years in that high reputation to
which he had so just a title.

THE Iofs of Metz, Toul and Verdun, hadrThe Epe-
made a deep impreflion on the Emperor. Ac- to mae
cuitomed to terminate all his operations againIt war upon

France with advantage to himrelf, he thought
France with advantage to himself, he thought

'Sleid. 573, BelcariiComment. 8j4.

that

BOOK XI. that it nearly concerned his honour not to al-
-' low Henry the superiority in this war, or to
'552. susser his own adminiltration to be slained with

the infamy of having permitted territories of
such consequence to be dismembered from the
Empire. This was no less a point of interest
than of honour. As the frontier of Champagne
was more naked, and lay more exposed than
that of any province in France, he had frequent-
Iy, during his wars with that kingdom, made
inroads upon it with great success and effect;
but if Henry were allowed to retain his late con.
quests, France would gain such a formidable
barrier on that fide, as to be altogether secure,
where formerly she had been the weakest. On
the other hand, the Emperor had now loft as
much, in point of security, as France had ac-
quired, and being stripped of the defence which
those cities afforded it, lay open to be invaded
on a quarter, where all the towns having been
hitherto confidered as interior, and remote
from any enemy, were but slightly fortified.
These considerations determined Charles to at-
tempt recovering the three towns of which
Henry had made himself mailer; and the pre-
parations which he made againit Maurice and
his associates, enabled him to carry his re-
solution into immediate execution.

ratirrcPa- As soon, then, as the peace was concluded
rations for
thipurpofe.at Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach,

and advanced to Augsburg at the head of a con-
fiderable body of Germans which he had levi-
ed, together with all the troops which he had
drawn out of Italy and Spain. To there he ad-
ded several battalions, which having been in
the pay of the confederates, entered into his ser-
vice when difrniffed by them; and he prevailed
likewise on some of the Princes of the Empire to
join him with their vassals. Iu order to conceal

the

the destination of this formidable army, and to BOOR XI.
guard against alarming the French so as to put %-"v-
them on preparing for their defence, he gave '52'
out that he was to march forthwith into Hun-
gary, in order to second Maurice in his opera-
tions against the Infidels. When he began to
advance towards the Rhine, and could no longer
employ that pretext, he tried a new artifice, and
spread a report that he was marching in order
to chaflife Albert of Brandenburgh, whose cruel
exaaions in that part of the Empire called
loudly for his interposition to check them.

BUT the French having grown acquainted,Ther--

at last, with arts by which they had been foth' Sieh
often deceived, viewed all Charles's motionsforthedc-

fenc of

with distrust. Henry immediately gueled themez.
true object of his vast preparations, and resolved
to defend the important conquest which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which they
were about to be attacked. As he foresaw
that the whole weight of the war would be turn-
ed against Metz, the fate of which would de-
cide that of Toul and Verdun, he nominated
Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take theThe Dnke
command in that city during the siege, the iffue°fG;ui''
of which would equally asse't the honour androvernrcf
interest of his country. His choice could not'he to'-
have fallen upon any person more worthy of
that trull. The Duke of Guise possessed, in a
high degree, all the qualities of courage, fagaci-
ty, and pretence of mind, which render men
eminent in military command. He was largely
endowed with that magnanimity of foul which
delights in bold enterprizes, and afpircs to fame
by Iplendid and extraordinary actions. He re-
paired with joy to the dangerous flation afligned
him, as to a theatre on which he might dillplay
his great qualities under the immediate eye of
his countrymen all ready to applaud him. The

martial

BOOK XI. martial genius of the French nobility in that
. A'v age, which confidered it as the greatest reproach

1552. to remain inactive,'when there was any opportu.

nity of signalizing their courage, prompted great
numbers to follow a leader who was the darling
as well as the pattern of all that courted military
fame. Several Princes of the blood, many no.
blemen of the highest rank, and all the young
officers who could obtain the King's permission,
entered Metz as voluntiers. By their pretence
they added spirit to the garrison, and enabled
the Duke of Guise to employ on every emer-
gency persons eager to diflinguifh themselves,
and fit to conduct any service.

Prepar fors BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of
a Vigorous
defence. Guise undertook the defence of Metz, he found

every thing, upon his arrival there, in filch a
situation, as might have induced any person of
less intrepid courage to despair of defending it
with success. The city was of great extent,
with large suburbs; the walls were in many
places feeble and without ramparts; the ditch
narrow; and the old towers, which projected
inflead of bastions, were at too great distance
from each other to defend the space between
them. For all there defects he endeavoured to
provide the best remedy, which the time would
permit. He ordered the suburbs, without spar-
ing the monaateries or churches, not even that
of St. Arnulph, in which several Kings of France
had been buried, to be levelled with the ground;
but in order to guard againit the imputation of
impiety, to which such a violation of so many
sacred edifices, as well as of the ashes of the
dead might expose him, he executed this with
much religious ceremony. Having ordered all
the holy vestments and utensils, together with
the bones of the Kings, and other persons depo-
fited in there churches to be removed, they were

carried

carried in solemn proceflon to a church within BOOK XI;
the walls, he himself walking before them un- _V-
covered with a torch in his hand. f-ie then 1552
pulled down such houies as stood near the walls,
cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired the
ruinous fortifications, and ereced new ones. As
it was necefTary that all there works should be
finished with the utmost expedition, he laboured
at them with his own hands: the officers and
voluntiers imitated his example, and the soldiers
filbmitted with chearfulnefs to the moil revere
fatigues, when they saw that their superiors did
not decline to bear a part in there together with
them. At the fame time he compelled all use-
less persons to leave the place;. he filled the
magazines with provisions and military stores;
burnt the mills; and destroyed the corn and
forage for several miles round the town. Such
were his popular talents as well as his arts of
acquiring an ascendant over the minds of men,
that the citizens seconded him with no less ar-
dour than the soldiers; and every other paflion
being swallowed up in the zeal to repulle the
enemy, with which he inspired them, they be-
held the ruin of their estates, together with the
havock which he made 'among their publick
and private buildings, without any emotion of
resentment .

MEANTIME the Emperor, having collected Char'lesad-

all his fbrces, continued his march towards Metz. wards
As he paged through the cities on the Rhine, he lct1
law the dismal effects of that licentious and
wasteful war which Albert hadcarried on in these
parts. Upon his approach, that Prince, though
at the head of twenty thousand men, withdrew
into Lorrain, as if he had intended tojoin the

* Thuan. xi. 387.
VOL. II. S French

RooK X. French King, whose arms he had quartered
--'' with his own in all his tfandards and ensigns.

z552' Albert was not in a condition to cope with the

Imperial troops, which amounted at least to
sixty thousand men, forming one of the mcft
numerous and befl appointed armies that had
been brought into the field, during that age, in
any of the wars among the Chrittian Princes.

Invelis the THE chief command under the Emperor,
to"als was committed to the Duke of Alva, affitted by

the Marquis de Marignano, together with the
most experienced of the Italian and Spanilh ge-
nerals. As it was towards the end of October,
these intelligent officers represented the great
danger of beginning,at such an advanced season,
a siege which could not fail to prove very tedi-
ous. But Charles adhered to his own opinion
with his usual obstinacy, and being confident
that he had made such preparations, and taken
0" ' 9' such precautions, as would insure success, he or-

dered the city to be invested. As soon as the
Duke of Alva appeared, a large body of the
French tallied out, and attacked his van guard
with great vigour, put it in confusion, and killed
or took prisoners a considerable number of men.
By this early specimen, which they gave ot
the condud of their officers, as well as the
valour of their troops, they thewed the Impe-
rialifts what an enemy they had to encounter,
and how dear every advantage muff coti thcm.
The place, however, was compleatly invefled,
the trenches were opened, and the other works
begun*.

Bndoth partr THE attention both of the besiegers and be-
gain Albert sieged was turned for fbine t:re towards Albert
btrl,'h. of Brandenburgh,and they plrove with emulation

* Natal. Comitis, Iift. 127.

which

which should gain that Prince, who still hove -Bo,K XI'
ed in the neighbourhood, fluctuating in all tihe -V
uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a man, 2
who being swayed by no principle, was allured
different ways by contrary views of interet.
The French tempted him with offers extremely
beneficial; the Imperialiits scrupled at no pro-
mile which they thought would make an impref-
sion upon him. After much helitation he was
gained by the Emperor, from whom he expeiced
to receive advantages, which were both more
immediate and more permanent. As theFrench
King, who began to fufpeR his intentions, had
appointed a body of troops under the Duke of
Aumale, brother to the Duke of Guise, to
watch his motions, Albert fell upon them unex- Nov. 4.
peaedly, with such vigour, that he routed them
entirely, killed many of the officers, wounded
Aumale himself and took him prisoner. Imme-
diately after this vi&cory, he marched in triumph
to Metz, and joined his army to that of the Em-
peror. Charles, in reward for this service, and
the great accession of strength which he brought
him, granted Albert a pardon, in form, of pall
offences, and confirmed him in the poffeflion of
the territories which he had violently usurped
during the war *.

THi Duke of Guise, though deeply affe&ed'The gallant

·

t-, ,.~ .

· r-i b * hehaviour

with his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in of the Duke
any degree, the vigour with which he defended of Guire

i t i « /y i i i r i r anu h's gat-

the town. He harraffed the besiegers by fre-rion.
qLitcnt tallies, in which his officers were so eager
to diflinguifh themselves, that his authority, be-
ing scarce sufficient to restrain the impetuosity
of their courage, he was obliged at different times
to shut the gates and to conceal the keys, in or-
der to prevent the Princes of the blood, and no-
blemen of the firit rank, from exposing them-

Slcid. 575. TIhuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

S 2 selves

BOOK XL felvesto danger in every rally. He repaired in
1-V0 the night what the enemy's artillery had beat

'552. down during the day, or erected behind the ruin.

ed works, new fortifications of almott equal
strength. The Imperialiifs, on their part, push-
ed on the attack with great spirit, and carried
forward, at once, approaches against different
parts of the town. But the art of attacking
fortified places was not then arrived at that de-
gree of perfelion, to which it was carried to-
wards the close of the sixteenth century, during
the long war in the Netherlands. The besiegers,
after the unwearied labour of many weeks,
found that they had made but little progress;
and although their batteries had made breaches
in different places, they saw, to their altonifil-
ment, works suddenly appear, in demolishing
which their fatigues and dangers would be renew-
ed. The Emperor, enraged at the obstinate re-
iftance which his army met with, left Thion-
ville, where he had been confined by a violent
fit of the gout, and though flill so infirm that
he was obliged to be carried in a litter, he re.
Nov. 2. paired to the camp; that by his pretence he

might animate the soldiers, and urge on the at-
tack with greater spirit. Upon his arrival, new
batteries were erected, and new efforts made
with redoubled ardour.

fthe Ifiref BUT, by this time, the winterhad set in with
ri. army. great rigour; the camp was alternately deluged

with rain, or covered with snow; at the lfame
time, provisions were become extremely scarce,
as the body of French cavalry which hovered in
the ncighbourhood, often interrupted the con-
voys, or rendered their arrival difficult and un-
certain. l)ieales began to spread among the
follikrs, efpccially among the Italians and Spa-
niards, iunaccui:oLmed toflilch inclement weat;her;
great numbers were di'abled from serving, and
many died. At length, such breaches were made

ias

as seemed practicable, and the Emperor resolved BooK Xr.
to hazard a general afiault, in spite of all the le ^
remonstrances of his generals concerning the im- 1552
prudence of attacking a numerous garrison, con-
duted and animated by the molt gallant of the
French nobility, with an army weakened by
(lifeafes, and dilheartened with ill success. The
Duke of Guise, suspecting his intentions, from
the extraordinary hurry which he observed in
the enemy's camp, ordered all his troops to their
refpetive pols. They appeared immediately
on the wall, and behind the breaches, with
fitch a determined countenance, so eager for the
combat, and so well prepared to give the assail-
ants a warm reception, that the Imperialifis,
inf!ead of advancing to the charge, hlen the
w\or( of command was given, flood motion!efs,
in a timid dejeCted silence. The Emperor, per-
ceiving that he could not trult troops whose
spirits were so much broken, retired abruptly to
his quarters, complaining that he was now de-
ferted by his soldiers, who deserved no longer
the name of men .

DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops mor- Thl Empe-

tified and afflected him, Charles would not hear the mehnod
of abandoning the siege, though he saw the ne-t' 'ttack.
ceflity of changing the method of attack. He
1tifpended the fury of his batteries, and propos-
ed to proceed by the more secure but tedious me-
thod of sapping. But as it still continued to
rain or to Inow almoit incessantly, flchl as were
employed in this service enduilred incredible lhard-
ships; and the Duke of Guise, whole induflry
was not inferior to his valour, discovering all
their mines,counter-worked them,and prevented
their effect. At lass, Charles, finding it impof-
fible to contend any longer with the rigour of

*Thuan. 397'

S 3 the

BoOK XI. the season, and with enemies, whom he could

'V`. neither overpower by force, nor subdue by art,
I552. while at the fame time, a contagious distemper

raged among his troops, and cut off daily great
numbers of his officers as well as soldiers, yielded
to the solicitations of his generals, who conjured
him to save the remains of his army by a timely
retreat; " Fortune," fays he, " I now perceive,
resembles other females, and choofes to confer
her favours on young men, while she forsakes
those who are advanced in years."

Obliged to UpoN this, he gave orders immediately to
raiic the raise the siege, and submitted to the disgrace of
flegc. abandoning the enterprize, after having conti-

nued fifty-fix days before the town, during
which time he had loft upwards of thirty thou-
sand men, who died of diseases, or were killed
by the enemy. The Duke of Guise, as soon as
he perceived the intention of the Imperialists,
took measures to prevent their retiring tinmolett-
ed, and sent out several bodies, both of cavalry
and infantry, to infest their rear, to pick up
itragglers, and to seize every opportunity of at-
tacking them with advantage. Such was the
confusion with which they made their retreat,
that the French might have annoyed them in the

Ruin of the most cruel manner. But when they sallied out,
rmprialnd a fpeaacle presented itself to their view, which
hum:nity ofextinguilhed at once all hostile rage, and melt-
the Frnch ed them into tenderness and companion. The

Imperial campwas filled with the sick and wound-
ed, with the dead and the dying. In all the
different roads by which the army retired, num-
bers were found, who having made an effort be-
yond their firength to escape, were left, when
they could go no farther, to perilh without al-
fitlance. This they received from their
enemies, and were indebted to them for all

the
274

the kind offices which their friends had not the BOOK XI.
power to perform. The Duke of Guise imme- %V
diately ordered proper refreshments for flch as I552'
were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons
to attend the sick and wounded; he removed
such as could bear it into the adjacent villages;
and those who would have suffered by being car-
ried To far, he admitted into the hospitals which
he had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers.
As loon as they recovered, he sent them home,
under an escort of soldiers, and with money to
bear their charges. By there acts of humanity,
which were uncommon in that age, when war
was carried on with greater rancour and ferocity
than at present, the Duke of Guise compleated
the fame which he had acquired by his gallant
and luccefsful defence of Metz, and engaged
thole whom he had vanquished to vie with his
own countrymen in extolling his name *

To these calamities in Germany, were added Badfituation
filch unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered thiso° the Em-

peror's

the most difaltrous year in the Emperor's life. aairs in
During his residence at Villach, Charles had IalY
applied to Cofrio de Medici for the loan of two
hundred thousand crowns. But his credit, at
that time, was so low, that, in order to obtain
this inconsiderable umr, he was obliged to put
him in pofUelion of the principality of Piombino,
and, by giving up that, he loft the footing which
he had hitherto maintained in TuScany, and en-
abled Cofimo to assume, for the future, the tone
and deportment of a Prince altogether inde-
pendant. Much about the time that his indi-
gence constrained him to part with this valuable

* Slcid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 38n, &c. Pcre Daniel, Hit.

de France, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of this
siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac, who
wasprelclet. Natal. Comit. Hiftor. 129.

territory,
S 4

BOOK X. territory, he loft Siena, which was of fiill great-
* nv s er consequence, through the ill conduct ot Don

s5sz' Diego de Mendoza*
oThfiena. SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy,

had long enjoyed a republican government, un-
der the protecion of the Empire; but being
torn in pieces by the diffenions between the
nobles and the people, which divided all the
commonwealths, the facion of the people, which
gained the ascendant, besought the Emperor to
become the guardian of the adminillration
which they had eflablilled, and admitted into
their city a small body of Spanish soldiers,
whom he had sent to countenance the execution
of the laws, and to preserve tranquillity among
them. The direction of there troops was given
to Mendoza, at that time ambafiador for the
Emperor at Rome, who periuaded the credu-
lous multitude, that it was necessary, for their
security againfl any future attempt of the no-
bles, to allow him to build a citadel in Siena;
and as he flattered himself that by means of this
fortress he might render the Emperor master of
the city, he pufled on the works with all poifi-
ble dispatch. But he threw off the mask too
fonn. Before the fortifications were compleated,
be began to indulge his natural haughtiness and
severity of temper, and to treat the citizens
with great insolence. At the fame time, the fol-
dicrs in garrison being paid as irregularly as the
Emperor's troops uflally were, lived almofl at
discretion upon the inhabitants, and were guilty
of many acts of license and opprellion.

The si;nere THIESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a
Court the
lnaulle ,,fenfecof their danger. As they fiw the neccf-
1 rance. fity of exerting themselves, while the unfinilhed

* Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

fortifications

fortifications of the citadel left them any hopesBooK° XL
of success, they applied to the French ambaffa- V
dor at Rome, who readily promniled them his 55Z
rmafer's protection and afii(lance*. At the fame
time, forgetting their domestic animofities when
such a mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and
exiitence of the republick, they sent agents to
the exiled nobles, and invited them to concur
with them in saving their country from the ser-
vitude with which it was threatened. As there
was not a moment to lose, meafuies were con-
certed speedily, but with great prudence; and
were executed with equal vigour. The ci-
tizens rose suddenly in arms; the exiles flocked
into the town from different parts with all their
partizans, and what troops they could draw to-
gether; and several bodies of mercenaries in
the pay of France appeared to Support them.
The Spaniards, tho' furprized, and much in-
ferior in number, defended themselves with
great courage; but feeing no profped of relief,
and having no hopes of maintaining their station
long in a half-finiflled fortress, they loon gave
it up. The Sienefe, with the utmost alacrity,
levelled it with the ground, that no monument
might remain of that odious ltructure, which
had been raised in order to enslave them. At
the fame time renouncing all conneCtion with
the Emperor, they sent amhafladors to the King
of France as the restorer of their liberty, and
to intreat that he would fecire to them the per-
petual enjoyment of that blelling by continu-
ing his protection to their republick.

To there misfortunes, one {fill more fatal had(l r et of

a'moft tucceeded. 'The fcvcre adminitiratio, n 'lthl;'k'.;;
of Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Natples,,1,1 i t

Naples.

* Pecci Memoire de Siena, vol. iii. p. 23, 261. Thnan.

375, 377, &c. l'aruta. Hi-t. Vcnct. 2z(7. Mem. de Ri-
bicr. 424, &c.

having

Boo, X. having filled that kingdom with murmuringand
^VY dilatfecltion, the Prince of Salerno, the head of
1552. the malecontents, had fled to the couit of

France, where all who bore ill-will to the Em-
peror or his ministers, were sure of finding
protetion and affiflance. That nobleman, in
the usual itile of exiles, boasting much of his
partizans, and of his great influence with them,
prevailed on Henry to think of invading Na-
ples, from the expectation of being joined by all
those with whom the Prince of Salerno held
correspondence, or who were diflatisfied with
Toledo's governmrent. But though the first
hint of this enterprize was fuggelled by the
Prince of Salerno, Henry did not chaofe that
its success should entirely depend upon his
being able to fulfill the promises which he had
made. He applied for aid to Solyman, whom
he courted, after his father's example, as his
most vigorous auxiliary against the Emperor,
and solicited him to second his operations by
fending a powerful fleet into the Mediterranean.
It was not difficult to obtain what he requet-
ed of the Sultan, who, at this time, was high-
ly incensed againfl the house of Austria, on ac-
count of their proceedings in Hungary. He
ordered an hundred and fifty ships to be equip-
ped, that they might fail towards the coast ot Na-
ples, at whatever time Henry should name, and
might co-operate with the French troops in their
attempts upon that kingdom. The command
of this fleet was given to the corsair Dragut,
an officer trained up under Barbarossa, and
scarce inferior to his marter, in courage, in ta.
lents, or in good fortune. He appeared on the
coatI of Calabria, at the time which had been
agrced on, landed at several places, plundered
and burnt several villages ; and at last cafling
aincllor in the bay of Naples, , filled that city
with conflcrnation. But as the French fleet,

detained

detained by rome accident, which the contem- BOOK XI.
porary hiltorians have not explained, did not OV '
join the Turks according to concert, they, as- I55'
ter waiting twenty days, without hearing any
tiling of it, set fail for Conltantinople, and thus
delivered the viceroy of Naples from the terror
of an invasion, which he was in no condition
to have refitted *.

As the French had never given so revere a ,~.

check to the Emperor in any former campaign, t'hen ,biy
they expressed immoderate joy at the iuccefsafffdted
of their arms. Charles himself, accuflomed to a wttholh
long series of prolperity, felt the blow molt fen.atffls.
sibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-
Countries, much deje~ted with the cruel re-
verse of fortune which affected him in his de-
clining age, when the violence of the gout had
increaled to such a pitch, as entirely broke the
vigour of his contitution, and rendered him
peevish, difficult of access, and often incapable
of applying to business. But whenever he en-
joyed any interval of ease, all his thoughts were
bent upon revenge; and he deliberated, with
the utmost solicitude, concerning the molt
proper means of annoying Fiance, and of es-
facing the slain which had oblcured the leputa-
tion and glory of his arms. All the fchcmes
concerning Germany, which had engrossed him
so long, being disconcerted by the peace of
Paffau, the affairs of the Empire became only
secondary objects of attention; and enmity to
France was the predominant pallion which
chiefly occupied his mind.

THIE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran- Trle \,'1:cn

denburgh, excited violent commotions, whicih l,"1''t;l
dilturbed the Empire during this year. 'lhat Iitiidrn
Prince's troops having Ihared in the calamities t''ar
* Thun. 375, 380o Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 403. Gianene.

of

Book XI.of the siege of Metz, were greatly reduced in
"v* v, number. But the Emperor, prompted by gra.

'553. titude for his diltinguiihed services on that oc-

cafion, or perhaps with a secret view of foment-
ing divisions among the Princes of the Empire,
having paid up all the money due to him, he
was enabled, by that fum, to hire so many of
the soldiers, difitifded from the Imperial ar-
my, that he was loon at the head of a body
of men as numerous as ever. The bishops of
Bamberg and Wurtzburg having solicited the
Imperial chamber to annul, by its authority, the
iniquitous conditions which Albert had com-
pelled them to sign, that court unanimously
finding all their engagements with him to be
void in their own nature, because they had been
extorted by force; enjoined Albert to renounce
all claim to the performance of them ; and ex-
horted all the Princes of the Empire, if he
should perfirt in fitchan unjust demand, to take
arms against him, as a disturber of the publick
tranquillity. To this decilion, Albert opposed
the confirmation of his transaCtions with the two
prelates, which the Emperor had granted him
as the reward of his having joined the Imperial
army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his
antagonists, and to convince them of his reCo.
lution not to relinquish his pretensions, he put
his troops in motion, that he might secure the
territory in question. Various endeavours were
employed, and many expedients proposed, in
order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the fame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enterpri-
zing, inflpiing him with the molt fangnine
hopes of 1iiccefs, even in his wildest under-
takings, he difdaintfllv rcjected all reasonable
overtures of accommodation.

Hc is c n- UrON this, the Imperial chamber ifTiectl its
demned 'c decrec againfl him, and required the Elefor of
i.thni Samrony,
l t.hamb~rd Saxony,

2o0

Saxony, together with several other PrincesBooK XI.
mentioned by name, to take arms in order to'V
carry it into execution. Maurice, and those '5533
associated with him, were not unwilling to un-
dertake this service. They were extremely
1olicitous to maintain publick order, by sup-
porting the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and saw the neceflity of giving a timely check to
the usurpations of an ambitious Prince who had
no principle of accion but regard to his own in-
terest, and no motive to direEt him but the im-
purle ofungovernable passions. They had good
reason to fufpec that the Emperor encouraged
Albert in hisextravagant and irregular proceed-
ings, and secretly afforded him alfitance, that,
by raising him up to rival Maurice in power,
he might, in any future broil, make uife of his
afliftance to counterbalance and controul the
authority which the other had acquired in the
Empire *.

THESE considerations united the mofl pow- Aprilz.

erful Princes in Germany in a league againftcy formed
Albert, of which Maurice was declared gene-agaitf1him,
raliflimo. This formidable confederacy, howe- Maurice
ver; wrought no change in Albert's fenti-w" he'ad
ments; but as he knew that he could not re-
silt so many Princes, if he should allow them
time to alfemble their forces, he endeavoured,
by his adtivity, to deprive them of all the ad-
vantage which they might derive from their
united power and numbers; and, for that rea-
son, marched diretly against Maurice, the ene-
my whom he dreaded most. It was happy for
the allies, that the conduct of their affairs was
committed to a Prince of such abilities. He,
by his authority and example, had inlpired them
with vigour, and having carried on their pre-

* Slei(l. ;Rs. Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 442. Arnoldi vita
Mauirit. ap. Mcnkcn. ii. 124 2.

parations

BlooK XI.parations with a degree of rapidity, of which
v r-"- confederate bodies are seldom capable, he was in

'553. condition to face Albert before he could make

any considerable progress.

Te sttacks THFIR armies, which were nearly equal in
Albert. number, each consisting of twenty-four thou-

sand men, met at Sieverhaufen, in the dutchy of
Lunenburgh; and the violent animosity against
each other, which pofleffed the two leaders, did
not susser them to continue long inactive. The
July g. troops, inflamed with the fame hostile rage,

marched fiercely to the combat; they fought
with the greatell obstinacy; and as both gene-
rals were capable of availing themselves of every
favourable occurrence, the battle remained long
doubtful, each gaining ground upon the other

And dereats alternately. At lass vitory declared for Mau-
bi army. rice, who was superior in cavalry, and Albert's

army fled in confusion, leaving four thousand
dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and
artillery, in the hands of the conquerors. The
allies bought their vietory dear, their best troops
suffered greatly, two sons of the Duke of
Bruinfwick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many
other persons of diflincion, were among the

Ft is kild number of the slain *. But all there were soon
in the battle.forgotten, for Maurice himself, as he led up to

a second charge a body of horse which ha;
been broken, received a wound with a pillol
bullet in the belly, of which he died two days
after the battle, in the thirty-fecond year of his
age, and in the sixth after his attaining the
eleCtoral dignity.

* Hiftoria pugna infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thorr.

Wintzero altiore apud Scaid. ii. 5.9. Sklid. sX3. ltIl
clii epilircs aux Princc.s i,4. Arnoldi vitL Malurit. 1zi43

OF all the personages who have appeared in ROOK XI.

the hiflory of this ative age, when great oc-
currences, and fudJen revolutions, called forth ,scac
extraordinary talents to view, and afforded tr.
them full opportunity to display themselves,
Maurice may justly be confidered as the most
remnarkable. If his exorbitant ambition, his
profound dissimulation, and his unwarrantable
ururpation of his kinfinan's honours and domi-
nions exclude him from being prdifed as a vir-
tuous man; his prud, nce in concerting his
measures, his vigour in executing them, and the
uniform success with which they were attended,
entitle him to the appellation of a great Prince.
At an age, when impetuosity of spirit c mmnon-
ly predominates over political wisdom, when
the highest efforts even of a genius of the firfl
order is to fix on a bold fchene, 'and to exe-
cute it with promptitude and courage, he form-
ed and conducted an intricate plan of policy,
which deceived the molt artful Monarch in Eu-
rope, At the very juncture when the Emperor
had attained almost unlimited defpotifin, Mau-
rice, with power seemingly inadequate to such
an undertaking, compelled him to relinquish all
his usurpations, and eflablifhed, not only the
religious, but civil, liberties of Germany on
such foundations, as have hitherto remained
unshaken. Although at one period of his life,
his conduct excited the jea!oufy of the Protef-
tants, and at another drew on him the relfnt-
ment of the Roman Catholicks, such was his
masterly address, that he was the only Prince
of the age, who in any degree poffefTed the con-
fidence of both, and whom both lamented as
the molf able as well as faithful guardian of the
conflitution and laws of his country.

TiIE

283

BOOK XI. THE conflernation which Maurice's death
. cr^ occasioned among his troops, prevented them

'53. from making the proper improvement of the

Albert con- viory which they had gained. Albert, whose
itiara. acqive courage, and profuse liberality, rendered

him the darling es such military adventurers as
were little solicitous about the justice of his
cause, soon re-assembled his broken forces, and
made fresh levies, with filch success, that he was
quickly at the head of fifteen thousand men,
and renewed his depredations with additional
fury. But Henry of Brunswick, having taken
the command of the allied troops, defeated
Spt. ,2. him in a second battle, scarce less bloody than

the former. Even then his courage did not
fink, nor were his resources exhausted. He
made several efforts, and some of them very
vigorous, to retrieve his affairs ; but, being laid
under the ban of the Empire by the Imperial
chamber; being driven by degrees out of all

He is drivenhis hereditary territories, as well as those which
otl ofGer- he had usurped; being forsaken by many of his
mlly. officers, and overpowered by the number of his

enemies, he fled for refuge into France. After
having been, for a considerable time, the ter-
ror and scourge of Germany, he lingered out a
few years in an indigent and dependant state of
exile, the miseries of which his restless and ar-
rogant spirit endured with the most indignant
'5s7 impatience. Upon his death without ifi'u, his

territories, which had been seized by the Prin-
ces who took arms againit him, were reltoreil,
by a decree of the Emperor, to his collateral
heirs of the house of Blandenburgh *.

Mtlricts MAURICr., having left only one daughter,
gil,. I,1- who1 was afterwards married to William, Prince
c.cisliiiini i of Orant.e, by wvbom (he had a Ibn, 1[lo
th' clccull a
L;ty. * SCid. 592. 594. 5()9· Struv. Corp. hilt. Germ. ino,.

L[)oe

bore his grandfather's name, and inherited the Boox XI.
great talents for which he was conspicuous, a
violent dispute arose concerning the fucceflion 1553*
to his honours and territories. John Frede-
rick, the degraded Elector, claimed the elec-
toral dignity, and that part of his patrimonial
estate, of which he had been violently firipped
after the Smalkaldic war. Augustus, Mau-
rice's only brother, pleaded his right not only
to the hereditary poffefions of their family,
but to the electoral dignity and to the territo-
ries which Maurice had acquired. As Auguf-
tus was a Prince of considerable abilities, as
well as of great candour and gentleness of man-
ners, the States of Saxony, forgetting the me-
rits and sufferings of their former master, de-
clared warmly in his favour. His pretensions
were powerfully supported by the King of Den-
mark, whose daughter he had married, and
zealously espoused by the King of the Romans
out of regard to Maurice's memory. The de-
graded Elector, though secretly favoured by
his ancient enemy the Emperor, was at last
obliged to relinquish his claim, upon obtaining
a small addition to the territories which had
been allotted to him, together with a ftipulati-
on, securing to his family the eventual fuccef-
sion, upon a failure of male heirs in the Al-
bertine line. That unfortunate but magna-
nimous Prince died next year, loon after rati-
fying this treaty of agreement; and the elec-
toral dignity is still poffeifed by the descendants
of Augutus *.

DURING there tranfafions in Germany, war:Ronfiteain

the Low-

was carried on in the Low-Countries with con-counti.
fiderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the stain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an

* Sleid. ;87. Thuan, 409. Struv. Corp. his. Germ.
VOL. 111. T army

BOOK X. army early in the field, and laid siege to Te-

rouane. Though the town was of such im.
portance that Francis used to call it one of the
two pillows on which a King of France might
sleep with security, the fortifications were in
disrepair: Henry, trufling to what had hap-
pened at Metz, thought nothing more was ne-
ceffary to render all the efforts of the enemy
abortive, than to reinforce the garrison with a
considerable number of the young nobility.
But d'Effe, a veteran officer who commanded
them, being killed, and the Imperialists pulh.
ing the siege with great vigour and perfeve-
rance, the place was taken by assault. That
it might not fall again into the hands of the
Ju:ne 21. French, Charles ordered not only the fortifi-

cations, but the town to be rafed, and the in-
habitants to be dispersed in the adjacent ci-
ties. Elated with this success, the Imperialiis
immediately inverted Hefdin, which, though
defended with great bravery, was likewise ta-
ken by aflault, and such of the garrison as es-
caped the sword were made prisoners. The
Emperor entrulted the conduce of this siege to
Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of Pied-
mont, who, on that occasion, gave the first di:f
play of his great talents for military command,
which soon entitled him to be ranked among
the first generals of that age, and facilitated his
re-elfablilhment in his hereditary dominions,
the greater part of which having been over-run
by Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were
still occupied by Henry *.

'l'hprtgrcfs THE loss of these towns, together with fT
u(' thlcmipe-
taliltsdl, "many perbsns of diftindion, either killed or
quict~ tile taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable cala
kt:l'g'mity to France, and Henry felt it very i:nfiblyy

Thuan. 411. Harai Annales Drabant, 669.

btIt
286

but he was itill more mortified at the Emperor's BooK X.
having assumed his wonted superiority in the V
field so soon after the blow at Metz, which the 553.
French had represented as fatal to his power.
He was ashamed, too, of his own remissness
and excessive security at the opening of the
campaign; and, in order to repair that error,
he assembled a numerous army, and led it into
the Low-Countries.

RouZED at the approach of such a formila-

bleenemy, Charles left Brulfels, where he had
been shut up so closely during seven months,
that it came to be believed in many parts of
Eprope that he was dead; and though he was
so much debilitated by the gout that he could
scarce bear the motion of a litter, he hastened
to join his army. The eyes of all Europe
were turned with expeAation towards thele
mighty and exasperated rivals, between whom
a decisive battle was now thought unavoidable.
But Charles having prudently declined to hazard
a general engagement, and the violence of the
autumnal rains rendering it impofiible for the
French to undertake any siege, they retired with-
out having performed any thing iuitable to the
great preparations which they had made *.

THE Imperial arms did not make the fame Tl,c 1,?-

progress in Italy. The narrowness of the Em- riai-i, u,
peror's finances seldom allowed him to act with it.iy:
vigour in two different places at the fame time;
and having exerted himself to the utmolt, in
order to make a great effort in the Low-countries
his operations on the other lide of the Alps,
were proportionally feeble. The viceroy of

* Iarcius 67. . Thlian. 414.

T' 2

Naples,

BooK XI. Naples, in conjuncion with Cosmo di Medici,
*L'V' who was greatly alarmed at the introduction

1553. of French troops into Siena, endeavoured to be-

come matter of that city. But instead of redu-
cing the Sienefe, the Imperialifis were obliged
to retire abruptly in order to defend their own
country, upo the appearance of the Turkilh
fleet, which threatened the coast of Naples; and
the French not only eftablilhed themselves more
firmly in Tuscany, but, by the assistance of the
Turks, conquered a great part of the island of
Corsica, subjea, at that time, to the Genoese *.
Anrdin THE affairs of the houfeof Austria declined

no less in Hungary during the course of this
year. As the troops which Ferdinand kept in
Transylvania received their pay very irregu-
larly, they lived almost at discretion upon the
inhabitants; and their insolence and rapacious
ness greatly disgusted all ranks of men, and
alienated them from their new sovereign, who,
instead of protecting, plundered his subjects.
Their indignation at this, added to their desire
of revenging Martinuzzi's death, wrought so
much upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of
injury, and upon a fierce people, prone to
change, that they were ripe for a revolt. At
that very junaure, their late Queen Isabella,
together with her son, appeared in Tranfylva-
nia. Her ambitious mind could not bear the
solitude and inactivity of a private life, and
repenting quickly of the ceflion which ihe had
made of the crown, in the year one thousand
five hundred and fifty-one, she left the place
of her retreat, hoping that the diffatisfation of
the Hungarians with the Austrian government,
would prompt them to recognize once more
her son's right to the crown. Some noblemen

* Thuan. 417. ,

of

of great eminence declared immediately in his BOOK XI.
favour. The Balhaw of Belgrade, by Soly- 'cV.
man's order, espoused his cau'e in opposition to '553
Ferdinand; the Spanish and German soldiers,
inltead of advancing against the enemy, mu.
tinied for want of pay, declaring that they
would march back to Vienna; so that Caltaldo
their general, was obliged to abandon Tran-Ferdinand
fylvania to Isabella and the Turks, and to place°blgd to

abandon

himself at the head of the mutineers, that byTanfylra-
his authority he might reltrain them from plun-n'a
dering the Austrian territories, through which
they passed *.

FERDINAND'S attention was turned so en-rolyman',

tirely towards the affairs of Germany, and hisd;,ocft-k
treasures so much exhaulted by his late efforts
in Hungary, that he made no attempt to reco-
ver this valuable province, although a favoura-
ble opportunity for that purpose presented it-
self, as Solyman was then engaged in a war
with Persia, and involved besides in domefick
calamities which engrossed and dirturbed his
mind. Solyman, though diftinguiflied, by ma-
ny accomplishments, from the other Ottoman
Princes, had all the paflions peculiar to that
violent and haughty race. He was jealous of
his authority, sudden and furious in his anger,
and susceptible of all that rage of love, which
reigns in the East, and often produces the wild-
eft and most tragical effects. His favourite
miltrefs was a Circafian slave, of exquiliterTh tragica
beauty, who bore him a Ton called Muftapha, hifryot his
whom, both on account of his birth-right andpha.
merit, he defined to be the heir of his crown.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, soon supplanted
the Circaflian, and gained the Sultan's heart.
Having the address to retain the conquest which
fie had made, The kept poffefion of his love

* Thuan. 430.

T 3 without

RBoo X. without any rival for many years, during which

55 ifhe brought him several sons and one daughter.

All the happiness, however, which flie derived
from the unb,,unded sway that she had acqui-
red over a monarch, whom one half of the world
revered or dreaded, was embittered by perpe-
tual reflections on Muftapha's acceflion to the
throne, and the certain death of her sons, who
the foresaw would be immediately sacrificed,
according to the baibarousjealoufy of Turkish
policy, to thefafety of the new Emperor. By
dwelling continually on this melancholy idea,
the came gradually to view Muflapha as the
enemy of her children, and to hate him with
more than a step-mother's ill-will. This
prompted her to with his dellrution, in order
to secure for one of her own sons the throne
which was defined for him. Nor did she want
either ambition to attempt such a high entcr-
prize, or the arts requilite for carrying it into
execution. Having prevailed on the Sultan to
give her only daughter in marriage to Ruffan
the Grand Vifier, fihe disclosed her scheme to
that crafty minister, who, perceiving that it
was his own interest to co-operate with her,
readily promised his afliflance towards aggran-
dizing that branch of the royal line, to which
he was now so nearly allied.

As Toon as Roxalana had concerted her rnea-

fures with this able confident, fie began to as-
sect a wonderful zeal for the Mahometan reli-
gion, to which Solyman was fiperftitioufly at-
tached, and propo(ed to found and endow a
royal mosque, a work of great expence, but
deemed by the Turks meritorious in the highell
degree. The Mufti whom she confilted ap-
proved much of her pious intention ; but, hav-
ing been gained and inllructed by Ruflan, told
her that (he being a slave could derive no be-
nefit hcrtilf from that holy deed, for all the

merit

merit of it would accrue to Solyman, the ma.BooK xr.
fter whose property the was. Upon this the "VV
seemed to be overwhelmed with sorrow, and to '553
fink into the deepest melancholy, as if file had
been disgusted with life and all its enjoyments.
Solyman, who was absent with the army, being
informed of this dejetion of mind, and of the
cause from which it proceeded, discovered all
the solicitude of a lover to remove it, and by a
writing under his hand declared her a free wo-
man. Roxalana having gained this point, pro-
ceeded to build a Mosque, and re-affumed her
usual chearfulnefs and gaiety of spirit. But
when Solyman, on his return to Conflantinople,
sent an eunuch, according to the custom of the
fezaglio, to bring her to partake of his bed,
she, seemingly with deep regret, but in the
mott peremptory manner, declined to follow the
eunuch, declarinaiita what had been an honour
to her while a flae, became a crime, as the
was now a free woman, and that the would not
involve either the Sultan or herself in the guile
that must be contracted by filch an open viola,
tion of the law of the prophet. Solyman, whole
pasTion this difficulty, as well as the affleted de-
licacy which gave rile to it, heightened and in-
flamed, had recourse immediately to the Mufti
for his direction. He replied, agreeably to the
Koran, that Roxalana's fcruplcs were well
founded, but added, artfully, in words whicl
Ruflan had taught him to ute, that it was in
the Sultan's power to remove these difficulties,
by espousing her as his lawful wife. The amo-
rous monarch closed eagerly with the proposal,
and solemnly married her according to the form
of the Mahometan ritual ; though, by doing lo,
he disregarded a maxim of policy, which the
plide ot the Ottoman blood had taught all the
Sultans since Bajazet I. to confider as inviola-
ble. From his time, none of the Turkish mo-
narchs had married, bccaufe, when ie was

rS 4 vailniillied

BooK XL vanquilhed and taken prisoner by Tamerlane,
_V% his wife had been abused with barbarous info-
'553. lenceby the Tartars. That no similar cala-

mity might fubje& the Ottoman family to the
like disgrace, the Sultans admitted none to their
bed but slaves, whose dishonour could not bring
any such itain upon their house.

BUT the more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it convinced Roxalana of the unbounded
influence which ihe had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute,
with greater hope of success, the scheme that
lhe had formed in order to detlroy Muftapha.
This young Prince having been intrusted by his
father, according to the pracice of the Sultans
in that age, with the government of several dif.
ferent provinces, was at that time invested with
the administration in Diarb pir, the ancient
Mesopotamia, which SolymsWhad wrested from
the Persians, and added to his empire. In all
there different commands, Muftapha had con-
ducted himself with such cautious prudence as
could give no offence to his father, though at the
fame time, he governed with so much mode-
ration as well-as Jufice, and displayed such va-
lour and generosity as rendered him equally the
favourite of the people and the darling of the
soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice

to his charge, that could impair the high opini-
on which his father entertained of him. Roxa-
lana's malevolence was more refined; she turn-
ed his virtues against him, and made use of these
as engines for his deflrution. She often men.
tioned, in Solyman's pretence, the splendid
qualities of his son; ,he celebrated his cou-
rage, his liberality, his popular arts, with ma-
licious and exaggerated praise. As soon as

fhc

the perceived that the Sultan heard these en-BooK XL
comiums, which were often repeated, with un-
easiness; that suspicion of his son began to '553
mingle itself with his former esteem of him;
and that by degrees he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, the introduced, as by acci-
dent, some discourse concerning the rebellion of
his father Selim against Bajazet his grandfather;
she took notice of the bravery of the veteran
troops under Muftapha's command, and of the
neighbourhood of Diarbequir to the territories
of the Persian Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy.
By these arts, whatever remained of paternal
tenderness was entirely extinguifled, and such
passions were kindled in his breast, as gave all
Roxalana's malignant suggestions the colour not
only of probability but truth. A deep-rooted
hatred succeeded, now, to his suspicions and
fear of Muftapha. He appointed spies to ob-
serve and report all his words and actions; he
watched and flood on his guard against him as
his most dangerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart

from Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon ano-
ther ftep, and entreated Solyman to allow her
own sons the liberty of appearing at court, hop-
ing that, by gaining access to their father,
they might, by their good qualities and dutiful
deportment, insinuate themselves into that
place in his affections, which Muftapha had
formerly held, and, though what she demanded
was contrary to the practice of the Ottoman
family in that age, the uxorious monarch
granted her requelt. To all there female in.
trigues Rultan added an artifice still more
subtle, whicl compleated thle Sultan's delusion,
and heightened !iis jealousy and fear. He
wrote to the Bashaws of the provinces adja-
cent to Diarbequir, inftruaing them to fend

him

BooK XI.him regular intelligence of Multapba's pro.
/Vc ~ceedings in his government, and to each of

5'3. them he gave a private hint, flowing, in ap-

pearance, from his zeal for their interefs, that
nothing would be more acceptable to the Sultan,
than to receive favourable accounts of a son,
whom he defined to fuftsin the glory of the
Ottoman name. The Bashaws, ignorant of his
fraudulent intention, and eager to pay court
to their sovereign at such an easy price, filled
their letters with fludied but fatal panegyricks
of Muftapha, representing him as a Prince
worthy to succeed such an illustrious father,
and as endowed with talents which might
enable him to emulate, perhaps to equal his
fame. These letters were industriously flecwn
to Solyman, at the seasons when it was known
that they would make the deepest impreflin.
Every cxpreflion in recommendation of his son
wounded him to the heart; he fufpealed his
principal officers of being ready to favour the
molt desperate attempts of a Prince whom they
were so fond to praise; and fancying that he
saw them already afaulting his throne with re-
bellious arms, he determined, while it was yet
in his power, to anticipate the blow, and to
secure his own safety by his son's death.

FoR thispurpofe, though under pretence of

renewing the war againrt Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
of a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
whose life he deemed inconfifrent with his own
safety. But that crafty minilter did not choose
to be loaded with the odium of having execut-
ed this cruel order. As Coon .s he arrived il
Syria he wrote to Solyman, that the danl('r
was fb imintient as called fbr his imminedi-ate
presence ; that the camp was full of Mufl:ipha's
emilaric ; that im:nv of the soldiers wcre cor-
rupted, that the atiTtions of all leaned tow.irk,

hii1 ;

him; that he discovered a negotiation which ROOK Xl.
had been carried on with the Sophi of Persia, in V
order to marry Muftapha with one of his '5;3
daughters; that he already felt both his talents
and his authority to be inadequate to the exi-
gencies of such an arduous conjuncture, that
the Sultan alone had sagacity to discern what
resolution should be taken in those circumftan-
ces, and power to carry that resolution into ex-
ecution.

THIS charge of courting the friendship of

the Sophi, Roxalana and Ruftan had reserved as
the last and molt envenomed of all their ca-
lumnies. It operated with the violence which
they expeted from Solyman's inveterate abhor-
rence of the Persians, and threw him into the
wildest transports of rage. He set out instant-
ly for Syria, and hastened thither with all the
precipitation and impatience of fear and rc-
venge. As soon as he joined his army near
Aleppo, and had concerted measures with Ruf-
tan, he sent a Chiaus, or messenger of the court
to his son, requiring him to repair immediately
to his presence. Muftapha, tho' no firanger to
his (tep-mother's machinations, or to Ruftan's
malice, or to his father's violent temper, yet rely-
ing on his innocence, and hoping to discredit
the accusations of his enemies by the prompti-
tude of his obedience, followed the mefTenger
without delay to Aleppo. The moment he ar-
rived in the camp, he was introduced into the
Sultan's tent. As he entered it, he observed
nothing that could give him any alarm ; no ad-
ditional crowd of attendants, no body of armed
guards, but the fame order and silence which al-
w iys reign in the Sultan's apartments. In a few
minutes, however, several mutes appeared, at the
fight of whom Mullapha, knowing what was
his doom, cried out with a loud voice, " Lo,
my death !" and attempted to fly. The mutes

rustled

Boox X. rushed forward, to seize him, he resifted and

truggled, demanding with the utmost earnef.
ness to fee the Sultan; and derpair, together
with the hope of finding protection from the
soldiers, if he could escape out of the tent, ani.
mated him with such extraordinary Rfrength,
that, for some time, he baffled all the efforts of
the executioners. Solyman was within hearing
of his son's cries, as well as of the noise which
the struggle occasioned. Impatient of this de.
lay of his revenge, and (truck with terror at the
thought of Multapha's escaping, he drew aside
the curtain which divided the tent, and thrust.
ing in his head, darted a fierce look towards
the mutes, and with wild and threatening gef.
tures feemned to chide them for sloth and timi.
dity. At fight of his father's furious and unre-
lenting countenance, Muftapha's strength failed,
and his courage forsook him; the mutes faRtened
the bow-ltring about his neck, and in a mo-
ment put an end to his life.

THE dead body was exposed before the Sul-

tan's tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and
contemplating that mournful objec with aflo-
nifhment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to have
broke into the wildest excesses of rage. After
giving vent to the first expressions of their grief,
they retired each man to his tent, and (hutting
themselves up, bewailed in secret the cruel fate
of their favourite; nor was there one of them
who tafted food, or even water, during the re-
mainder of that day. Next morning, the fame
solitude and silence reigned in the camp; and
Solyman, being afraid that tome dreadful florm
would follow this sudden calm, in order to ap-
pease the enraged soldiers, deprived Ruftan of
the feals, ordered him to leave the camp, and
railid Achnet, a gallant officer much beloved

in

the army, to the dignity of Vifier. This change, BooK XI.
however, was made in concert with Ruftan him- 'V"
self; that crafty minister fuggeffing it as the 1553.
only expedient which could save himself, or his
matter. But within a few months, when the
resentment of the soldiers began to subside, and
the name of Muftapha to be forgotten, Achmet
was firangled by the Sultan's command, and
Ruflan re-inflated in the office of Vifier. To-
gether with his former power, he reaffumed the
plan for exterminating the race of Muftapha,
which he had concerted with Roxalana; and,
as they were afraid that an only son whom
Muftapha had left, might grow up to avenge
his death, they redoubled their activity, and,
by employing the fame arts against him which
they had prafifed against his father, they in-
spired Solyman with the fame fears, and pre-
vailed on him to issue orders for putting to
death that young innocent Prince. These or-
ders were executed, with barbarous zeal, by an
eunuch, who was dispatched to Bursa, the place
where the Prince resided; and no rival was left
to dispute the Ottoman throne with the sons of
Roxalana *.

SUCH a tragical scene, productive of so deep Charlespro-

distress, seldom occurs but in the history of the '

ae bem

great monarchies of the East, where the force tween his
of the climate works up and sublimes all the ry of'LD
pafions of the human mind into the greatefftlad.
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns ena-
bles them to aCt with uncontrouled violence;
but while it passed in the court of Solyman and
engaged his whole attention, Charles was pur-
siing with the utmost ardour a new scheme for
aggrandizing his family. About this time,

* Augerii Giflenii Bilbcquii Legationis Turcicae Epiftolan

iv. Franc, 1615. p. 37. Thnan. lib. 12. p. 432. Mer. de
Ribier. ii. 457, Mauroccni hiftor. Vencta, lib. vii. p. 69.

Edward

PooK XI. Edward the sixth of England, after a short reign,
%.V^^ in which he displayed such virtues as filled his

'553 fubjecds with sanguine hopes of being happy

under his government, and made them bear
with patience all that they suffered from the
weakness, the dissentions, and the ambition of
the miniiters who assumed the adminiltration
during his minority, was seized with a lingering
distemper which threatened his life. The Enm-
peror no sooner received an account of this,
than his ambition, always attentive to seize
every opportunity of acquiring an increase of
power or of territories to his son, suggested the
thought of adding England to his other king-
doms, by the marriage of Philip with the Prin-
cess Mary, the heir of Edward's crown. Be.
ing apprehensive, however, that his son, who
was then in Spain, might decline a match with
a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven
years older than himself ; Charles determined
notwithstanding his own age and infirmities, to
sake offer of himself as a husband to his cousin.

To which BUT though Mary was so far advanced in
,isco"'- years, and deflitute of every charm, either of
Icnt. person or of manners, that could win afietion,

or command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his content to the match proposed by his
father, and was willing, according to the usual
maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his inclination to
his ambition. In order to inuhre success, the
Emperor, even before Edward's death, began
to take such fleps as might facilitate it. Upon
Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of
England; the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray

*Pallav. his. Concil. Trid, v. ii. c. 13. p. 150.

proviing

proving as unfortunate, as they were ill found- BOOK XL
ed *. Charles sent immediately a pompous em- . W
bafry to London, to congratulate Mary on her '553
acceflion to the throne, and to propose the alli-
ance with his son. The Queen, dazzled with the The fnti-
profpeL of marrying the heir of the greatest Mo- mclus of
narch in Europe; fond of uniting more clofelyorf tIc. G-_
with her mother's family, to which (he had beenlifh with re-
always warmly attached; and eager to fecuregrd"i
the powerful aid which she knew would be ne-
ceflary towards carrying on her favourite scheme
of re-eflablifhing the Romi(h religion in Eng-
land, listened in the molt favourable manner
to the proposal. Among her fubjets, it met
with a very different reception. Philip, it was
well known, contended for all the tenets of the
church of Rome with a sanguinary zeal, which
exceeded the measure even of Spanish bigotry:
this alarmed all the numerous partizans of the
Reformation. The Castilian haughtiness and
reserve were far from being acceptable to the
English, who, having several times seen their
throne occupied by those who were born fib-
jecs, had become accustomed to an unceremo-
nious and familiar intercourse with their fove-
reigns. They could not think, without the
utmofl uneasiness, of admitting a foreign Prince
to that influence in their councils, which the
husband of their Queen would naturally polises.
They dreaded, both from Philip's over-bearing
temper, and from the maxims of the Spanish
monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would
infuse ideas into the Queen's mind, dangerou:,
to the liberties of the nation, and would intro-
duce foreign troops and money into the kingdora
to afnill her in any attempt against them.

" Carte's hil. of England, iii. 287.

FL'LL

BOOK XI. FULL of thefeapprehenfions, the house of Corn
bdVu^ mons, though in that age extremely obsequious
The houle to the will of their Monarchs, presented a warm
of Com- address against the Spanish match; many
mions re-
mnftrAte pamphlets were published, representing the dan-
aa.ni t. gerous consequences of the alliance with Spain,

and describing Philip's bigotry and arrogance in
the molt odious colours. But Mary, inflexible
in all her resolutions, paid no regard to the re-
monstrances of her Commons, or to the senti-
ments of the people. The Emperor, having
secured, by various arts, the ministers whom (he
trufled most, they approved warmly of the
match, and large umrns were remitted by him
in order to gain the reft of the council. Cardinal
Pole, whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's
acceflion, had dispatched as his legate into Eng-
land, in order to reconcile his native country to
the fee of Rome, was detained by the Empe-
ror's command at Dillinghen, in Germany, left
by his pretence he should thwart Philip's preten-
sions, and employ his interest in favour of his
kinfiman Courtnay Earl of Devonflire, whom
the English ardently wished their sovereign to
choose for a husband .

The mar- MIEANWHILE, the negotiation was carried
iage reay forward with the greateit rapidity, the Empe-

ror agreeing, without hesitation, to every arti-
cle in favour of England which Mary's minilters
either represented as neceflary to sooth the
people and reconcile them to the match, or that
was suggested by their own fears and jealousy
of a foreign malter. The chief articles were,
that Philip, during his marriage with the Queen,

1,54. should bear the title of King of England, but the
Jan. . entire adminifiration of affairs, as well as the

* Carte, iii. 288.

sole

sole disposal of all revenues, offices, and bene- Boot XI
sices lhould remain with the Queen; that the cV"
heirs of the marriage should, together with the 4
crown of England, inherit the dutchy of Bur-
gundy and the Low-Countries; that if Prince
Charles, Philip's only son by; a former marriage,
should die without issue, his children by the
Qgeen, whether male or female, should succeed
to the crown of Spain and all the Emperor's
hereditary dominions; that before the confum-
mation of the marriage, Philip should swear
solemnly that he would retain no domeflick who
was not a subjec of the Queen, and would
bring no foreigners into .the kingdom that
might give umbrage to the English i that he
wo0ild make no, alteration in the corstitution or
laws of England,; that he would not carry the
Queen, or any of the children born of this mar-
riage, out of the kingdom; that if the Queen
should die before him without iflue, he should
leave the crown to the lawful heir, without
claiming any right of adminiflration whatever;
that England Ihould not, in consequence of this
marriage, be engaged in any war subsisting be-
tween France and Spain; and that the alliance
between France'and England hould remain in
full force *.

BUT this treaty, though both the EmperorDi.content

and Mary's ministers employed their utmost ad- ^nhlfP of
dress in framing it so as to please the Englifh,the English.
was far from quieting their fears and jealousies.
They saw that words and promises were a feeble
fccurity againl' the encroaclhments of an ambi-
tious Prince, who, as soon as lie got poffellion of
the power and advantages which the Queen's
husband nmul necessarily enjoy, could easily

Rymer's Fed. vol. xv. 377. 393. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 492.
VOL. 1l. ' ' evaae

BOOK XI.evade any of the articles that either limited his
%OV%.' authority, or obftruded his schemes. They

1554. were convinced that, the more favourable the

conditions of the present treaty were to England,
the more Philip would be tempted to violate
them; and they dreaded that Eng!and, like
Naples, Milan, and the other countries annex-
ed to the Spanish Crown, would soon feel the
intolerable weight of its oppressive domination,
and be constrained, as there had been, to waste
its wealth and vigour in wars wherein it had no
interest, and from which it could derive no ad.

wyat's in- vantage. These sentiments prevailed so gene-
furrecion. rally, that every part of the kingdom was filled

with discontent at the match, and with indigna-
tion againit the advisers of it. Sir ThomasWyat,
a gentleman of tome note, and of good inten-
tions towards the publick, took advantage of
this, and routed the inhabitants of Kent to arms,
in order to save their country from a foreign
yoke. Such numbers retorted in a short time to
his standard; he marched to London with fich
rapidity; and the Queen was so utterly unpro-
vided for defence, that the asped of affairs was
extremely threatening, and if any nobleman of
diftindion had joined the malecontents, or had
Wyat pofTeffed talents equal, in any degree, to
the boldness of his enterprize, the infurreEion
must have proved fatal to Mary's pbower But
all his meafiures were conceited. 'I:ith ft little
prudence, and executed with :ifch irresolution,
.that many of' lis followers ;fforfok him; the
relt were dispersed by an handful of men; and
he himself way taken prisoner,. without having
made any eff.rt worthy of the cause that he
hlid xlndertdkeri,' or riitab!e ::t thee ardour
with which he engaged in it.: H filtffercd the
}pulnihment due to his rafhnets ajid rebellion.
lThe Q^.en' aithority was'confirmed and in-

creali.'l

creased by her 'usce{' in defeating this inconfi.Boo. XI.
derate attempt to abiiidge jt. ',he lady Jane '/"
Gray, whose title the ambition 'of. her relations
had ret up in opposition to the OQueen's, was,
notwichilanding her' youth and innocence,
brought to the fcaff6ld. The lady Elizabeth,
the Q.een's lifter, was observed with the most'
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was
ratified by the parliament.

PHILIP landPd in England.with arriagnifi. Th^m

cent retinue, celebrated his nuptials 'ith great brad.
solemni.ty, and though'he co.utld"not lay aside
his nat-utal severity and pride, or assume graci-
ous and'popplar manners, he endeavoured to
concilia'te the favour of the Entglifh iobility by
his extraordinary liberality. In'case that should
fail'of acquiring him such influende. in the go-
vernment of the kinrgcldi,as he aimed atobtairi-
ing, the Emperor lept' a body of twelv'e thou-
sand men on the coaftof Slanders, in' readiness
to embark for England, and to support him in
all his enterprizes.'

EMiBoLDE NEI . byall there favourable circum-Mary's

flarces, Mary pdtfrued'the scheme of extirpatingoverturn th
the Protestant re'igidn out of her dominions, Protftant
with the moR: precipitant zeal. -The laws ofEng'and.
Edward the sixth in favour of the'Reformation
were repealed;' tle 'roteftant clergy ejeEted;
all the forms and rites of the Popiflh worflip were
re-eftabliflled; the nation was folemnrly absolved
from the guilt which it had contra&ed during
the period of its apbflacy, and was publickly
r:conciled to the church of Rome, by cardinal
Pole, who, immediately after the Queen's mar.
riage, was permitted to continue hisjourney to
England, and to exercise his legantine functi-

U a ons

BOOK XL.OS. with. thel mpot ample o.wer.. No,t satisfied

~. iwith. haviing.Qvnertmrned. t~"proteftant church,
$5.4, and havi'ng eablilhed her pwn fytern on its

ruins, M.ry i.tled that al. hes.fubjeas ihotuld
coinform to the fame mode of worlhip whic!l lhe
preferred; ib ould prbf esthe'ir faith in the
ifme creed whiih she had' approved; and abjure
every pra'lice or opinjonthat was deeimed re-
pugnant to either of the.rp. .P qwers, altogether
unknown in the English confiitution,were vested
.in certain perrops .appointed tq take cognizance

of heresy., ani they proceedecj to exercise them
with more thariin hqifitpri;everity. 'The prof-
peet of dahnger' howver,. did not intimidate
the teachisof the 'Ptiotet'ant '.docrines, who
believed' t[a;,'they wexrj onte.nzting for truths
of the uxo cfl;'.Qpfequence t t he happiness of
mankind'. Tlhey b ao4li[y, ayowed their senti-
ments, aQl vy/ee conde. eli to that cruel death
which th

i ,urh of R'me referlves or its ene-

mies., Thii' C'oking p nfriirn)ent wasirnfliied
with that Ibafiarity which .the ;rancour, of false
zeal alone "can' inspire. The Englili, whlo are
inferior in humanity to no people in Europe, and
remarkable, o,r .the mi,ldness, ps their publick
.xecutions, beheld, witb alaonilment and hor-
ror, perroqrs w ,9 had filled te moe t refpettable
flations in th'e'church, .a~,d wh o were venera-
ble on accunt qs' their age, their piety and their
literature, -conlsemnede to. endure torments, to
whicl even t'h most atrocius criminals were
not fubjeet'ed.'

' ie ob- Ttlr 'extr'eie rigour did not accomplish the
nlalcs end at whici Mary aimed. The patience and
which Ihe , .' , ,
had to iur- fortitude withwlich these martyrs for the Re
mount. formation ftibmitted to the'ir suffering, the

heroick contempt of death exprelIed by persons
of every' rank, and age, and sex, confirmed

mally

nany more in the Proteflant faith; than thelooi:l;
threats of their ei raged persecutors :;uld fright- '_.
en into'apoftacy*. 'The bifinefsofffudh as were '554
entrulted with trying of hereticks grew upon
them, and appeared to be as endlefsas it was
odious. The Queen's ablest niiiifters becamo
sensible how impolitick 'as well as dangerous it
was to irritate the people, by the freq.entfpec-
tale of publick executions, which. they detefl-
ed both as unjust and cruel. Even Philip was
so thoroughly convinced of her having run to
an excess of rigour, tliat, on this occasion, he
affulned a part to which he was little accuf-
tomed, becoming an advocate for moderation
and lenity.

BUT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingraTheEn lif

tiate himself with. the English, ;they difcoveredjalups of
aconftantjealoify and diitruit of )all his intenti*
ous; and when. some members, who had been
gained by the court, ventured 'to'-iove in the
houfeof Commons that the nati6n iought to assist
the. Emperor, the Queen's father-in-law, in:his
war against France,. tle proposal was rejected
with general diiffatisfasion. -A motion which
was made, thatr the 'parliament should give its
consent that Philip might be publickly crowned
as the Queen's husband, met with fich a cold
reception, that it wasiinfantly.vithdzawn t-.

IME:AN.WH ILE, thl King as France liad ob0 The French

served the progrefs.of:the EmperarY negotiation King alarm-
in England with much uneafncfs. :,The great aci match bc-
elliQon of territories as well at reputation which twcen Phi-

lip and Ma-
his enemy 'would acquire by the malriage :otry.

'.qodwin's Annals of Q Mary ap.cnnctt; v.ii, p. 329.

Burnet's hilt. of Reform. ii. 298. 3p5.
t Carte'e hift.lf England, iii. 314.

U3

hiis

fBooK XI.his son with 'the Queen of such a powerful king.
LoV' dom was obvious and formidable. He eafilv

'554. foresaw that the English, notwithstanding all

their fears and precautions, would be loon
drawn in to. take part in. the.:quarrels on the
continent, and be compelled to.;at in fubfervi-
ency to the Emperor's ambitious; schemes. For
this reason, Henry had given it in charge to his
ambassador at the court of London, to employ
all his address in order to defeat or retard the
treaty of marriage; and as there was not, at
that time, any Prince of the blood in France,
whom he could propose to the Queen as a hus.
band, he inflrilted him to co-operate with such
of the English as wished their sovereign to marry
one of her own filbjets. But the Queen's ar.
dour and precipitation, -in' closing with the firfi
overtures in favour of Philip, having rendered
all his endeavours ineffectual, Henry was so far
from thinking it prudent to give. any aid to the
English malecontents, though earnestly solicited
by Wyat and their other.leaders, who tempted
him to take them: under his protetion, by offers
of great advantage to France, that he command-
ed his ambassador to congratulate the Queen in
the warmest terms upon the fu£ppreflionof the
insurrection, '

.

H;sprepa- BUT, notwithlandingthefe external profefli-
rations tor a
vigorous ons, lie dreaded so much the consequence of
mpign, ,this alliance, wicih more than compenfated'for

all that the Emperor had'Tlot in.:Germany, that
he determined to carry oti .his imiilitary opera.
tions both in the Low-Countriesi and in Italy,
with extraordinary' vigour, in. order .that he
might compel Charles to accept of an equitable
peace, before' his datughter-in-law could fur-
mount the aversion of her 'fuibjeas to a war on
the continent, and prevail on them to afifit the

Emperor

Emperor either with money or troops. So Book XI
this purpose, he exerted himself to the utmoft"v'
in order to have a numerous army early assem- 15S4a
bled on the frontiers of the Netherlands, and
while one part of it laid waste the open country
of Artois, the main body, under the Constable
Montmorency, advanced towards the provin-
ces of Liege and Hainault by the forest of Ar-
dennes.

THE campaign was opened with the liege ofThe rr,-

Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen ofarms.
Hungary, the governess of the Low-Countries,
had fortified at great expence; but, being defti-
tute of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in
fix days. Henry, elated with this success, put June o.
himself at the head of his army, and investing
Bouvines, took it by assault, after a (hort re-
fiftance. With equal facility he became master
of Dinant; and then, turning to the left, bent
his march towards the province of Artois.
The vast fums which the Emperor had remitted 1rt-
into England, had so exhausted his treasury, as able to oh-
to render his preparations, at this juncture, ftalt'
flower and more dilatory than usual. He had
no body of troops to make head against the
French at their first entrance into his territo-
ries; and tho' he drew together all the forces in
the country, in the utmost hurry, and gave the
command of them to Emanuel Philibertof Sa.
voy, they were in no condition to face an ene-
my Co far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his activity and good con-
duet, made up for his want of troops. 3y
watching all the motions of the French at a
distance, and by choofing his own posts with
such skill as put it out of their power either to
form any siege of consequence or to attack him,
he obliged them to fall back for want of sub-
fiftence towards their own frontiers, after hav-
ing burnt all the open towns, and having plun-

U 4 ecred

Booc XLdered the country. through which they marched

V'4J with a cruelty and license more becoming a bo-
'554. dyof.light troops than a royal army led bya

great monarch.

The French:. BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his
invcft Ren-
vti. n'army, without attempting some conquest ade-

quate to the vast preparations, as well as fan-
guine hopes with which he had opened the cam.
paign, invested Renti, a place deemed in that
age of'great importance, as, by its situation on
the confines of Artois, and Boulonnais, it co.
vered the former province, and proteced the
parties which had made incursions into the lat-
ter. The town, which was strongly fortified
and provided with a numerous garrison, made
a;gallant defence; but being warmly pressed by
a powerful army, it must soon have yielded.
The Emperor, who at that time enjoyed a short
interval of cafe from the gout, was so solicitous
to save it, that, although he could bear no other
motion but.that, of a litter, he instantly put
himself at the head of his army, which, having
received several reinforcements, was now strong
enough to approach the enemy. The French
were eager to decide by a battle, what (hould
be the fate of Renti, and expected it from the
Emperor's arrival in the camp; but Charles
avoided it with great industry, and as he had
nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped
to accomplish that, without exposing himself
to the confequencesof such a dangerous and
doubtful event.

.laeion NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautionr, a
bctwetn thedifpute, about a post which both armies en-

deavoured to seize, brought on an engagement
'which proved .almost general. The Duke of
Aug. 13 Guise who commanded the wing of the French

which frood the brunt of thecotibat, displayed

valoul

valour and conduct worthy of the defender of Boo, XI.
Metz; the Imperialifis, after anobftinate (trug- 8v
gle, were repulsed; the French remained matters 554S
of the post in dispute; and if the Contfable,
either from his natural caution and slowness, or
from unwillingness to support a rival whom he
hated, had not delayed bringing up the main
body to second the impreflion which Guise had
made, the rout of the enemy mult have been
complete. The Emperor, notwithstanding the
loss which he had futlained, continued in the
fame camp; and the French, being, iraitened
for provisions, and finding it impossible to car-
ry on the siege in the face of an hostile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired
openly, courting the enemy to approach, ra-
ther than shunning an engagement.

BUT Charles, having gained his end, susser- TTh Ipe-

ed them to march off unmolested. As loon as vad Pi-
his troops entered their own country, HenrycardY-
threw garrisons into the frontier towns, and dif-
miffed the reft of the army. This encouraged
the Imperialills to push forward with a confide-
rable body of troops into Picardy, and by lay-
ing waste the country with fire and sword, they
endeavoured to revenge themselves for the ra-
vages which the French had committed in
Hainault and Artois *. But as they were not
able to reduce any place of importance, they
gained nothing more than the enemy had done
by this cruel and inglorious method of car-
rying on the war.

MEA NWHILE, the arms of France were still Afair, of

more unsuccessful in Italy. The footing which l'ly
the. French had acquired in .'iena, occasioned
much uneasiness to Cofino di Medici, the modl

Tluanl. 460,, &F Harai Ann. Brab. 674.

sagacious

Boo XI.fagacious and enterprising of all the Italian
ri'Vn Princes. He dreaded the neighbourhood of a
1554. powerful people, to whom all who favoured the

ancient republican government in Florence
would have recourse, as to their natural pro-
tector, against that absolute authority which the
Emperor had enabled him to usurp; he knew

Cormo di how odious he was to the French, on account
lledicis of his attachment to the Imperial party; and he
with regard foresaw that if they were permitted to gather
to Sicna. ffrength in Siena, Tuscany would soon feel the

effects of their resentment. For there reasons,
he wished with the utmost solicitude for the
expulsion of the French out of the Sienefe, be-
fore they had time to eftablifl themselves tho-
roughly in the country, or to receive such rein-
forcements from France, as would render it
dangerous to attack them. As this, however,
was properly the Emperor's business, who was
called by his interest as well as honour to dif.
lodge there formidable intruders into the heart
of his dominions, Cosmo laboured to throw
the whole burden of the enterprize on him;
and on that account had given no assistance, du.
ring the former campaign, but by advancing
fotne small tums of money towards payment of
the Imperial troops.

He negoti- P,UT as the defence of the Netherlands en-
tes w th grossed all the Emperor's attention, and his re-
ror. mittances into England had drained his trea-

fury, it was obvious that his operations in Italy
would be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly
perceived that, if he hinmfelf did not take part
openly in the war, and aA with vigour, the
French would scarce meet any annoyance. As
his fittuation rendered this resolution necessary
and unavoidable, his next care was to execute
it in fiuch a manner, that he might derive from
it some other advantage, besides that of driving

the

the French out of his neighbourhood. With BooK XI.
this view, he dispatched an envoy to Charles, V-'.
and offered to declare war against France, and to
reduce Siena at his own charges, on condition
that ihe: hould be repaid whatever he ihouid ex-
pend in the enterprize, and be permitted to re-
tain all his conquells, until his demands were
fully satisfied. Charles, to whom, at this
junAure, the war againrt Siena was an intolera-
ble burden, and who had neither expedient nor
resource that could enable him to carry it on
with proper vigour, closed gladly with this
overture; and Cofino, well acquainted with
the low slate of the Imperial finances, flattered
himfdf that the Emperor, finding it impolTible
to reimburse him, would susser him to keep
quiet poffiefion of whatever places he (hould
conquer *.

FvLL of these hopes, he made great prepa-Enters into

rations for war, and as the French King hadiFranc'i
turned the firength of his arms againit the
Netherlands, he did not despair of assembling
such a body of men, as would prove more than
a sufficient match for any force which he could
bring into the field in Italy. He endeavoured
to obtain assistance from the Pope, or at least to
secure his remaining neutral, by giving one of
his daughters to that Pontiff's nephew. He
attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini, whose
family had been long attached to the French
party, from his ancient confederates, by be-
frowing on him another of his daughters; and
what was of greater consequence than either of
tlefe, he engaged John James Medecino, Mar- G'"'cst
quis of Marignano, to take the command of hisi :irmy to
army t. This officer, from a very low condi-N'a ci, o

a Adriani Iftfrii de filoi tempi, vol. i. 662.
t Adgicni I4oria vol. i. p. 663.

tion

BooK XI. tion in life, had raised himself ,through all the

wv"X ranks of service, to high command, and had
554' displayed talents and acquired reputation in

war, which entitled him to be placed on a le-
vel with the greatest generals of that martial
age. Having attained a fation of eminence so
disproportionate to his birth, he laboured with
a fond solicitude to conceal his original -obfcu-
rity, by giving out that he.was descended of
the family of Medici, to which honour theca-
fual resemblance of his name was his only pre-
tension. Cosmo, happy that he could gratify
him at such an easy rate, flattered his vanity in
this point, acknowledged him as a relation,
and permitted him to assume the arms.of his
family : Medecino, eager to serve the head of
that family, of which he now confidered him.
self as a branch, applied with wonderful zeal
and afliduity to raise troops; and as, during
his long service, lie had acquired great credit
with the leaders of those mercenary bands,
which formed the strength of Italian armi:es, he
engaged the most eminent of them to follow
Cosmo's standard.

zi intrued To oppose this able general, and the formi-
with the dable army which he had assembled, the. King
command of
the French of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Flo-
rmy in rentine nobleman, who-had long resided in
Italy. France, as an exile, and who had risen by his

merit to high reputation and comrand :in the
army. He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who,
in the year one thousand five hundred and thir-
ty-feven, had concurred with such ardourin the
attempt to expel the family, of Medici out of
Florence, and to re-establish the ancient repub'
lican form of government;.and who had pe-
rilhed in the undertaking. The Ton inherited
the implacable aversion to the Medici, aswell
as the fame enthufiaftick zeal for the liberty of
Florence, which had animated his fariher, whole

death

death he was impatient to revenge. Henry BooK XI.
flattered himsel( that his army would make ra-
pid progress under a general, whose zeal to pro 1554.
mote! hbi interelf was roused and seconded by
such powerful palions; especially as he had al-
iotted him, for the scene of adCion, his native
Country, in whi.ch he had many powerful parti-
zas ready to facilitate all his operations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might Th impru-
appear which. induced Henry to make this choice.
choice,: i proved fatal to the interelts of France
in Italy.. Cosmo, as .soon as he heard that the
mortal enemy of:his family was appointed to
tak, the commrand in Tuscany, concluded that
the King. of France i:med at fometbing more
than the protefion Qs the Sienefe, and saw the
i.oeffity of mpaking extraordinary efforts, not
merely, to reduce $iena, but to save himself from
derrution *. At the fame time, the Cardinal
of Ferrara, w!lo had the entire direction of the
French affairs'.i Ita.ly, confidered Strozzi as a
forari4able rivgl inpower; and, in order to pre-
vent him from acquiring any increase of autho-
rity from fuccelI,, he was extremely remiss in
supplying him .eitler with money.to pay his
troops, or with provisions to support them.
Strozii mlilnelf, blinded by his resentment againtt
the Mcdici, puflhed on.his operations with impe-
tuofity of revenge, ratlier than with the.caution
and pruience becoming a great general..

Ar firif, however, he attacked leveral towns The bittle

in the territories of Florence, with fiuch vigour, otMar
as obliged Medecino, in order to check his pro-
grelf, to withdraw the greater part of his army
fromn Siena, which he had inverted before
Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cofino sustained

* Pecci Mcmoric di Sicna, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.

the

BOOK XI. the whole burden of mtilitary operations, the

expence of which mutt have exhausted his reve,
s554h nues, neither the viceroy of Naples nor gover,

nor. of Milan were in condition to afford him
any aid; and as the troops which Medecino had
left in the camp before ,Siena could attempt no-
thing against it during his' absence, it was
Strozzi's business to have protraaced the war,
and to have transferred the feat of it into the
territories of Florence ; but the hope of ruihing
the enemy with one decisive blow, precipitated
him into a general engagement not far- 'from

Aug. 3. Marciano. The armies were nearly equal in
in wrch number; but a body of Italian cavalry, in which
the Fre.n(h n mr
aredefeated.Strozzi placed great confidence; having fled;

either thro' the treachery or 'cowardice of the
officers who commanded its without making
any resistance,. the infantry remained exposed to
the attacks of all Medecino's' troops. Encou-
raged, however, by Strozzi's pretence and 'ex-
ample, who, after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally'.the cavalry, placed
himself at the head of the infantry, and mani-
fested an admirable pretence of mind, as well as
extraordinary valour, they flood their ground
with great firmn'nes, and irepiiled such of the
enemy as ventured to approach them. But there
gallant troops, being furrouhded at last on, every
fide, and torn in pieces by:a battery of cannon
.which Medecino brought to bear upon them,
the Florentine cavalry brcke in on their flanks,
and a general rout enfitd. Strozzi, faint with
the loss of blood, and deeply affe'cld with the
fatal consequences of his own ralhnefs, found
the utmoll difficulty in making his elcape with
a handful of men*.

* Pecci Mcoric;dclla Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.

MEDECINO

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege Boox XL

of Siena with his victorious troops, and as Stroz-'/-"
zi could not, after the utmost efforts of activity,, Mecnli
collec as many men as to form the appearance befeges
of a regular army, he had leisure to carry onSiena'
his approaches against the town without moles-
tation. But the Sienefe, instead of finking into which i,
despair upon this cruel disappointment of theirrnd'j by
only hope of obtaining relief, prepared to de-the itizens
fend themselves to the utmost extremity, with"an' Mnu"
that undaunted fortitude which the love of li-
berty alone can inspire. This generous refo-
lution was warmly seconded by Monluc, who
commanded the French garrison in the town.
The active and enterprizing courage which he
had displayed on many occalions had procured
him this command; and as he had ambition
which aspired at the higher military dignities,
without any pretensions to attain them but what
he could derive from merit, he determined to
distinguish his defence of Siena by extraordinary
efforts of valour and perseverance. For this
purpose, he, with unwearied induitry, repaired
and strengthened the fortifications ; he trained
the citizens to the use of arms, and accustomed
them to go thro' the fatigues and dangers of
service in common with the soldiers; and as the
enemy were extremely firiknt in guarding all the
avenues to the city, he husbanded the provisions
in the magazines with the mofl parsimonious
ceconomy, and prevailed on the soldiers, as well
as the citizens, to reltriR themselves to a very
moderate daily allowance for their fubfillence.
IJedecino, though his army was not numerous
enough to Itorm the town by open force, ven-
tured twice to assault it by furprize, but he was
received each time with io much spirit, and re-
pulsed with fhich loss, as. dircouraged him from
repeating the attempt, and left him no hopes
of reducing the town but by famine.

WI T-lT

BOOK XI. 'WITH this view, he fortified his own camp
,-NV- with great care, occupied all the polls of
Mc5n4 firength round the place, and having entirely
converts the cut off the besieged from. any communication
geokoa with the adjacent country, he waited patiently

until neceflity ihould compel them to-open their
gates. But the enthufiallick zeal of the citizens
for liberty, made them despise the inconvenien.
cies occasioned by scarcity of provisions, and
even supported them long under all the mileries
of famine; Monluc, by his example and ex-
hortations, taught his ioldiers to vie with them
in patience and ab'tinence;' and it was not until
they had whftood a siege of ten months, until
they had eaten up all t e horses, dogs, and other
animals in the place,. and were reduced almost
. to their last morsel ps bread, that they proposed

a capitulation. Even then, they demanded ho-
nourable terms; and as Cosmo, tho' no stranger
to the extremity of their condition, was afraid
that despair might prompt them to venture
upon rome wild enterprize, he immediately
granted them conditions more favourable than
they could have expected.

Aril t2. TH E capitulation was mdle in the Emperor's
TLie tor name, who engaged to* take the , republck of
famine to Siena under the prqtection of the Empire; he
captuate. promised to maintain the ancient liberties of the

city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise of
their, former authority, to secure the citizens in
the undiCtprbed poffeifion of their privileges and
property; he granted an ample and unlimited
pardon to all who had borne arms against him;
he reserved to himself the right of placing a gar-
rifon in the town, but engaged not to rebuild
the citadel without the content of the citizens.
Monluc and his French garrison were allowed
to march out with all the honours of war.

MIEDICIN

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitula-Boori XI.

tion, so far as depended on him with great ex- -/ 'l
aftnefs. No violence or insult whatever was -S5-
offered to the inhabitants, and the French gar-
rifon was received with all the refpet due to its
spirit and bravery. But many of the citizensltanyorthe
fufpeting from the extraordinary facility with ieC re-
which they had obtained fuch.favourable con .lonte-Al-
ditions, that the Emperor, as well as Cosmo,'"°'
would take the first opportunity of violating
them, and disdaining to possess a precarious li-
berty, which depended on the will of another,
abandoned the place of their nativity, and ac-
companied the French to Monte-Alcino, Porto
Ercole, and other small towns in the territory
of the republic. They ettablifhed in Monte-
Alcino the fame model of government tn which and ctalifh
they had been accuflomed at Siena, and ap-.free go-
pointing magiatrates with the ame e titles and thre
jurifdition, solaced themselves with this image
of their ancient liberty.

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fateHardihipsto

of their country were not imaginary, or their wh.ichh
suspicion of the Emperor and Cofino ill-found-sicna were
ed; but no sooner had the Imperial troops ta-fubj'"c'd
ken poffeflion of the town, than Cofino, with-
out regarding the articles of capitulation, not.
only displaced the magiltrates who weie in of-
fice, and nominated new ones devoted to his in.
terest, but commanded all the citizens to deli-
ver up their arms to peifons whom he appoint-
ed to receive them. They fibmitted to the
former from neceflity, though with all the re-
ludtance and regret which men accuflomed to
liberty feel in obeying the first commands of a
mailer. They did not yield the fame tame
obedience to the latter, and many persons of
distinction, rather than degrade thermfe!ves, by
furrerdering their arms, from the rank of

VOL. 111. X frtemt:en

BOOK XI. fieemen to the condition of slaves, fled to their
'V ' countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and chore to en.

'555' dure all the hardships, and encounter all the

dangers which they had reaion to expect in that
new station, where they had fixed the feat of
their republick.

Cecmo at- COSMO, not reckoning himself secure while
wliohad r-fuch numbers of implacable and desperate ene-
tirej. mies were sett!ed in his neighbourhood, and re-

tained any degree of power, solicited Medecino
to attack them in their different places of re-
treat, before they had time to recruit their
firength and spirits, after the many calamities
which they had suffered. He prevailed on him,
though his army was much weakened by hard
duty during the siege of Siena, to invert Porto
Ercole; and the fortifications being both flight
and incornpleat, the besieged were toon compel-
led to open their gates. An unexpected order
which Medecino received from the Emperor to
detach the greater part of his troops into Pied-
jt1e '3 mont, prevented farther operations, and per-

mitted the Sienefe exiles to reside for some time
undisturbed in Monte-Alcino. But their un-
happy countrymen who remained at Siena,
were not yet at the end of their fifferings;
for the Emperor, inftcad of adhering to the ar-
ticles of capitulation, granted his son Philip the
invelriture of that city and all its dependen-
cies; and Francis de Toledo, in the name of
their new master, proceeded to fettle the civil
aond military government, treated them like a
conquered people, and fubjeded them to the
Spanish yoke, without paying any regard
whatever to their privileges or eltablilhed forms
of policy .

' Sleid. 617. Thinan. lib. \v. 526, 537. Joan. Camera

ni adnot. rer. prtcipuarium ah anno 15 °o ad 1 S1 ;Ip F're
leruin, vol. iii. p. 5i4. I'ccJi ecmmorie dell a Siena, is.
164, &c.

THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been BOOK XI.

so feeble, for some time, and its commanders so I
inactive, that the Emperor, in order to give op.eris,,
vigour to his operations in that quarter, found inl'icdmont
it necessary not only to call off Medecino's
troops from Tuscany, while in the career of
conquest, but to employ in Piedmont a general
of such reputation and abilities, as might
counterbalance the great military talents of the
Marechal Brifsac, who was at the head of the
French forces in that country.

He pitched on the Duke of Alva for tathathrls ap
purpose; but it was as much the effet of a points the

D

* Duke oft Al-

court intrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's va ge era-
merit, which led him to this choice. Alva hadlilmu'thcre
long attended Philip with the utmost afliduity,
and had endeavoured to work himself into his
confidence by all the insinuating arts of which his
haughty and inflexible nature was capable. As
he nearly resembled that Prince in many sea-
tures of his character, he began to gain much
of his good-will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Phi-
lip's favourite, who dreaded the progress which
this formidable rival made in his master's as-
fetions, had the address to prevail with the
Emperor to name Alva to this command. The
Duke, though sensible that he owed this dif-
tintion to the malicious arts of an enemy,
who had no other aim than to remove him at
a diflance fiomr the court, was of such puncti-
lious honour, that he would not decline a com-
mand that appeared dangerous and difficult,
but, at the fame time, so haughty that he would
not accept of it but on his own terms, insist-
ing on being appointed the Emperor's Vicar
General in Italy, with the supreme military
command in all the Imperial and Spanish ter-
ritories in that country. Char!es granted
all his demands j and he took pofnllion of

X 2 hi[

BOOK XI.his new dignity, with almosl unlimited au-
.,r-Y",. thority.

1555.

His opera- His first operations, however, were neither
tio tr^ proportioned to his former reputation and the
able. extensive powers with which he was invested,

nor did they come up to the Emperor's expec-
tations. Briffac had under his command an
army which, though inferior in number to the
mnperialilts, was composed of chosen troops,
which having grown old in service in that
country, where every town was fortified, and
every castle capable of being defended, were
perfeetly acquainted with the manner of carry-
ing on war there. By their valour, and his
own good conduct, Briffac not only defeated
all the attempts of the Imperialifrs, but added
new conquefis to the territories of which he was
formerly mailer. A'va, after having boatsed,
with his usual arrogance, that he would drive
the French out of Piedmont in a few weeks, was
obliged to retire into winter quarters, with the
ignominy of being unable to preserve entire
that partof the country of which the Emnpror
had hitherto kept pofleflion *.

A conCpin- As the operations of this campaign in Pied-
y to b"tay rnont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
Mctz to the
ni,,pcriaifts. were inconsiderable, neither the nmperor nor

King of France being able to bring into the
field an army Rirong enough to undertaike any
enterprize of moment. Put w at Char!es
wanted in force, he erdeavoured to lulpI!y by
a bold stratagem, the 'luccefs of which would
have been equal to that of the mnol vigorous cam-
paign. During the fiegeof Metz, Leonard Father
Guardian of a convent of Franciscans in that
city had, by his attchn,7,nt to the French in-
terest, insinuated hinfc'f far into the eitecrm and

* Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guicheqon Hist. de Savoye, tom.
i. 670.

favour

favour of the Duke of Guise. Being a man Book r.
of an ailive and intriguing spirit, he had been "V
extremely useful both in animating the inha- '555
bitants to fuflain with patience all the hard-
ships of the siege, and in procuring intelli-
gence of the enemies designs and motions.
The merit of there important services, together
with the warm recommendations of the Duke
of Guile, secured him feich high confidence
with Vielleville, who was appointed governor
of Metz, when Guise left the town, that he
was permitted to converse or correspond with
whatever persons he chose, and nothing that he
did created any suspicion. This monk, from
the levity natural to bold and projecting ad-
ven urers; or from resentment against the
French, who had not beltowed on him such re-
wards as he thought due to his own merit; or
tempted, by the unlimited confidence which
was placed in him, to imagine that he might
carry on and accomplish any scheme with per-
sect security; formed a design of betraying
Metz to the Imperialists.

HE communicated his intentions to theTliepliiof

Queen-dowager of Hungary, who governedi.
the Low-Countries in the name of her bro-
ther. She approving, without any scruple, an
at of treachery, from which the Emperor might
derive such lignal advantage, aliifted the Fa-
ther Guardian in concerting the mofi proper
plan for ensuring its success. They agreed that
the Father Guardian should endeavour to gain
the monks of his convent to concur in pro-
moting the design; that he Ihould introduce
into the convent a certain number of chosen
soldiers, disguised in the habit of friars; that
when every thing was ripe for execution, the
governor of Thionville should march towards
Metz in the night with a considerable body of
troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts ; that

X 3 while

BOOK XI. while the garrison was employed in resisting the
LV"iaffailants, the monks should set fire to the

town in different places ; that the soldiers who
lay concealed hould sally out of the convent, and
attack thole who defended the ramparts in the
rere. Amidct the universal terror and confusion
which events so unexpected would occasion,
it was not doubted but that the Imperialilts
might become masters of the town. As a re-
cmnrenfe for this service the Father Guardian
stipulated that he should be appointed bishop of
Metz, and ample rewards were promised to
filch of his monks as should be most ative in
co-operating with him.
Its progress. THE Father Guardian accomplithed what he

had undertaken to perform, with great secrecy
and dispatch. By his authority and arguments,
as well as by the profped of wealth or honours
which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He
introduced into the convent, as many soldiers
as were thought sufficient, without being sus-
peaed. The governor of Thionville, apprised
in due time of the design, had assembled a
proper number of troops for executing it; and
the moment appronchled, which probably would
have wrested from Henry the most important of
all his conquefRs.

BUT happily for France, on the very day
D.:covre that was fixed for firiking the blow, Viellevillc,

an able and vigilant officer, received informa-
tion from a spy whom he entertained at T'li-
onville, that certain Francican friars resortcd
frequently thither, and were admitted to nmany
private conferences with the governor, who
was carrying on preparations for some military
enterprize with great dispatch, but with a molt

myfteriolus

mylterious'fecrecy. This was sufficient to a'BpoK XI.
waken Vielleville's suspicions. Without com- -V'
municating these to any person, he infantly 555'
visited the convent of Franciscans; detedted
the soldiers who were concealed there; and
forced them to discover as much as they knew
concerning the nature of the enterprize. The
Father Guardiat, who had gone to Thionville,
that he might put the last hand to his ma-
chinations, was seized at the gate as he re-
turned; and he, in order to save himself from
the rack, revealed all the circuraflances of the
conspiracy.

VIEL LEVILLE not satisfied with having seized A tboi, o,

the traitors, and having frutrated their schemes, dfpateili
was solicitous to take advantage of the dif-
coveries which he had made, lo as to be re-
venged on the Imperialists. For this purrpofe
he marched out with the bell troops in his gar-
rilbn, and placing these in ambush near the
road, by which the Father Guardian had in-
formed him that the governor of Thionville
would approach Metz, he fell upon the Impe-
rialilts with great fury, as they advanced in
perfed security, without fuifpecting any danger
to be near. Confounded at this fiudden attack,
by an enemy whom they expeced to furprize,
they made little relifance; and a great part of
tlhe troops employed in this service, among
which were many persons of diflincion, was
killed or taken prisoners. Before next morning
'ielleville returned to Metz in triumph.

No resolution was taken for omen time co0l-The cnnipi

cerning the fatc of the Father Guardian and lis ;lt"r I-
monks, the framers and conduosors of this dan-
gerous conspiracy. lRegard for the l:onour of a
iody b numncrous and refpelable as the Ij'anci'-

X 4 cans,

Boox XI.cans, and unwillingness to afford a fil)jedt of

sVu triumph to the enemies of the Romish church
'555. by their disgrace, feeln to have occasioned this

delay. But at length, the neceflity ofinflilting
exemplary punillinent upon them, in order to
deter others from venturing to commit the fame
crime, became so evident, that ordeis were if.
sued to proceed to their trial. Their guilt was
made apparent by the clearest evidence; and
sentence of death was palSed upon the Father
Guardian, together. with twenty monks. On
the evening previous to the day fixed for their
execution, thejailor took them out of the dunge-
ons in which they had hitherto been confined fe-
parately, and (hut them all up in one great room,
that they might confers their fins one to ano-
ther, and join together in preparing for a fu-
ture state. But as soon as they were left alone,
instead of employing themselves in the religious
exercises suitable to their condition, they began
to reproach the Father Guardian, and four of
the senior monks who had been most aftive in
reducing them, for their inordinate ambition,
which had brought such misery on them, and
such disgrace upon their order. From re-
proaches they proceeded to curses and execra-
tions, and at lal, in a frenzy of rage and def-
pair, they fell upon them with such violence,
that they murdered the Father Guardian on the
spot, and so disabled the other four, that it
became necessary to carry them next morning
in a cart, together with the dead body of t;e
Father Guardian, to the place of execution. Six
of the youngest were pardoned, the reft fuIffred
the punifnmcnt which their crime merited *.

* Tllan. lib. xv. p. g22. Belcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 86V.

Memoires du Marcch. Vielleville, par. M. Charlcvoix, tom.
iii. p. 24, &c. p. 3 +7. Par. 1757.

THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the BooK X.

length of the war, carried it on in this languish- VV
ing manner, neither of them flewed any dif-Afr',t'ef'
position to liften to overtures of peace. Cardi- negotiation
nal Pole indeed laboured with all the zeal be-nebli' to
coming his piety and humanity, to re-eftablifhpec.
concord among the Princes of Christendom. He
liad not only persuaded his mistress, the Queen of
England, to enter warmly into his sentiments and
to offer her mediation to thecontending powers,
but had prevailed both on the Emperor and
King of France to fend their plenipotentiaries to
a village between Gravelines and Ardres. He
himself, together with Gardiner biflop of Win-
chester, repaired thither in order to prelide as me-
diators in the conferences, which were to be lield
for adjuting all the points in difference. But
though both the monarchs committed this nego-
tiation to those ministers, in whom they placed
the greatest confidence, it was loon evident that
they came together with no sincere desire of ac-
commodation. Each proposed articles so extra- nay za.
vagant that they could have no hopes of their
being accepted. Pole, after exerting, in vain,
all his zeal, address and invention, in order to
persuade them to relinquish lilch extravagant
demands, and to content to the fubfiitution of
more equal conditions, became sensible of the
folly of wafting time, in attempting to recon-
cile those, whom their obitinacy rendered irre-
concilable, broke off the conference, and re-
turned into England *.

DURING there transactions in other parts of A^irs of

Europe, Germany enjoyed fucl profound tran- Grmany.
quillity, as afforded the d;et fill leifi're to delibe-
rate, and to eltablifh proper regulations concern-

* Thuan. lib. xv. p. 523. Mcm. de Ribicr, tom. ii. p.
613.

ing

BOOK XI. ing a point of the greatest consequence to the in.
."V1- ternal peace of the Empire. By the treaty of
'I55 Paffau in one tboufand five hundred and fifty.

two, it had been referred to the next diet of the
Empire to confirm and perfelt the plan of reli-
gious pacification, which was there agreed upon.
The terror and confusion with which the violent
commotions excited by Albert of Brandenburgh
had filled the Empire, as well as the constant at.
tention which Ferdinand was obliged to give to
the affairs of Hungary, had hitherto preventtd
the holding a diet, though it had been summon.
ed soon after the conclusion of the treaty, to
meet at Augsburg.

D;et he, git BUT as a diet was now necessary on many ac.
and 'crdi- counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this
nand's
fpoech in t. year had repaired to Augsburg. Though few of

the Princes were present either in Ferlon or by
their deputies, he opened the assembly by a
speech, in which he proposed the termination of
the dissentions, to which the new tenets and con.
troverfies with regard to religion had given rift,
not only as the first and great Lufinefs of the
diet, but as the point which both the Emperor
and he had molt at heart. He reprefenred the
innumerable obflacles which the Emperor had to
surmount before he could procure the convoca-
tion of a general council, as well as the fatalac-
cidents which had for fime time retarded, and
had at last fifpended the consultations of that
assembly. He observed that experience had al-
ready taught them how vain it was to expect any
remedy for evils, which demanded immediate
rcdrefs, fiomn a general council, the afemblilng
of which would either be prevented, or its de
liberations be interrupted by the difftntiunls :lll
hhotilities( f the Princes of Chliliendom ; Th::
a national council in Germany, which, as firl
in:agiic-d, might be called widl greater c t,

b Bn ;~~~~~Iilda

and deliberate with more perfec security, was BOOK XI
an assembly of an unprecedented nature, the sV'
.urifdicrion of which was uncertain in its ex- s
tert, and the form of its proceedings un-
defined; That in his opinion there remained
bt one method for composing their unhappy
differences, which though it had been often tried
without success, might yet prove effectual if it
were attempted with a better and more pacific
spirit than had appeared on former occasions,
and that was to choose a few men of learning,
abilities and moderation, who by discussing the
disputed articles in an amicable conference,
might explain them in such a manner as to
bring the contending parties either to unite in
sentiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, stlrp;ions

and dispersed over the Empire, revived the fears the Proef-
and jealousies of the Proteflants; Ferdinand,tlts.
they observed with much furprize, had not once
mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty
of Paffau, the stipulations in which they confi-
dered as thegreat security of their religious liber-
ty. The suspicions to which this gave rife were
confirmed by the accounts which they daily re-
ceived of the extreme rigor with which Ferdi-
nand treated their Proteflant brethren in his he-
reditary dominions, and as it was natural to
confider his actions as the surest indication of his
intentions, this diminished their confidence in
those pompous profeflions of moderation or of
zeal for the re-establishment of concord, to
which his practice was so utterly repugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Morone, whom Thrir in-

the Pope had appointed to attend the diet as his lra'=3d';
nuncio, compleatcd their conviction, and lefttrfi.iinco
them no room to doubt that some dangerous ma- f, p t
" he

chination dici.

BooK XT. chination was forming against the peace or safety
%..V'r' of the Proteltant church. Julius, elated with the

'555- unexpeced return of the English nation from

apoftacy, began to flatter himfelfthat the spirit of
mutiny and revolt having now spent its force,
the happy period was come when the church
might resume its ancient authority, and be obey.
ed by the people with the fame tame filbniflion
as formerly. Full of these hopes, he had sent
Morone to Augsburg with intrutions to em-
ploy his eloquence in order to excite the Ger.
mans to imitate the laudable example of the
Eng'ifh, and his poli:ical address in order to
prev nt any decree of the diet to the detriment
of the catholick faith. As Morone inherited
from his father, the chancellor of Milan, un-
common talents for negotiation and intrigue, he
could scarce have failed of embarraflingthe ica-
fures of the Protestants in the diet, or of defeat-
ing whatever they aimed at obtaining in it for
their farther security.

The death
oI Julius BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from

'X , all the danger which they had reason to appre-

hend from Morone's pretence. Julius, by aban-
doning himself to pleasures and amusements no
less unbecoming his age than his character, ha-
ving contracted such habits of dissipation, that
any serious occupation, especially if attended
with difficulty, became an intolerable burden to
him, had long refilled the solicitations of his ne-
phew to hold a confillory, because he expcted
there a violent opposition to his schemes in favour
of that young man. But when all the pretexts
which he could invent for eluding his requeit
were exhauffcd, and at the fane time his indo-
lent aversion to bufinels continued to grow upon
him, he feigned indisposition rather than yicld to
his nephew's importunity; and that he miglr
give the deceit a greater colour of probability, lie

Best
328

not only confined himself to his apartment, but8ooK XL.
changed his usual diet and manner of life. By f'V
perfifling too long in ading this ridiculous part, 1555'
he contracted a real disease, of which he died in March
a few days, leaving his infamous minion the
Cardinal de Monte to bear his name, and to dif-
grace the dignity which he had conferred upon
him a. As soon asMorone heard of his death, heThe nuncio
set out abruptly from Augsburg, where he had"'s for
resided only asew days, that he might be preicnt
at the eleCtion of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their fiufpicions and fears beingFdaiand'

thus removed, the Protestants loon became fenfi reasons for
ble that their conjecAures concerningFerdinand's fatistthe
in:entions, how plausible soever, were ill-found- Prote:'tats
ed, and that he had not houghts of violating the
articles favourable to them in the treaty of Pas-
fau. Charles, from the time that Maurice had
defeated all his schemes in the Empire, and
overturned the great fyltem of religious and civil
despotism, which he had almost established there,
gave little attention to the internal government
of Germany,and permitted his brother to pursue
whatever measures he judged most salutary and
expedient. Ferdinand, less ambitious and enter-
prizing than the Emperor, instead of refuiming
a plan, which he, with power and relburces so far
superior, had failed of accomplishing, endeavour-
ed to attach the Princes of the Empire to his fa-
mily by an adminiltration uniformly moderate
and equitable. To this he gave, at present, x
particular attention, because his situation at this
juniture rendered it neceltary to court their fa-
vour and support with more than usual afliduity.

* Oniphr. Panviniua de vitis Pontificum. p. 320. Thian.
lib, xv. 5 7.

CHARLES

BOOK XI. CHARLES had again resumed his favourite
_rV v proje't of acquiring the Imperial crown for his
ha'rihadfon Philip, which the ill reception it had met
reiumcd his with when first proposed had obliged him to in.
tferi' the termit, but had not persuaded him to relinquilh.
fuccefiion This led him warmly to renew his requests to his
to the
Empire. brother that he would accept of some compen.

fation for his prior right of fucceflion, and facri.
fice that to the grandeur of the house of Auflria
Ferdinand who was as little disposed, as former-
ly, to give filch an extraordinary proof of self-
denial, being sensible that, in order to defeat
this scheme, not only the most inflexible firm.
ness on his part, but a vigorous declaration from
the Princes of the Empire in behalf of his title,
were requisite; was willing to purchase their
favour by gratifying them in every point that
they deemed interelting or essential.

The Ttrks ON the other hand, the Turks, after having
tere read wrested from him great part of his Hungarian
iiungary. territories, were ready to attack the provinces

frill subjec to his authority with a formidable
army, against which he could bring no equal
force into the field, unless the diet ihould grant
him immediate and extraordinary aid. For this
lie could not hope if the internal peace of the Em-
pire were not established on a foundation solid ill
itself, and which should appear, even to the Pro.
tefiants, fofecure and so permanent, as mightnot
only allow them to engage in a distant war with
iafety, but encourage them toadL with vigour.

ie isalaim- A STFP taken by the Protestants tllemfelves,
Itrps t , a flhort time after the opening of the diet, render-

cntsh ed him rill more cautious of giving them any

new cause of offence. As soon as the publication
of Fcrdin;nd's speech created the fears and ft!i
picions which have been mentioned, the Eleqor.'

of

of Saxony and Brandenburgh, together with the0ooK X.
Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and VVY
renewing the ancient treaty of confraternity '555'
which had long united their families, they ad-
ded to it a new article, by which the contracing
parties bound themselves to adhere to the con-
feLlion of Augsburg, and to maintain the doArine
which it contained in their refpetive dominions*.

FERDINAND, influenced by all there confi-ernan

derations, employed his utmost address in COn-promotean
duding the deliberations of the diet so as notdCaton
to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friend-
ship he depended, and whose enmity, as they
had not only taken the alarm, but had begun to
prepare for their defence, he had so much rea-
son to dread. The members of the diet readily
agreed to Ferdinand's proporal of taking the
tlate of religion into consideration, previous to
any other bulinefs. But, as loon as they enter-
ed upon it, both parties discovered all the zeal
and animosity which a fubjecd so interefling na-
turally engenders, and which the rancour of
controverly, together with the violence of civil
war, had inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Proteltants contended that the security The preten.

which they claimed in consequence of the treaty sCoh!,k
of Paflau Ihould extend, without limitation, toandi rotl,-
all who had hitherto embraced the doctrine of'""t''
,uther, or who flould hereafter embrace it. The
Catholics, having firit of all afrerted the Pope's
right as the supreme and final judge with refpe&'t
to all articles of faith, infliled that the toleration
granted, by the treaty of Pafau, to such as had

* Chytrxci Saxonia, 480.

adopted

BooK XI. adopted the new opinions; which, on account of
`\` the present situation of the Empire, and for the
'555. fake of peace, they were willing to confirm;

should not be extended either to those cities
which had conformed to the Interim, or to such
ecclefiatics as (hould for the future apoltatize
from the church of Rome. It was no easy mat-
ter to reconcile fiuch opposite pretensions, which
were supported, on each fide, by the mod elaho-
rate arguments, and the greatelt acrimony of ex-
prefion, that the abilities or zeal of theologians
long exercised in disputation could suggest. Ser.
dinand, however, by his address and perfeve.
rance; by softening some things on each fide; by
putting a favourable meaning upon others; by
representing incessantly the necessity as well as
the advantages of concord; and by threatening
on some occasions, when all other considerations
were disregarded, to dissolve the diet, brought
them at length to a conclusion in which they all
agreed.

Sept. 25. CON FORMA BLY to this a recess was framed,
of reli;io approved of, and published with the usual for-
eftabmiied. malities. The following are the chief articles

which it contained. That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confession of Augsburg, (hall be permitted to
profess the doStrine and exercise the worship
which it authorises without interruption or mo-
lefation from the Emperor, the King of the
Romans, or any power or person whatsoever;
That the Proteflants on their part, shall give no
disquiet to the Princes and States who adhere to
the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome; Thar,
for the future, no attempt (hall be made towards
terminating religious differences, but by tie
gentle and pacifick methods of persuasion ird
conference ; That the Popihl ecclefiaflics fl;lli

C1a11

claim no spiritual jurisdiction in such fiates as re- BOOK XI.
ceive the confeflion of Augsburg; That such as a -
had seized the benefices or revenues of the church, ' 55
previous to the treaty of Paffau, shall retain pof-
feflion of them, and be liable to no prosecution in
the imperial chamber on that account; That the
supreme civil power in every state shall have
right to eltablifh what form of doctrine and wor-
ship it (hall deem proper, and if any of its sub-
jeAs refuse to conform to there, shall permit them
to remove with all their effects wherever they
please; That if any prelate or ecclesiastic shall
hereafter abandon the Romish religion, he shall
instantly relinquish his diocese or benefice, and it
shall be lawful for those in whom the right of no-
mination is veited, to proceed immediately to an
election, as if the office were vacant by death or
translation, and to appoint a successor of undoubted
attachment to the ancient system I.

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Re- Refletions

cess, which is the basis of religious peace in Ger- rers of 'tle
many, and the bond of union among its various principles of
states, the sentiments of which are so extremely ole
different with refpe6t to points the most interefi-
ing and important. In our age and nation, to
which the idea of Toleration is familiar, and its
beneficial effects well known, it tnay teem strange
that a method of terminating their dissentions, so
suitable to the mild and charitable spirit of the
Christian religion, did not sooner occur to the
contending parties. But an expedient, which,
how salutary soever it might be, was repugnant
to the sentiments and practice of Christians during
many ages, did not lie obvious to discovery.
Among the ancient heathens, all whose deities
were local and tutelary, diversity of fentinent

1 Sleid. 62o. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. 1l. 161.
Vo L. III. Y concerning

BooK XI. concerning the object or rights of religious wor-

l hip seems to have been no source of animosity,
555. because the acknowledging veneration to be due

to any one God,;did not apply denial of the exif-
tence or the power of any other Go4; nor were
the modes and rites of worship established in one
country inconpatible with those 'hich other na-
tions approved of-and observed' Thys the errors
in their system of theology were of such a nature
as to be produtive of concord, and notwithftand-
ing the amazing number of their deities, as well
as the infinite variety of their ceremonies, a foci-
able and tolerating spirit subsist1ed aimoft univer-
sally in the pagan world.

Bu T when the Christian revelation declared one

Supreme Being to be the sole object of religious
veneration, prescribed the form of worship most
acceptable to him, whoever admitted the truth of
it held, of consequence, every other mode of reli-
gion to be absurd and impious. Hence the zeal
of the first converts to the Christian faith in propa-
gating its dotrines, and the ardour with which
they laboured to overturn every other form of
worship. They employed, however, for this pur-
pose, no methods but such as suited the nature of
religion. By the force of powerful arguments,
they convinced the understandings of men; by
the charms of superior virtue, they allured and
captivated their hearts. At length the civil pow-
er declared in favour of Christianity, and though
numbers, imitating the example of their superiors,
crouded into the church, many frill adhered to
their ancient fuperflitions. Enraged at their ob-
flinacy, the ministers of religion, whose zeal was
fill unabated, though their fantity and virtue
were much diminished, forgot so far the nature
of their own mission, and of the arguments which

they

they ought to have employed, that they armed Boos XI.
the Imperial power against these unhappy men, '-J
and as they could not persuade, they tried to S55
compel them to believe.

AiT the fame time,, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among christians themselves, and the fame unhal-
lowed weapons which had first been used against
the enemies of their religion, were turred against
each other. Every zealous disputant endeavour-
ed to interest the civil magistrate in his cause, and
each in his turn employed the secular arm to
cnifh or to exterminate his opponents. Not long
after, the bishops of Rome put in their claim to
infallibility in explaining articles of faith, and de-
ciding, points in controversy, and bold as the pre-
tension was, they, by their artifices and perfeve-
rance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and
brought them to recognize it. To doubt or to
deny any doctrine to which there unerring infiruc-
tors had given the sanction of their approbation,
was held to be not only a refitning of truth, but
an ac of rebellion against their sacred authority,
and the secular power, of which by various arts
they had acquired the absolute direction, was in-
ftantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force; the, charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth were forgotten, the
sacred rights of conscience and of private judg-
ment were unheard of, and not only the idea of
toleration, but even the word itf¢lf, in the sense
now affixed to it, was unknown. A right to
extirpate error by force was univer ally allowed
to be the prerogative of those who pofehffed the

Y 2 knowledge

BOOK XI. knowledge of truth, and as each party of Chris.

J'--. tians believed that they had got poffeflion of this
'555. invaluable attainment, they all claimed and exer-

cifed, as far as they were able, the rights which
it was supposed to convey. The Roman catholics,
as their system refted on the decisions of an infal-
lible judge, never doubted that truth was on their
fide, and openly called on the civil power to re-
pel the impious and heretical innovators who
had risen up againa it. The Protestants, no less
confident that their doctrine was well founded,
required, with equal ardour, the Princes of their
party to check such as presumed to impugn or to
oppose it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the
founders of the reformed church in their refpec-
tive countries, inflicted, as far as they had power
and opportunity, the fame punishments which
were denounced against their own disciples by the
church of Rome, on such as called in question
any article in their creeds. To their followers,
and perhaps to their, opponents, it would have
appeared a symptom of diffidence in the goodness
of their cause, or an acknowledgment that it was
not well founded, if they had not employed in its
defence all those means which it was fuippofed
truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth

century, before Toleration, under its present
form, was admitted first into the republic of the
United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calamities
of mutual persecution, the influence of free go-
vernment, the light and humanit\ acquired by the
progress of science, together with the prudence
and authority of the civil magistrate, were all
requisite in order to establish a regulation, so re-
pugnant to the ideas which all the different sects
had adopted from miRaken conceptions concern-

ing

ing the nature of religion and the rights of truth, BooK XI.
or which all of them had derived from the erro- 'L-
neous maxims established by the church of 'S55S
Rome.

THE recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was Advanta.

founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti- ge of the
ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry or peace to the
the nature of toleration. It was nothing more Lutherans.
than a scheme of pacification, which political
considerations alone had suggested to the contend-
ing parties, and regard for their mutual tranquil-
lity and safety had rendered necelfary. Of this
there can be no stronger proof than an article in
the recess itself, by which the benefits of the pa-
cification are declared to extend only to the Ca-
tholics on the one fide, and to such as adhered to
the Confeflion of Augsburg on the other. The
followers of Ziiing!ius and Calvin remained, in
consequence of that exclusion, without any pro-
tetion from the rigour of the laws denounced
again t heretics. Nor did they obtain any legal
security, until the treaty of Westphalia, near a
century after this period, provided that they
should be admitted to enjoy, in as ample man-
ner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and pro-
tetion which the recess of Augsburg affords.

BuT if the followers of Luther were highly And to the

pleated with the security which they acquired by Catholick.
this recess, filch as adhered to the ancient system
had no left reason to be satisfied with that article
in it, which preserved entire to the Roman ca-
tholick church the benefices of such ecclefi-
afticks as should hereafter renounce its doctrines.
This article, known in Germany by the name
of the Ecclefia/ical Refervazion, was manifestly so
conformable to the idea and to the rights of an

Y 3 established

BOOK XI. established church; and it appeared so equitable

to prevent revenues, which had been originally
5 appropriated for the maintenance of persons at-

tached to a certain system, from being alienated
to any other purpose, that the protestants, though
they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to
relinquish their opposition to it. As the Roman
catholick Princes of the Empire have taken care
to fee this article exaatly observed in every cafe
where there was an opportunity of putting it in
execution, it has proved the great barrier of the
Romish church in Germany against the Reforma-
tion; and as from this period the fame tempta-
tion of interest did not allure ecclefiafticks to re-
linquifh the established system, there have been
few of that order, who have loved truth with
such disinterested and ardent affection, as to aban-
don for its fake the rich benefices which they had
in possession.

MarceIus DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cer-
1I. eleled
Pope, April vino, Cardinal of Santa Croce, was elected Pope

9 in room of Julius. He, in imitation of Adrian,

did not change his name on being exalted to the

His charac- Papal Chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in pu-
ter' rity of intention, and excelled him much in the

arts of government, and fill more in knowledge
of the slate and genius of the papal court; as he
had capacity to discern what reformation it need.
ed, as well as what it could bear, such regulati-
ons were expeced from his virtue and wisdom,
as would have removed many of its grossest and
most flagrant corruptions, and have contributed
towards reconciling to the church, such as from
indignation at these enormities had abandoned its
communion. But this excellent Pontiff was only
Ihewn to the church and immediately snatched
His death. away. The confinement in the conclave had

impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious

ceremonies

ceremonies upon his acceflion, together with too BooK XI-
intense and anxious application of mind to the
schemes of improvement which he meditated,
exhausted so entirely the vigour of his feeble con-
ftitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and di-
ed on the twentieth day after his election r.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, The eleai-

on of Paul

peculiar to conclaves, were displayed in that of Pau
which was held for electing a successor to Marcel-
lus; the Cardinals of the Imperial and French
factions labouring, with equal ardour, to gain
the necessary number of suffrages for one of their
own party. But, after a struggle of no long du-
ration, though conducted with all the warmth
and eagerness natural to men contending for so
great an object, they united in chufing John Pe- May i-
ter Caraffa the eldest member of the sacred col-
lege and the Ton of Count Montorio, a nobleman
of an illustrious family in the kingdom of Naples.
The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese
who favoured his pretensions, Caraffa's own me-
rit, and perhaps his great age, which toothed all
the disappointed candidates with the nearer pro-
speCt of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing
about this speedy union of suffrages. In order to
testify his respect for the memory of Paul III. by
whom he had been created Cardinal, and his
gratitude to the family of Farnese, he aflumed
the name of Paul IV.

THE choice of a prelate of such a singular cha- is ,llclll.

racter, and who had long held a course extreme-
ly different from that which usually led to the
dignity now conferred upon him, filled the Itali-
ans, who had nearest accels to observe his man-
m Thuan. 520. F. Paul, 365. Onupb. Panvin. 32i, &c.

Y 4

nct s

BooK XTl.ners and deportment, with aitonifhment, and

C'"- ' kept them in suspense and solicitude with regard
'555. to his future condut. Paul, though born in a

rank of life which, without any other merit, might
have secured to him the highest ecclesiastical
preferments, had from his early years applied to
study with all the assiduity of a man, who had
nothing but his personal accomplilhments to ren-
der him conspicuous. By means of this he not
only acquired profound skill in fcholaftick theolo-
gy, but added to that a considerable knowledge
of the learned languages and of polite literature,
the tfudy of which had been lately revived in Ita-
ly, and was pursued at this time with great ar-
dour. His mind, however, naturally gloomy
and severe, was more formed to imbibe the four
spirit of the former, than to receive anr. degree
of elegance or liberality of sentiment from the
latter; so that he acquired rather the qualities
and paflions of a recluse eccleflaftick, than the
talents necessary for the conduct of great affairs.
Accordingly, when he entered into orders, al-
though several rich benefices were bestowed on
him, and he was early employed as nuncio in
different courts, he soon became disgusted with
that course of life, and languished to be in a situ-
ation more suited to his taste and temper. With
this view he resigned at once all his ecclesiastical
preferments, and having instituted an order of
regular priests, whom he denominated Theatines,
from the name of the archbihoprick which he
had held, he associated himself as a member of
their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which he had fubjeted them, and pre-
ferred the solitude of a monaflick life, with the
honour of being the founder of a new order,
to all the vast objects which the court of Rome
presented to his ambition,

IN

IN this retreat he remained for many years, un- BOOK XI.

til Paul III. induced by the fame of his sanctity '--
and knowledge, called him to Rome, in order to 5
consult with him concerning the measures which
might be most proper and effectual for the sup-
prefling of heresy, and re-establishing the an-
cient authority of the church. Having thus al-
lured him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by
his intreaties, and partly by his authority, pre-
vailed on him to accept of a Cardinal's hat, to re-
aflume the benefices which he had refined, and
to return again into the usual path of ecclefiaflical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquished.
] But, during two fucceflive Pontificates,;iinder the
firfl of which the court of Rome was thetnoft art-
ful and interefled, and under the second the molf
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his
monafiic auferity. He was an avowed and bitter
enemy not only of all innovation in opinion, but of
every irregularity in practice; he was the chief in-
ftrument in establishing the formidable and odi-
ous tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal terri-
tories; he appeared a violent advocate on all oc-
cafions for the jurifdlition and discipline of the
church, and a levere cenf irer of every meafiure
which seemed to flow from motives of policy or
interest, rather than from zeal for the honour of
the ecclesiastical order, and the dignity of the Ho-
ly See. Under a prelate of such a character, the
Roman courtiers expected a revere and violent
Pontificate, during which the principles of found
policy would be sacrificed to the narrow prejudi-
ces of priestly zeal; while the people of Rome
were apprehensive of feeing the fordid and forbid-
ding rigour of monafliclk manners substituted in
place ot the gaiety or magnificence to which they
had long been accuflomed in the papal court.
These apprehensions Paul was extremely folici- 1hle ti.:.
tOus to remove. At his first entrance on the ad- lt'' "t '.: *

Ini i .

r adniloi . -
miniflrartion (iol

BooR XI. ministration he laid aside that austerity which ha

-v hitherto distinguished his person and family, an,

555. when the master of his houthold inquired in wha

manner he would chufe to live, he haughtily re
plied, " as becomes a great Prince." He order
ed the ceremony of his coronation to be con
du6ted with more than usual magnificence; anm
endeavoured to render himself popular by fevera
ads of liberality and indulgence towards the in
habitants of Rome n.

The excess His natural severity of temper, however
tfcimant towould haieifoon returned upon him, and woul
hisnephews. have juilified the conjectures of the courtiers

and thei feats of the people, if he had not, imme
diately after his election, called to Rome two o
his nephews, sons of his brother the Count o
Montorio. The eldest he promoted to be gover.
nor of Rome, the youngest who had hitherto
served as a soldier of fortune in the armies of Spair
or France, and whose di fpofition as well as man
ners were till more foreign from the clerica
character than his profeflion, he created a Cardi.
nal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the fe.
cond office in power and dignity which a Pope car
beflow. These marks of favour, no less sudder
than extravagant, he accompanied with the moi
unbounded confidence and attachment, and for'
getting all his former severe maxims, he seemed
to have no other object than the aggrandizing ol

Their am- his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately foi
jioius pro- Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any

moderate acquisition. They had seen the family
of Medici raised by the interest of the Popes ol
that house to supreme power in Tuscany; Paul
III. had by his abilities and address secured the
dutchies of Parma and Placentia to the family of

n Platina, p. 327. Callaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Ram 161;
p. 70.

Farnefr.

Farnese. They aimed at some efiablilhment for Boo, Xl.
themselves, no less considerable and independant; -
and as they could not expect that the Pope would 55'
carry his indulgence towards them so far as to
secularize any part of the patrimony of the church,
they had no profped of attaining what they wish-
ed, but by dismembering the Imperial dominions
in Italy, in hopes of seizing rome portion of
them. This alone would have been to them a
sufficient reason for Cowing the feeds of discord
between their uncle and the Emperor.

BUT Cardinal Caraffa, had, besides, private Rearons of

their disgust

reasons which filled him with hatred and enmity ,wth the
to the Emperor. While he served in the Spanish Emperor.
troops he had not received such marks of honour
and diftinAion as he thought due to his birth
and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had
abruptly quitted the Imperial service, and enter-
ing into that of France, he had not only met
with such a reception as soothed his vanity, and
attached him to the French interelt, but by con-
trafting an intimate friendship with Strozzi, who
commanded the French army in Tuscany, he
had imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor
as the great enemy to the liberty and indepen-
dence of the Italian states. Nor was the Pope
himself indisposed to receive impreflions unfa-
vourable to the Emperor. The opposition given
to his election by the Cardinals of the Imperial sac-
tion left in his mind deep resentment, which was
heightened by the remembrance of ancient inju-
ries from Charles or his ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and em- Tlhy en-

ployed various devices, in order to exatperate " ` ,he
him beyond a possibility of reconciliation. They Plope from
aggravated every circumstance which could be ro Emp
deemed any indication of the Emperor's diffatif-

faEtion

BOOK X. faction with his promotion; they read to him
*-*. * an intercepted letter in which Charles taxed

'555 the Cardinals of his party with negligence or in.

capacity in not having defeated Paul's eledio,
They pretended, at one time, to have difcmered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial riniter and
Cofrmo de Medici againif the Pope's life; they
alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a plot
for assassinating themselves. By there artifices,
they kept his mind, which was naturally violent
and become suspicious from old age, in such per-
petual agitation, as precipitated him into mea-
fures, which otherwise he would have been the
first person to condemn o. He seized rome of the
Cardinals who were most attached to the Empe-
ror, and confined them in the cattle of St. An-
gelo; he persecuted the Colonnas and other Ro-
man barons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial
faction, with the utmost severity; and discover-
ing on all occasions his distrust, fear, or hatred
of the Emperor, he began at Iaft to court the
friendship of the French King, and seemed wil.
ling to throw himself absolutely upon him for
support and protection.

Induce him THIS was the very point to which his nephews
to court wished to bring him as most favourable to their
of France. ambitious ichemes; and as the accompli(hment

of there depended on their uncle's life, whose ad-
vanced age did not admit of losing a moment
unneceifarily in negotiations, instead of treating
at second hand with the French ambaflador at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a
person of confidence directly to the court of
France with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rejected. He proposed an

o Ripamontii Hist. Patri, lib. iii. 1146. Ap Grv.
Thef. vol. ii. Mem, dc Ribier. ii. 615. Adrianilltor. i.906.

alliance

alliance offensive and defensive between Henry BooK XI.
and the Pope; that they should attack the dutchy v"-
of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with '55'5
their united forces; and if their arms should prove
ficcefsful, that the ancient republican form of go-
vernment should be re-elfablifhed in the former,
and the invefliture of the latter should be grant-
ed to one of the French King's sons, after refer-
ving a certain territory which should be annexed
to the patrimony of the church, together with
an independent and princely eftablilhment for
each of the Pope's nephews.

THE King, allured by these specious projects, c(tI3.:e

gave a most favourable audience to the envoy. renc"ylci
But when the matter was proposed in council, the rfc ths :

th 1

contfable Montmorency, whose natural cautionhe ''po
and aversion to daring enterprizes increased with
age and experience, remenfirated with great,
vehemence against the alliance. He put Henry
in mind how fatal every expedition into Italy had
been to France during three fuccefive reigns,
and if such an enterprize had proved. too great
for the nation even when its firenath and sinan-
ces were entire, there was no reason to hope for
success, if it should be attempted now.lwhen both
were exhaufled by extraordinary efforts during,
wars, which had lasted, with little interruption,.
almost half a century. He reprefentedthle ma-
nifeft imprudence of entering into engagements
with a Pope of fourscore, as any system whicl.
refted on no better foundation than his life must
be extremely precarious, and upon the event of
his death, which could not be distant, the face of
things together with the inclination of the Italian
States mulf inflantly change, and the whole weight
of the war be left upon the King alone. To
there considerations he added the near profpec
which they now had of a final accommodation

,w.ith

Boo- XI. with the Emperor who, having taken the resolution
*'""
X of retiring from the world, wished to transmit his

55SS kingdoms in peace to his Ton; and he concluded

with representing the absolute certainty of draw.
ing the arms of England upon France, if it
Should appear that the re-establishment of tran.
quillity in Europe was prevented by the ambition
of its Monarch.

The Duke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and
of Guise fa-
vours it. urged by a minister of great authority, would

probably have determined the King to decline any
connecion with the Pope. But the Duke of
Guise and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain,
who delighted no less in bold and dangerous un-
dertakings than Montmorency shunned them, de-
clared warmly for an alliance with the Pope.
The cardinal expeced to be entrusted with the
conduct of the negotiations in the court of Rome
to which this alliance would give rife; the duke
laid his account with obtaining the command of
the army which would be appointed to invade
Naples; and confidering themselves as already in
these stations, vai projects opened to their aspiring
and unbounded ambition. Their credit, toge-
ther with the influence of the King's mistress,
the famous Diana of Poitiers, who was, at that
time, entirely devoted to the interest of the fami-
ly of Guise, more than counterbalanced all Mont-
morency's prudent rerrionftrances, and prevailed
on an inconsiderate Prince to liften to the over-
tures of the Pope's envoy.

Cardinal of THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expeted,
to egotite was immediately sent to Rome with full powersto
with the conclude the treaty, and to concert measures for
Pope. carrying it into execution. Meanwhile, the Pope,

either from reflecting on the danger and uncertain
iflue of all military operations, or through the

addref,

address of the Imperial ambassador who had been Boot Xl.
at great pains to sooth -him, had not only begun
to lose much of the ardour with which he had set '55'.
on foot the negotiation with France, but even dif-
covered great unwillingness to continue it. In
order to rouse him from this fit of despondency,
and to rekindle his former rage, his nephews had
recourse to the arts which they had already prac-
tifed with Co much success. They alarmed him
with new representations of the Emperor's hostile
intentions, with frelh accounts which they had
received of threats uttered against him by the
Imperial ministers, and with new di coveries which
they pretended to have made of con fpiracies form-
ed, andjuft ready to take effect against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, Paul en-
would not have operated a second time with the proceedng
fame force, nor have made the impreflion which of the diet
they wished, if Paul had not been excited by an b"frg.
offence of that kind which he was leat able to
bear. He received advice of the recess of the
diet of Augsburg, .and of the toleration which
was thereby granted to the Protestants, and this
threw him at once into such transports of passion
against the Emperor and King of the Romans,
as carried him headlong into all the violent mea-
fures of his nephews. Full of high ideas with re-
fpet to the papal prerogative, aridanimated
with the fiercest zeal against heresy, he confider-
ed the liberty of deciding concerning religious
matters, which had been assumed by an assembly
composed partly of laymen, as a presumptuous
and unpardonable encroachment on that jurifdic-
tion which belonged to him alone; and regarded
the indulgence which had been given tQ the Pro-
teftants as an impious act of that power which the
diet had usurped. He complained loudly of both
to the Imperial ambaflador. He insisted that the

recess

BOOK Xl. recess of the diet should immediately be declared

^-"

i illegal and void. He threatened the Emperor
'55-' and King of the Romans, in cafe they should ei.

ther refute or delay to gratify him in this particu.
lar, with the feveref effects of his vengeance.
He talked in a tone of authority and command
which might have suited a pontiff of the twelfth
century, when a papal decree was sufficient to have
shaken or to have overturned the throne of the
greatest Monarch, but which was altogether im.
proper in that age, especially when addressed to the
minister of a Prince who had so often made Pon.
tiffs more formidable feel the weight of his power,
The ambassador, however, heard all his extrava-
gant propositions and menaces, with much pati.
ence, and endeavoured to sooth him by putting
him in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor. was reduced at lnfpruck, of the en-
gagements which he had come under to the Pro.
teftants in order to extricate himself of the ne-
ceflity of fulfilling there, and of accommodating
his conduct to the situation of his affairs. But
weighty as these considerations were, they made
no impreflion on the mind of the haughty and bi.
gotted pontiff, who inflantly replied, that he
would absolve him by his apoftolick authority
from the obligation of there engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that
in carrying on the cause of God and of the church,
no regard ought to be had to the maxims ot
worldly prudence and policy, and that the ill fuc-
cess of the Emperor's schemes in Germany might
justly be deemed a mark of the divine difplealiire
against him, on account of his having paid little
attention to the former, while he regulated his
conduct entirely by the latter. Having said this
he turned from the ambassador abruptly without
waiting for a reply.

His

His nephews took care to applaud and cherish BooK XI.

these sentiments, and easily wrought up his arro- " i
gant mind, fraught with all the monkish ideas And exafpe-
concerning the extent of the papal supremacy, to lated by his
such a pitch of resentment against the house of nelhews.
Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own
power, that he talked continually of his being the
fucceflor of those who had deposed Kings and
Emperors; that he was exalted as head over them
all, and would trample such as opposed him un-
der his feet. In this disposition, the cardinal of Decemb. .
Lorrain found the Pope, and easily persuaded him "reat,.y ,,
to sign a treaty, which had for its object, the ruin vrane.
of a Prince against whom he was so highly exafl
perated. The ltipulations in the treaty were
much the fame as had been proposed by the Pope's
envoy at Paris; and it was agreed to keep the
whole tranfaAion secret until their united forces
should be ready to take the field p.

DURING the negotiation of this treaty at Rome The Fmpe-

and Paris, an event happened which seemed to to rcfini
render the fears which had given rife to it vain, hereditary
and the operations which were to follow upon it
unnecessary. This was the Emperor's resignation
of his hereditary dominions to his ton Philip; to-
gether with his resolution to withdraw entirely
from any concern in business or the affairs of this
world, in order that he might spend the remain-
der of his days in retirement and folitiide. Though
it requires neither deep refledion nor extraordina-
ry difcernmnent to discover that the slate of royal-
ty is not exempt from cares and disappointment;
though miof of those who are exalted to a throne
find Iblicitude, and satiety, and disgust to be their
perpetual attendants in that envied pre-eminence;

p 1allav. lib. 13. p. 163 F. I'aul 365. Tlhuin. lib. xv.

525 .

l ib .
xvi. 54 ·l. dc. ( ilyicl. i. 6o , &C.

VOL. 11I. Z yet,

349

BooK XI. yet, to descend voluntarily from the supreme to a

'"77 Y subordinate flation, and to relinquish the poffeflion

5 of power in order to attain the enjoyment of hap.

piness, seems to be an effort too great for the hu.
man mind. Several inflances, indeed, occurin
hiflory of Monarchs who have quitted a throne,
and have ended their days in retirement. But they
were either weak Princes who took this resolution
rashly, and repented of it as soon as it was taken;
or unfortunate Princes from whose hands some
strong rival had wrefled their sceptre, and com-
pelled them to descend with reluctance into a pri-
vate flation. Diocletian is perhaps the only Prince
capable of holding the reins of government, who
ever resigned them from deliberate choice, and
who continued during many years to enjoy the
tranquillity of retirement without fetching one pe.
nitent sigh, or cafling back one look of desire,
towards the power or dignity which he had aban-
doned.

The mo- No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation
tives of this
resignation. 1hould fill all Europe with astonishment, and give

rife, both among his contemporaries, and among
the historians of that period, to various conjec-
tures concerning the motives, which determined a
Prince, whose ruling paflion had been uniformly
the love of power, at the age of fifty-fix, when
objeds of ambition operate with fuill force on the
mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour,
to take a resolution so singular and unexpected,
But while many authors have imputed it to mo-
tives so frivolous and fantastical, as can hardly be
supposed to influence any reasonable mind; while
others have imagined it to be the result of some
profound scheme of policy; historians more intel-
ligent, and better informed, neither ascribe it to
caprice, nor search for mysterious secrets of hlate,
where simple and obvious causes will fully account

for

for the Emperor's conduct. Charles had been at- BooK XI.
tacked early in life with the gout, and notwith- -
flanding all the precautions of the most skilful '555.
physicians in his time, the violence of the diftem-
per encreafed as lie advanced in age, and the fits
became every year more frequent, as well as more
intolerable. Not only was the vigour of his con-
flitution broken, but the faculties of his mind
were impaired by the excruciating torments which
he endured. During the continuance of the fits,
he was altogether incapable of applying to bus-
ness, and even when they began to abate, as it
was only at intervals that he could attend to what
was serious, he gave up the greatest part of his
time to trifling and even childish occupations,
which served to relieve or to amuse his mind, en-
feebled and worn out with excefsof pain. Under
there circumstances, the conduct of such affairs as
occurred, of course, in governing so many king-
doms, was a burden more than sufficient; but to
push forward and compleat the vast schemes,
which the ambition of his more active years had
formed, or to keep in view and carry on the fame
great system of policy, extending to every nation
in Europe, and connedced with the operations of
every different court, were tasks, which far ex-
ceeded his strength, and oppressed and overwhelm-
ed his mind. As he had been long accustomed
to view the business of every department, whether
civil, or military, or ecclesiastical, with his own
eyes, and to decide concerning it according to his
own ideas; it gave him the utmost pain, when he
felt his infirmities encreafe so fast upon him, that
lie was obliged to commit the conduct of all as-
falirs to his ministers. He imputed every misfor-
tune which besel him, and every miscarriage that
happened, even when the former was unavoidable,
.and the latter accidental, to his inability to take
the infpedilon of bulines lilllfcl. He com-

Z 2 plained

BOOK XI. plained of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in
'-v-' his declining years, to a rival, who was in the full

I555. vigour of life, and that while Henry could take

and execute all his resolutions in person, he should
now be reduced, both in council and in action, to
rely on the abilities of other men. Having thus
grown old before his time, he wifely judged it
more decent to conceal his infirmities in some soli.
tude, than to expose them any longer to the pub-
lick eye; and prudently determined not to forfeit
the fame, or lose the acquisitions of his better
years, by struggling, with a vain obstinacy, to re-
tain the reins of government, when he was no
longer able to hold them with iteadinefs, or to
guide them with address *.

* Dom Levefque in his memoirs of cardinal Granvelle

gives a reason for the Emperor's refignation,;which, as I re-
collet, is not mentioned by any other historian. He fays,
that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon
his marriage with the Queen of England; Philip, notwith-
standing the advice and entreaties of his father, removed all
the ministers and officers in thole countries, and appointed
creatures of his own, to fill the places which they held.
That he aspired openly, and with little delicacy, to obtain
a (hare in the adminifiration of affairs, in the Low-Countries.
That he endeavoured to thwart the Emperor's neafures, and
to limit his authority, behaving towards him sometimes
with inattention, and sometimes with haughtiness. That
Charles finding that hemuft either yield to his fon,or open-
ly contend with him, in order to avoid these, which were
both disagreeable and mortifying to a father, he took the
resolution of resigning his crowns, and of retiring from the
world, vol. i. p. 24, &c. Dom Levefque derived his infor-
mation concerning thele curious facts, which he relates very
briefly, from the original papers of cardinal Granvelle. lut
as that vast collection of papers, one of the molt valuable
historical monuments of the sixteenth century, and which
could not fail of throwing much light on the tranfiations
of Charles V, though preserved and alranged by M. L'Abb
Boizot of Befancon, is not puhliifed, I cannot determine
what degree of credit Should be given to this account of
Charles's relignation. 1 have therelfoe taken no notice of
it in relating this event.

BUT

BUT though Charles'had revolved this scheme BooK Xr.

in his mind for several years, and had communi- "
cated it to his sifters the dowager Queens of France cir' 5 55a-
and Hungary, who not only approved of his in- ces which

had retard-

tention, but offered to accompany him to what- ed it.
ever place of retreat he should choose; several
things had hitherto prevented his carrying it into
execution. He could not think of loading his son
with the government of so many kingdoms, un-
til he should attain filch maturity of age, and of
abilities, as would enable him to sustain that
weighty burden; but as Philip had now reached
his twenty-eighth year, and had been early accuf-
tomed to business, for which he discovered both
inclination and capacity, it can hardly be imputed
to the partiality of paternal affection, that his
scruples, with regard to this point, were entirely
removed; and that he thought he might, without
further hesitation or delay, place him on the throne
which he was about to abandon. His mother's
situation had been another obftrudion in his way.
For although she had continued almost fifty years
in confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her husband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain
was still vested in her jointly with the Emperor;
her name was inserted together with his, in all
the public writs iflied in that kingdom; and filch
was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to her,
that they would probably have scrupled to recog-
nize Philip as their sovereign, unless hle had con-
sented to alIinme him as her partner on the throne.
Her utter incapacity for buiinefs rendered it im-
pollible to obtain this. But her death, which haD-
pened this year, removed this difficulty; and as
Charles, upon that event, became sole Monarch
of Spain, it left the fucceflion open to his ion.
The war with France had likewise been a rcalbni
for retaining the administration of aftails in his own

Z 3 hand,

BOOK XI. hand, as he was extremely solicitous to have ter-

minated it, that he might have given up his king-
doms to his son in peace with all the world. But
as Henry had discovered no disposition to close
with any of his overtures, and had even rejected
proposals of peace, which were equal and mode-
rate, in a tone, that seemed to indicate a fixed
purpose of continuing hostilities, he saw that it
was vain to wait longer in expectation of an event,
which, how desirable soever, was altogether un-
certain.

The forma- As this, then, appeared to be the properjunc-
lilies with
which he ture for executing the scheme which he had long
executed it. meditated, Charles resolved to resign his kingdoms

to his son, with a solemnity, suitable to the im-
portance of the tranfadion, and to perform this
last at of sovereignty, with such formal pomp,
as might leave a lasting impreflion on the minds
not only of his fubjets but of his successor.
With this view he called Philip out of England,
where the peevish temper of his Queen, which
increased with her dcfpair of having iffle, render-
ed him extremely unhappy, and the jealousy of
the English left him no hopes of obtaining the di-
rection of their affairs. Having assembled the lates
of the Low-Countries at Brufels, on the twenty-
fifth of Oc'ober, he feated himielf, for the lal:
time, in the chair of slate, on one fide of which
was placed his son, and on the other his filler the
Queen of Hungary regent of the Netherlands,
with a splendid retinue of the grandees 6f Spain
and princes of the Empire llanding behind him.
The president of the council of Slanders, by his
command, explained in a few words his intention
in calling this extraordinary meeting of the States.
He then read the inifrument of resignation by
which Charles filrrendercd to his Ton Philip all his
territories, jurifdidion, and authority in the LoDw-
Countries, absolving his fubjcds there from their

oath

oath of allegiance to him, which he required them BOOK XI.
to transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve v -
him with the fame loyalty and zeal that they had 5
manifefied, during so long a course of years, in
support of his government.

CHARLES then rose from his feat, and leaning on
the shoulder of the Prince of Orange, because he
was unable to fland without support, he addressed
himself to the audience, and from a paper which
he held in his hand, in order to allift his memory,
he recounted, with dignity, but without oftenta-
tion, all the great things which he had undertaken
and performed since the commencement of iis ad-
ministration. He observed, that from the seven-
teenth year of his age, he had dedicated all his
thoughts and attention to publick objects, refer-
ving no portion of his time for the indulgence of
his eare, and very little for the enjoyment of pri-
vate pleasure; that either in a pacifick or hostile
manner, he had visited Germany nine times, Spain
fix times, France four times, Italy seven times, the
Low-Countries ten times, England twice, A frica as
often, and had made eleven voyages by Tea; that
while his health permitted him to discharge his du-
tv, and the vigour of his conflitution was equal,
in any degree, to the arduous office of governing
fitch extenlivc dominions, he had never flluned
labour, nor repined under fatigue; tlhat now who:
hiis health was broken, and his vigour exhaflledi b,'
the rageof an incurable distemper, his growingv in-
firnities adnoniilhed him to retire, nor was I;e t,
fond of reigning, as to l'etlin tle fc eptrc in 1an imi.
potent hand, w hich was no longer able to prot.ct
Ili lb1'b'jes, or to render then: happl; that in llead
oi a sovereign worn out with diFlafes, and Icarce
lali alive, he gave them one in the prinme of 'i1l,
accuflomed already to govern, and who added to
the vigour (,f youtli all the attention and ahgaciry of
Iiaturer years; that, if during the course of- a long

Z 4 ad-

Boor XI. administration, he had committed any material er-

.-v-O^ ror in government, or if under the prefliure and
155S5 amidst the attention which he had been obliged

to give to so many and great affairs, he had either
negleted or injured any of his fubjeEts, he now
implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he
should ever retain a grateful sense of their fidelity
and attachment,and would carry the remembrance
of it along with him to the place of his retreat, as
his sweetest consolation, as well as the best reward
for all his services, and in his last prayers to Al-
mighty God would pour forth his ardent wishes
for their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his

knees and kilfed his father's hand, " If, fays he, I
had left you by my death this rich inheritance, to
which I have made such large additions, Come re-
gard would have beenjuftly due to my memory on
that account; but now when I voluntarily resign
to you what I might have still retained, I may well
exped the warmest expreflions of thanks on your
part. With there, however, I dispense, and (hall
confider your concern for the welfare of your filb-
jeds, and your love of them, as the best and mors
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me. It
is in your power, by a wife and virtuous admini-
ftration, to justify the extraordinary proof which
I give this day of my paternal affection, and to
demonstrate that you are worthy of the confidence
which I repose in you. Preserve an inviolable re-
gard for religion; maintain the Catholick faith in
its purity; let the laws of your country be sacred
in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and pri-
vileges of your people; and if the time shall ever
come, when you shall wish to enjoy the tranquil-
lity of private life, may you have a Ton endowed
with such qualities, that you can resign your fcep-
tre to him, with as much satisfaction, as I give up
mine to you.'"

As

As Coon as Charles had finished this long address BooK Xr.
to his fubjeEts and to their new sovereign, he funk -
into the chair, exhausted and ready to faint with 15
the fatigue of such an extraordinary effort. Du
ring his discourse, the whole audience melted in-
to tears, omne from admiration of his magnani-
mity, others fofcened by the exprelfions of ten-
dernefs towards his son, and of love to his people;
and all were affteed with the deepefs sorrow at
losing a sovereign, who had distinguished the
Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after
returning thanks to his father, with a low and
fubmillive voice, for the royal gift which his unex-
ampled bounty had bestowed upon him, he ad-
dressed the assembly of the flates, and regretting
his inability to speak the Flemish language with
such facility as to express what he felt on this in-
teresting occasion, as well as what he owed to
his good fubjeds in the Netherlands, he begged
that they would allow Granvelle bishop of Arras,
to deliver what he had given him in charge to
Ipeak in his name. Granvelle, in a long discourse,
expatiated on the zeal with which Plilip was ani-
mated for the good of his fubjets, on his refolu-
tion to devote all his time and talents to the pro-
nioting of their happiness, and on his intention to
imitate his father's example in distinguishing the
Netherlands with peculiar marks of his regard.
4Macs, a lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in
name of the States, with large profeflions of their
fidelity and affection to their new sovereign.

THEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary,

resigned the regency, with which the had been
entrusted by her brother during the space of twen-
ty-five years. Next day Philip, in pretence of
the States, took the usual oaths to maintain the

rights

BooK XI. rights and privileges of his subje&s; and all the
UVhw members, in their own name, and in that of their

1556. P 5k*11
Jauary 6. confituents, swore allegiance to him q.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assem.

bly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally
pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain,
with all their territories depending on them, both
in the old and in the new world. Of all these vast
possessions, he reserved nothing for himself but
an annual pension of an hundred thousand crowns,
to defray the charges of his family, and to afford
him a small fum for ads of beneficence and
charity r.

As

q Godleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldaft. Po-

lit. Imper. p. 377. Strada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p 5.

r The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of such imn-
portance, but of such a nature, that the precise dateot it,
one would expect, should have been ascertained by hilorionn
with the greatef accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diversity among them with regard to thli
point. All agree that the deed by which Charles transferred
to his son his dominions in the Netherlands, bears date at
Brussels the 25th of October. Sandovelfixeson the 28thot
O&ober as the day on which the ceremony of relignation ha,-
pened, and he was present at the transaction, vol. ii. p. ;2.
Godleveus who published a treatifede Albdicatione Caroli V.
fixes the public ceremony as well as the date of the inltru-
ment of resignation on the z5th. Pere Bar;e, I know not on
what authority, fixes it on the 2..th of November. Hill.
D'Alem. viii. 976. Herrera agrees with Godleveus in i;nti-
ment, torn. . i 55. as likewise does Pallavicini, whole autlio.
rity with tefpea to dates, and every thing where a minutcr c-
curacy is requisite, is of great weight. Hist. lib. xvi. p. I6.
Historians differ no less with regard to the day on wlici
Charles resigned the crown of Spain to his oIn. Accordingto
M. de Thou, it was a month after his having resigned his J1.
minions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the 25th of Novei-
ber, Thuan. lib. 16. p. 571. According to Sandoval it wis
on the i6th of January, z 556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio di 'lia
agrees with him, Epitome del Vida dcl Car. V. p. lo. c-
cording to 'allavicini it was on the 7th. Pal. lib. xvi. p. (
and with him Herrera aglees, Vida del D. Felipc, towI. i.
233. But Ferreras fixes it on the fitt day of January, Hilt.

CUtci.

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, BooK Xt.

hoping that the dryness of the air and warmth of '` '
the climate in that country might mitigate the Resolvs to
violence of his disease, which had been much en- si hil ref-
creased by the moisture of the air and the rigour s 'ain
of the winters in the Netherlands, he was ex-
tremely impatient to embark for that kingdom,
and to disengage himself entirely from business,
which he found to be impoflible while he remained
in Brussels. But his phylicians remonstrated so obliied to
strongly again(t his venturing to sea at that cold and remaln ,ar
boisterous season of the year, that he consented, in the Ne-
though with reluctance, to put off his voyage for therlands.
some months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, he had the satis- Promotes

th negoti-

faction, before he left the Low-countries, of tak- .i,,,, for
ing a considerable tfep towards a peace with p'cacc
France, which he ardently wished for, not only on
his son's account, but that he might have the
merit, when quitting the world, of re-establishing
that tranquillity in Europe, which he had banish-
ed out of it almof from the time that he afflimed
the adminiftrarion of affairs. Some time previ-
ous to his resignation, commillioners had been
appointed by him and by the French King, in or-
der to treat of an exchange of prisoners. In tliir

conferences

cener. toni. p. 37 1. M. de Beaucaire fippofes the refigna-
tnn of the crown o 'Spain to have been executed a tewdays
alter the relignation of the Netherlands, Coin. dit: Ret. Gail.
p. 879. It is rc!iarkable that in the treaty of truce, at Van-
relies, though Charle ci hd iidelover all his doninions to his
Ion some weeks previous to the conclulion of it, all the (tipu-
hitions are in the Emperor's na1,1, antd Philip is only Itiled
King of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was not
proclaimied King ot Caltile, &c. :at Valladolid sooner than the
24thl of March. Sandov. ii. p. 6o6, and previous to that ce-
re:nony, he did not choi,);, it would leemi, to aflru the tie tlel
ot King of any ot his Spaniil Kingdoms, or to perloir n ani
aC of royal juril;lictioi. In a deed annexed to the treaty s('
truce, dated April I9th, he allf'ues the title of King of
Callile, &c. in the ulual Ifile of the Spanilh nionaiclih in
tliat age. Corps Dipl. tou. iv. Append. p. 85.

BOOK XI. conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles, near

ó-" *Cambray, an expedient was accidentally proposed

for terminating hostilities betwixt the contending
monarchs, by a long truce, during the fubfillance
of which, and without difcufling their refpetive
claims, each should retain what was in his poffefli.
on. Charles, sensible how much his kingdoms
were exhausted by the expensive and almost con-
tinual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his son a short inter-
val of peace, that he might establish himself firmly
on his throne, declared warmly for closing with
the overture, though manifestly dishonourable as
well as disadvantageous; and such was the refpedl
due to his wisdom and experience, that Philip,
notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchate
peace by such concessions, did not presume to urge
his opinion in opposition to that of his father.

A truce HENRY could not have hesitated one moment
conclude. about giving his content to a truce on such condi-

tions, as would leave him in quiet possession of
the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's domini-
ons, together with the important conquest which
he had made on the German frontier. But it Xas
no easy matter to reconcile such a flep with the
engagements that he had come under to the Pope,
in his late treaty with him. The Confiable
Montmorency, however, represented in such a
firiking light, the imprudence of sacrificing the
true interests of his kingdom to these rash obliga-
tions, and took such advantage of the absence of
the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had reduced the
King into his alliance with the Caraffas, that
Henry, naturally fludtuating and untfeady, a:d
apt to be influenced by the advice lalt given him,
sth Ftb. authorized his ambafladors to sign a treaty ot

truce with the Emperor for five years, on the
terms which had been proposed. But that he
might not seem to have altogether forgotten hlis

ally

ally the Pope, who he foresaw would be highly BooK Xl.
exasperated, he, in order to tooth him, took care
that he should be exprefly included in the truce s. 1556.

THE Count of Lalain repaired to BIois, and Ratified by

the Admiral Coligny to Brufels, the former to be bah mo-
present when the King of France, and the latter
when the Emperor and his son, ratified the trea-
ty, and bound themselves by oath to observe it t.
When an account of the conferences at Vaucelles, The Pope's
and of the conditions of truce which had been alonih,-
proposed there, were first carried to Rome, it diltr..
gave the Pope no manner of disquiet. He trust-
ed so much to the honour of the French monarch,
that he would not allow himself to think that
Henry could forget so soon, or violate so Ihame-
fully, all the Ilipulations in his league with him.
He had such an high opinion of the Emperor's
vwidom, that he made no doubt of his refusing
his con ent to a truce on such unequal terms; and
on both theel accounts he confidently pronounced
that this like many preceding negotiations, would
terminate in nothing. But later and more certain
intelligence soon convinced him that in political
affairs no reasoning is more fallacious, than, be-
cause an event is improbable, to conclude that it
will not happen. The sudden and unexpected
conclusion of the truce filled Paul with affonill-
ment and terror. The Cardinal of Lorrain durst
not encounter that florm of indignation, to which
he knew he should be exposed from the haughty
Pontiff, who had so good reason to be incenied;
S Mem. de Ribier. ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. App. 8 .

One of Admiral Coligny's attendants, who wrote to the

cour ot ' rance an account of what happened while they re-
lided at lBrufels, takes notice, as an inltance of Philip's impo-
litenefs, that he received the French anibaffador in an apart-
Inent hung with tapefiry, which reprelented the battle of Pa-
via, the manner in which Francis I. was taken prisoner, his
Voyage to Spain, with all the circuintances of his captivity
and impiifonuent at Madrid. Mcni. de Ribier. ii. 634.

but

BOOK XI. but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to the

Cardinal Tournon the difficult talk of attempting
556. to tooth Paul and his nephews. They were fully

sensible of the perilous situation in which they
now flood. By their engagements with France,
which were no longer secret, they had highly irri-
tated Philip. They dreaded the violence of his
implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a mi.
nifter, fitted as well by his abilities as by the fe-
verity of his nature, for executing all Philip's ri-
gorous schemes, had advanced from Milan to
Naples, and began to assemble troops on the
frontiers of the Ecclefiafical State. While they,
if deserted by France, must not only relinquilh
all the hopes of dominion and sovereignty to
which their ambition aspired, but remain exposed
to the resentment of the Spanish monarch, with-
out one ally to protect them against an enemy
with whom they were so little able to contend.

He at- UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourse
tempts to
rekindle the to the arts of negotiation and intrigue, of which
,war. the Papal court knows well how to avail itself in

order to ward off any calamity threatenedby an
enemy superior in power. He affected to approve
highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for
putting a stop to the effusion of Christian blood.
He expressed his warmest wishes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He ex-
horted the rival Princes. to embrace this favoura-
ble opportunity of setting on foot a negotiation
for that purpose, and offered, as their common
father, to be mediator between them. Under
this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his
nuncio to the court of Brussels, and his nephew
Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The publick
inftru6ions given to both were the fame that
they should use their utmost endeavours to pre-
vail with the two monarchs to accept of the Pope's

mediation,

mediation, that by means of it, peace might be BOOK XI.
re-established, and measures might be taken for
assembling a general council. But under this fpe- 1556.
cious appearance of zeal for attaining objects so
desirable in themselves, and Co becoming his fa-
cred character to pursue, Paul concealed very
different intentions. Caraffa, betides his publick
inflru&ions, received a private commission to so-
licit the French King to renounce the treaty of
truce, and to renew his engagements with the
Holy See, and he was impowered to spare neither
entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in order to
gain that point. This, both the uncle and the
nephew confidered as the real end of the embassy;
while the other served to amuse the vulgar, or to
deceive the Emperor and his son. The Cardinal, I th May.
accordingly, set out instantly for Paris, and tra-
velled with the greatest expedition, while Rebiba
was detained Come weeks at Rome; and when it
became necessary for him to begin his journey,
he received secret orders to protraA it as much
as possible, that the issue of Caraffa's negotiation
might be known before he should reach BruiTels,
and according to that, proper directions might
be given to him with regard to the tone which he
Ihould assume, in treating with the Emperor and
his son u.

CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with ex- His negoti-
traordinary pomp; and having presented a confe- ations uar

that pur-

crated sword to Henry as the protector, on whose pore.
aid the Pope relied in the present exigency, he
besought him not to disregard the entreaties of a
parent in distress, but to employ that weapon
which he gave him in his defence. This he re-
presented not only as a duty of filial piety, but as
an aCt ofjuftice. As the Pope, from confidence

u Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 169. Burnet Hid. of Reform, ii.
App. 309,

in

BOOK XI in the assistance and support which his late treaty
'"*v with France entitled him to expect, had taken

556. such steps as had irritated the King of Spain, he

conjured Henry not to susser Paul and his family
to be crushed under the weight of that resentment
which they had drawn on themselves merely by
their attachment to France. Together with this
argument addressed to his generosity, he employ-
ed another which he hoped would work on his am-
bition. He affirmed that now was the time,
when, with the moif certain profpet of success,
he might attack Philip's dominions in Italy; that
the flower of the veteran Spanish bands had pe-
rifled in the wars of Hungary, Germany, and
the Low-countries; that the Emperor had left
his son an exhausted treasury, and kingdoms
drained of men; that lie had no longer to contend
with the abilities, the experience, and good for-
tune of Charles, but with a monarch scarce feated
on his throne, unpradifed in command, odious
to many of the Italian states, and dreaded by all;
that the Pope, who had already levied soldiers,
would bring a considerable army into the field,
which when joined by a sufficient number of
French troops, might by one brisk and sudden
effort, drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and
add to the crown of France a kingdom, the con-
quest of which had been the great object of all
his predecefiors during half a century, and the
chief motive of all their expeditions into Italy.

Their es- EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deep im-
ualy prefion on Henry; conscious, on the one hand,

that the Pope had jut cause to reproach him with
not having consulted the laws either of generosity
or of decency, when he renounced his league
with him, and had agreed to the truce of
Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, not
only to dlftinguifh his reign by a conquef,

whllicl

which three former monarchs had attempted Boot Xr.
without success, but likewise to acquire an efta- '.--v-
blifhment of such dignity and value for one of 1556.
his sons. Reverence, however, for the oath, by
which he had so lately confirmed the truce of
Vaucelles; the extreme old age of the Pope,
whose death might occasion an intire revolution
in the political system of Italy; together with
the representations of Montmorency, who repeat-
ed all the arguments that he had used against the
first league with Paul, and pointed out the great
and immediate advantages which France derived
from the truce; kept Henry for some time in sus-
penfe, and might poflibly have outweighed all
Caraffa's arguments. But the Cardinal was not
flch a novice in the arts of intrigue and negotia-
tion, as not to have expedients ready for remov-
ing or surmounting all these obstacles. To ob-
viate the king's scruple with regard to his oath,
he produced powers from the Pope to absolve him
from the obligation of it. By way of security
against any danger which he might apprehend
from the Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle
would make such a nomination of Cardinals, as
should give Henry the absolute command of the
next election, and enable him to place in the Pa-
pal chair a person entirely devoted to his interefl.

IN order to counterbalance the effed of the

Constable's opinion and influence, he employed
not only the active talents of the Duke of Guise,
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, but the addrcfs of the Queen, aided by
the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who,
unfortunately for France, co-operated with Ca-
tlarine in this point, though fie took pleasure,
on almost every other occasion, to thwart and
mortify her. They, by their united solicitations,
easily swayed the King, lwho leaned of his own

VOL. Ill. A a accord

BooK XI. accord to that fide, towards which they wished
L*t-« him to encline. All Montmorency's prudent re-

1556. monstrances were disregarded; the nuncio abfol-
July 31. ved Henry from his oath; and he signed a new

league with the Pope, which rekindled the flames
of war both in Italy and in the Low-Countries.

The Pope's As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew
violent pro- that there was a fair profpe&t of his succeeding in
ccedingc
againfa this negotiation, he dilpatched a messenger after the
Philip. nuncio Rebiba, with orders to return to Rome,

without proceeding to Brussels. As it was now
no longer necessary to preserve that tone of mo-
deration, which suited the charaCter of a media-
tor, and which he had affected to assume, or to
put any farther restraint upon his resentment
against Philip, he boldly threw off the mask, and
took such violent steps as rendered a rupture un-
avoidable. He seized and imprisoned the Spa-
nifh envoy at his court. He excommunicated
the Collonna's; and having deprived Mark An-
tonio, the head of that family, of the dukedom
of Paliana, he granted that dignity, together
with the territory annexed to it, to his nephew
the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal in-
formation to be presented in the consistory of
Cardinals against Philip, setting forth that he,
notwithstanding the fidelity and allegiance due by
him to the Holy See, of which he held the crown
of Naples, had not only afforded a retreat in his
dominions to the Colonna's, whom the Pope had
excommunicated and declared rebels, but had
furnished them with arms, and was ready, in
conjunction with them, to invade the Ecclefiafti-
cal State in an hostile manner; that such condua
in a vaflal was to be deemed treason against
his liege lord, the punishment of which was
the forfeiture of his fief. Upon this the confif-
torial advocate requested the Pope to take cog-

nizance

nizance of the cause, and to appoint a day for BoOK XI.
hearing of it, when he would make good every v
article of the charge, and expe& from hisjuftice 5SS6.
that sentence which the heinousness of Philip's
crimes merited. Paul, whose pride was highly
flattered with the idea of trying and passing
judgment on so great a King, aflented to his re-
quest; and as if it had been no less easy to ex- July 27.
ecute than to pronounce sentence, declared that
he would consult with the Cardinals concerning
the formalities requisite in conducting the trial x.

BuT while Paul allowed his pride and resent- Philip's fu-

ment to drive him on with such headlong impe- rtitiou
tuofity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation
on his part. He had been taught by the Spanish
ecclefiafticks who had the charge of his educati-
on, a profound veneration for the Holy See.
This sentiment, which had been early infused,
grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full poffeflion of his mind, which was na-
turally thoughtful, serious, and prone to super-
ftition. When he foresaw a rupture with the
Pope approaching, he had such violent scruples
with refped to the lawfiilnefs of taking arms
against the Vicegerent of Christ, and the com-
mon father of all Christians, that he consulted
some Spanish divines upon that point. Though
they, with the usual dexterity of cafiifts in ac-
commodating their responses to the circumftan-
ces of those who apply to them for direction, as-
fured him that, after employing prayers and re-
monstrances in order to bring the Pope to reason,
he had full right, both by the laws of nature and
of Christianity, not only to defend himself when
attacked, but to begin hostilities, if that were

x Palav. lib. xiii. i71.

judged
Aa 2

BooK X. judged the most proper expedient, for prevent-

l-'~ ' ing the effets of Paul's violence and injuftlce:
15s6· Yet Philip still deliberated and delayed, confi-

dering it as a most cruel misfortune, that his ad-
ministration should open with an attack on a
person, whose sacred function and character he
so highly refpeded y.

The Duke AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compli-
of Alva ance with his master's scruples, had continued to
takes ,he
field against negotiate long after he should have begun to at,
the Pope. finding Paul inexorable, and that every overture

of peace, and every appearance of hesitation on
his part encreafed the Pontiff's natural arrogance,
Sept. 5. took the field and entered the ecclesiastical terri-

tories. His army did not exceed twelve thousand
men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers,
and commanded chiefly by those Roman barons,
whom Paul's violence had driven into exile.
The valour of the troops, and the animosity of
their leaders who fought in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own estates, supplied the
want of numbers. As none of the French forces
were yet arrived, Alva soon became master of the
Campagna Romana; some cities being furren-
dered through the cowardice of the garrisons,
which consisted of raw soldiers, ill ditciplined,
and worse commanded; the gates of others being
opened by the inhabitants, who were eager to
receive back their ancient maiters. Alva, that
he might not be taxed with impiety in seizing the
patrimony of the church, took possession of the
towns which capitulated, in the name of the col-
lege of cardinals, to which, or to the Pope that
should be chosen to iuccced Paul, he declared
that he would immediately restore them.

y Ferrer. Hil. de Efpagne ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose Booi. XT.

light troops made inroads to the gates of Rome, '"
filled that city with consternation; and Paul, A trce be.
though inflexible and undaunted himself, was tween the
obliged to give way so far to the fears and so ici- Pip.and
tations of the Cardinals, as to fend deputies to
Alva in order to propose a ceflation of arms. 'iThe
Pope yielded the more readily, as he was fenfi-
ble of a double advantage which might be deriv-
ed from obtaining that point. It would deliver
the inhabita::ts of Rome from their present ter-
ror, and would afford time for the arrival of the
succours which he expeced from France. Nor
was Alva unwilling to close with the overture,
both as he knew how desirous his mailer was to
terminate a war, which he had undertaken with
reluctance, and as his army was so much weaken-
ed by garrisoning the great number of towns
which he had reduced, that it was scarce in a
condition to keep the field without frcfh recruits.
A truce was accordingly concluded first for ten, No. 19.
and afterwards for forty days, during which, va-
rious schemes of peace was proposed, and perpe-
tual negotiations were carried on, but with no
sincerity on the part of the Pope. The return
of his nephew the cardinal to Rome, the receipt
of a considerable fulm remitted by the King of
France, the arrival of one body of French troops,
together with the expectation of others which
had begun their march, rendered him more ar-
rogant than ever, and banished all thoughts from
his mind, but those of war and revenge z.

z Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 588. Mem. de
Ribier. ii. 664.

THE
Aa 3

# BOOK XII.

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XII.
BOOK XII. H I L E these operations or intrigues kept

- VV the Pope and Philip bury and attentive,
'1 56' the Emperor disentangled himself finally from all

Charles s
new at- the affairs of this world, and set out for the place
tempt to of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Im-
succession of perial dignity not from any unwillingness to relin-
the Empire. quih it, for after having resigned the real and

extensive authority that he enjoyed in his heredi-
tary dominions, to part with the limited and of-
ten ideal jurifdidion, which belongs to an elec-
tive crown, was no great sacrifice. His sole
motive for delay was to gain a few months, for
making one trial more, in order to accompliflh
his favourite scheme in behalf of his son. At
the very time Charles seemed to be mos
sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur, and

when

when he appeared to be quitting it not only with BOOK XII.
indifference, but with contempt, the vast schemes '~ *
of ambition, which had so long occupied and en- ' 55
groflied his mind, frill kept poffelfion of it. He
could not think of leaving his son, among the
Princes of Europe, in a rank inferior to that
which he himself had held. As he had, some
years before, made a fruitless attempt to secure
the Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it
to the kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of
the house of Burgundy, he might put it in his
power to prosecute, with a better profpea of fuc-
cess, those great plans, which his own infirmities
had obliged him to abandon, he was still unwil-
ling to relinquish this flattering project as chime-
rical or unattainable.

NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he which

had formerly met with from his brother Ferdi- p; vs un-
nand, be renewed his solicitations with fre(h im-
portunity, and during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which
he thought could induce him to quit the Imperi-
al throne to Philip, and to accept of the invefti-
ture of some province, either in italy, or in the
Low-Countries, as an equivalent t. But Ferdi-
nand, who was so firm and inflexible with regard
to this point, that he had paid no regard to the
solicitations of the Emperor, even when they
were enforced with all the weight of authority,
which accompanies iipreme power, received the
overture, that now came from him in the fituati-
on to which he had descended, with greater in-
difference, and would not deign to lilten to it.
Charles, alhamed of his own credulity in ha ing

Ambaffades des Noaillcs, tom. v. 356.

inmagined

BOOK XI. imagined that he might accomplish that now,

-rv -' which he had attempted formerl' without success,
1556 defifled finally from his scheme. He then re-

signed the government of the Empire, and hav-
ing transferred all his claims of obedience and
allegiance from the Germanick body, to his bro-
Auguf 27. ther the King of the Romans, he executed a deed

to that effedt, with all the formalities, requisite
in such an important tranfadtion. The inftru-
ment of resignation he committed to William
Prince of Orange, and impowered him to lay it
before the college of electors b.

Charles sets NOTHING now remained to detain Charles
Spainr from that retreat for which he languished.

Every thing having been prepared some time
for his voyage, he set out for Zuitburg in
Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendez-
vous. In his way thither he passed through
Ghent, and after flopping there a few days,
to indulge that tender and pleasant melancholy,
which arises in the mind of every man in the de-
cline of life, on visiting the place of his nativi-
ty, and viewing the scenes and objects familiar
to him in his early youth, he purlued hisjour-
ney accompanied by his Con Philip, his daughter
the archdutchefs, his fifers the dowager Queens
of France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish no-
bility. Before he went on board, he diminlffed
them, with marks of his attention or regard,
and taking leave of Philip with all the tender-
nels of a father who embraced his son for the
last time, he set fall on the seventeenth of
September under convoy of a large fleet

b Goldaft. Conflit. Imper. pars i. 576.

of

of Spanish, Flemish and English ships. He de- Boor XIr.
dined a prefling invitation, from the Queen of'-'v-
England, to land in some part of her dominions, 1556.
in order to refresh himself, and that she might
have the comfort of feeing him once more. It
cannot surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to
receive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now
nothing more than a private gentleman.

His voyage was proCperous and agreeable, and His arrival

and recep-

he arrived at Laredo in Bi(cay on the eleventh day tion tere.
after he left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he
fell prostrate on the ground; and confidering him-
self now as dead to the world, he kisTed the earth;
and said, " Naked came I out of my mother's
womb, and naked I now return to thee, thou
common mother of mankind." From Laredo he
purfiled his journey to Burgos, carried by his at-
tendants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a
horse litter, suffering exquisite pain at every siep,
and advancing with the greatest difficulty. Some
of the Spanish nobility repaired to Burgos in order
to pay court to him, but they were so few in
number, and their attendance was so negligent,
that Charles observed it, and felt, for the first
t;me, that he was no longer a Monarch. Accuf-
tomed from his early youth to the dutiful and
officious ref pe with which those who possess fove-
:eign power are attended, he had received it with
the credulity common to Princes, and was weak
enough to be mortified, when he now discovered,
that he had been indebted to his fortune, for
much of that obsequious regard, which he had
fondly thought was paid tu his personal quali-
ties. But though he might have soon learned
to forget the levity of his filbjects, or to have
despised their negleCt, he was more deeply as-
slided with his son's ingratitude, who, forget-
ting already how much he owed to his father's

bou::tv,
I- L Ar 'n" n rb # 7 1 A in 7". e. I 1

BOOK XII. bounty, obliged him to remain rome weeks at
'-Y-v Burgos, before he paid him the first moiety of that

'556. small pension, which was all that he had reserved

of so many kingdoms. As without this um,r
Charles could not dismiss his domefticks with such
rewards as their services merited, or his generosity
had destined for them, he could not help expref-
sing both surprise and difatisfadion b. At last the
money was paid, and Charles having difmifled a
great number of his domefticks, whose attendance
he thought would be superfluous or cumbersome
in his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid.
There he took a last and tender leave of his two
JiRfers, whom he would not permit to accompany
him to his solitude, though they entreated it with
tears, not only that they might have the confola-
tion of contributing by their attendance and care
to mitigate or to sooth his sufferings, but that they
might reap inftrudion anid benefit by joining with
him in those pious exercises, to which he had col-
fecrated the remainder of his days.

The place FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to
treat,' re Plazencia in Estremadura. He had pafled through

that city a great many years before, and havirg
been struck at that time with the delightful firua-
tion of the monastery of St. Juftus belonging to
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant
from that place, he had then observed to rome of
his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dio-
cletian might have retired with pleasure. The
impreflion had remained To strong on his mind,
that he pitched on it as the place of his retreat.
It was feated in a vale of no great extent, water-
ed by a small brook, and surrounded by rising
grounds, covered with lofty trees; both from tih
nature of the foil, and temperature of the climate,
it was esteemed the most healthful and delicious

situation
b Strada de hello Belg. lib. i. 9.

situation in Soain. Some months before his refig- Boox XII.
natl ):; he had sent an architect thither, to add a
new a;artment to the monastery, for his accom- r556.
modation; but he gave ftrit orders that the flile
of the building lhould be such as suited his pre-
sent station, rather than his former dignity. It
confifed only of fix rooms, four of them in the
form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the
other two, each twenty feet Iquare, were hung
with brown cloth, and furnished in the most rim-
ple manner. They were all level with the ground;
with a door on one fide into a garden, of which
Charles himself had given the plan, and had filled
it wi:;h various plants, which he proposed to culti-
vate with his own hands. On the other fide it
communicated with the chapel of the monastery,
in which he was to perform his devotions. Into 1s57.
this humble retreat, scarce sufficient for the corn- Feb 24.
sortable accommodation of a private gentleman,
did Charles enter, with twelve domefticks only.
He buried there, in solitude and silence, his gran-
deur, his ambition, together with all those vast
projects, which, during halfa century, had alarm-
ed and agitated Europe, filling every kingdom in
it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and the
dread of being fubjeded to his power c.

THE contrast between Charles's conduct, and Contrast be-

that of the Pope at this jundure, was so obvious, " "heiour
that it firuck even the most careless observers; Charles and
nor was the comparison which they made much to the Pope.
Paul's advantage. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accustomed to the splendor
which accompanies supreme power, and to those
bury and interelling lcenes in which an aftive
ambition had engaged him, quitted the world,
at an early period of life, that he might close the

evening
c Sandov. ii. 607. & Zuniga. i lo. Thuan. lib. xviii. 609.

BooK XII. eveningof his days in tranquillity, and secure some

interval for fober thought, and serious recollection.
1557. The latter, a pries, who had pased the early part

of his life in the shade of the schools, and in the
study of the speculative sciences, who was seem-
ingly so detached from the world, that he had
shut himself up for many years in the solitude of
a cloister, and who was not raised to the Papal
throne until he had reached the extremity of old
age, discovered at once all the impetuosity of
youthful ambition, and engaged in vast schemes,
in order to accomplish which, he scrupled not to
scatter the feeds of discord and to kindle the
flames of war in every corner of Europe. But
Paul, regardless of the opinion and censures of
mankind, held on his own course with his wo -.ed
arrogance and violence. There, although they
seemed already to have exceeded all bounds, rose
to frill a greater height, upon the arrival of the
duke of Guise in Italy.

Theduke of TH A T which the two Princes of Lorrain fore-
Cuife leads saw and desired, had happened. The duke of
the French
army into Guise was entrusted with the command of the
Italy. army appointed to march to the Pope's allifiance.

It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the belt
troops in the service of France. So high was the
Duke's reputation, and such the general expecta-
tion of beholding some extraordinary exertion of
his courage and abilities in a war, into which he
had precipitated his country, chiefl, with the de-
sign of gaining a field where he might display his
own talents, that ma:iy of the French nobility, who
had no conmand in the troops employed, accom-
panixcd him as volunteers. This army passed the
Alps iii a lig(rl,us iialon, and advanced towards
lirline, wili',,t any opposition from the Spani-
;i>',;,i ho, as the! were not ffrong enoulgh to ad
i,! illiulcl,. parts, ]had collected all their forces in

one

one body on the frontiers of Naples, for the de- BOOK XI.
fence of that kingdom. v_

'557.

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, The Pope

the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment renews hot
against Philip, which, notwithstanding the natu- againt Phi-
ral violence of his temper, prudential confidera- i r
tions had hitherto obliged him to keep under
tome restraint. He named commissioners, whom February
he impowered to pass judgment in the fuir,I-
which the consistorial advocate had commenced
against Philip, in order to prove that he had for-
feited the crown of Naples, by taking arms
against the Holy See, of which he was a vassal.
He recalled all the nuncios resident in the courts Aprl 9.
of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies.
This was levelled chiefly against Cardinal Pole,
the Papal legate in the court of England, whose
great merit, in having contributed so filccefsfully
to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Rome,
together with the expectation of farther services
that he might perform, was not sufficient to screen
him from the resentment which he had incurred
by his zealous endeavours to re-establish peace
between the house of Austria and France. He
commanded an addition to be made to the ana-
themas annually denounced against the enemies
of the church on Maunday-Thurfday, whereby
he inflicted the censure of excommunication on
the authors of the late invasion of the ecclefiafti-
cal territories, whatever their rank or dignity
might be; and, in conlequence of this, the ulual
prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day
in the Pope's chapel J.

BUT while the Pope indulged himself in these

wild and childish rallies of rage, he either neglet-
ed, or it exceeded his power, to take ulich mea-

fures
d Pal. lib. xiii. 180. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 678.

BOOK XII. fures as would have rendered his resentment real-

c- - ly formidable, and fatal to his enemies. For,

Hi' mil5ry when the duke of Guise entered Rome, where he
preparations was received with a triumphal pomp, which
inadequate. would have been more suitable if he had been

returning from having terminated the war with
glory, than when he was going to begin it with
a doubtful chance of success, he found none of
the preparations for war in such forwardness as
Caraffa had promised, or he had expe&ed. The
Papal troops were far inferior in number to the
quota stipulated; no magazines sufficient for their
fubfiftance were formed; nor was money for pay-
ing them provided. The Venetians, agreeably
to that cautious maxim which the misfortunes of
their state had first led them to adopt, and which
was now become a fundamental principle in their
policy, declared their resolution to preserve an ex-
aft neutrality, without taking any part in the
quarrels of Princes so far their superiors in power.
The other Italian states were either openly united
in league with Philip, or secretly wished success
to his arms againrt a Pontiff, whose inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat of
war.

Duke of THE duke of Guise perceived that the whole
rti8"pe' weight of the war would devolve on him; and

became sensible, though too late, how imprudent
it is to rely, in the execution of great enterprizes,
on the aid of feeble allies. Pushed on, however,
by the Pope's impatience for action, as well as
by his own desire of performing something of
what he had To confidently undertaken, he march-
ed towards Naples, and began his operations. But
April 13. the success of these fell far short of his former re-

putation, of what the world expeAed, and of what
he himself had promised. He opened the cam-
paign with the iege of Civetella, a town of some

importance

importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But the BOOK XIL;
obstinacy with which the Spanish governor defend. - v
ed it, baffled all the impetuous efforts of the '557.
French valour, and obliged Guise, after a siege
of three weeks, to retire from the town with dif-
grace. He endeavoured to wipe off that stain, by
advancing boldly towards the duke of Alva's
camp, and offering him battle. But that prudent
commander, sensible of all the advantages of
sanding on the defensive before an invading ene-
my; declined an engagement, and kept within
his entrenchments; and adhering to his plan with
the steadiness of a Castilian, eluded with great ad-
dress all Guise's firatagems, to draw him into ac-
tion e. Meanwhile, sickness wafted the French
army; violent dissensions had arisen between
Gilife and the commander of the Pope's forces;
the Spaniards renewed their incursions into the ec-
clefiaftical state; the Pope, when he found, in-
flead of the conquests and triumphs which he had
fondly expected, that he could not secure his own
territories from depredation, murmured, com-
plained, and began to talk of peace. The duke
of Guise, mortified to the last degree with having
aated such an inglorious part, not only solicited
his court either to reinforce his army, or to recall
him, but urged Paul to filfill his engagements;
and called on Cardinal Caraffa, sometimes with
reproaches, and sometimes with threats, to make
good these magnificent promises, from a raih con-
fidence in which he had advised his malter to re-
nounce the truce of Vaucelles, and to join in
league with the Pope f.

BuT while the French affairs in Italy were in Honilities

this wretched situation, an unexpected event in the Low.
happened in the Low-Countries, which called the Cori
duke of Guise from a ltation wherein he could

acquire

t Herrera vida de Felipe, 181. f Thuan. lib. xxviii. 614.
Palay. lib. xiii. 181. Burn. ii. app. 317.

Boox XII. acquire no honour, to the most dignified and irnm
--v-- portant charge which could be committed to a
'*57. subje&t. As soon as the French had discovered

their purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles,
not only by fending an army into Italy, but by
attempting to furprize bore of the frontier towns
in Slanders, Philip, though willing to have avoid-
ed a rupture, determined to prosecute the war
with such spirit, as should make his enemies fen-
fible, that his father had not erred, when he judg-
ed him to be To capable of government, that he
had given up the reins into his hands. As he
knew that Henry had been at great expence in
fitting out the army under the duke of Guise, and
that his treasury was hardly able to answer the ex-
orbitant and endless demands of a diftairt war,
he foresaw that all his operations in the Low-
Countries must, of consequence, be feeble, and
be confidered only as secondary to those in Italy.
For that reason, he prudently resolved to make
his principal effort in that place where he expec.
ted the French to be weakest, and to bend his
chief force against that quarter where they would
feel a blow most sensibly. With this view, he as-
fembled in the Low-Countries an army of about
fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving him on
this occasion with that active zeal, which fubjeds
are wont to exert in obeying the commands of a
new sovereign. But Philip, cautious and provident,
even at that early period of life, did not reft all his
hopes of success on that formidable force alone.

hilip en- HE had been labouring for some time to
deavours to engage the English to espouse his quarrel and
Englandin though it was manifestly the interest of that
the war kingdom to maintain a strict neutrality, and

the people themselves were sensible of the
advantages which they derived from it; though he
knew how odious his name was to the Englilh, and

how

how averse they would be to co-operate with him Book XII.
in any meafiire, he nevertheless did not despair ""~"---'
of accomplishing his point. He ielied on the as- '557.
fedtion wherewith the Queen doated on him,
which was so violent, that even his coldness and
negleat had not extinguished it; he knew her im-
plicit reverence fbr his opinion, and her fond de-
fire of gratifying him in every particular. That
he might work on there with greater facility, and
more certain success, he set out for England.
The Queen who, during her husband's absence,
had languished in perpetual dejedion, resumed
fresh (pirits on his arrival; and without paying
the least attention either to the interest or to thl
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into
all his schemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonstrate againit the imprudence as well as
danger of involving the nation in an unnecefiary
war; in vain did they put her in mind of the to-
lemn treaties of peace fubifting between England
and France, which the conduct of that nation
had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary,
soothed by Philip's carefles, or intimidated by
the threats which his ascendant over her embol-
dened him at forne times to throw out, was deaf
to every thing that could be urged in oppolitiou
to his sentiments, and infilfted with the greatest
vehemence on an immediate declaration of war
against France. The council, though all Phi-
lip's address and Mary's authority were employ-
ed to gain or over-awe them, struggled long,
and yielded at last, not from conviction, but mere-
ly from deference to the will of their Ibvereign.
War was declared against France, the only one June zo.
perhaps against that kingdom into which the En-
glifh ever entered with reluhance. As Mary
knew the aversion of the nation to this measure,
Ihe durit not call a parliament in order to raise
money for carrying on the war. She supplied

VOL. 1II. B b this

BooK XII. this want, however, by a strain of prerogative;
,-.- and levied large fums on her fubjets by her own
A 557 authority. This enabled her to assemble a fuffi-

cient body of troops, and to fend eight thousand
men under the conduct of the earl of Pembroke
to join Philip's army g.

operations PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military
ofm hip' th glory, gave the command of his army to Emanu-
Low-ccun- el Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his own
t""s residence at Cambray, that he might be at hand

to receive the earliest intelligence of his motions,
and to aid him with his counsels. The duke open-
ed the campaign with a masterly stroke of ad-
dress, whichjuftified Philip's choice, and disco-
vered such a superiority of genius over the French
generals, as almost ensured success in his fubfe-
quent operations. He appointed the general ren-
dezvous of his troops at a place considerably dif-
tant from the country which le deflined to be the
scene of action; and having kept the enemy in
suspense for a good time with regard to his inten-
tions, he at last deceived them so effectually by
the variety of his marches and counter-marches,
that they concluded that he meant to bend all his
force against the province of Champagne, and
would attempt to penetrate into the kingdom on
that fide. In consequence of this opinion, they
drew all their strength towards that quarter, and
reinforcing the garrisons there, left the towns on
other parts of the frontier destitute of troops sus-
ficient to defend them.

Invests St. EMANUEL, as soon as lie perceived that this
uintin. feint had its full effect, turned suddenly to the

right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy,
and fending his cavalry, in which he was extreme-
ly strong, before him, invested St. Quintin. This

was
g Carte iii. 337.

was a town deemed in that age of considerable BooK XII.
strength, and of great importance, as there were ~
few fortified cities between it and Paris. The '557
fortifications, however, had been much neglet-
ed, the garrison weakened by draughts sent to-
wards Champagne, did not amount to a fifth
part of the number requisite for its defence; and
the governor, though a brave officer, was nei-
ther of rank, nor authority, equal to the com-
mand in a place of so much consequence, be-
fieged by such a formidable army. A few days
mull have put the Duke of Savoy in possession
of the town, if the admiral de Coligny, who
thought it concerned his honour to attempt fa-
ving a place of such importance to his country,
and which lay within his jurifdidion as governor
of Picardy, had not taken the gallant reiolution
of throwing himself into it, with such a body of
men as he could collet of a sudden. This resolution
lie executed with great intrepidity, and confi-
dering the nature of the enterprize, with no con-
temptible success; for though one half of his
small body was cut off, he, with the other, broke
through the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpected arrival of an officer of such high rank
and reputation, and who had exposed himself
to such danger in order to join them, in-
spired the delponding garrison with courage.
Every thing that the admiral's great skill and ex-
perience in the art of war could fuggefi, for an-
noying the enemy, or defending the town, was
attempted; and the citizens as well as the garri-
ton seconding his zeal with equal ardour, seemed
to be determined that they would hold out to the
lait, and sacrifice themselves in order to save their
country h.

h-Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

Bb 2

THE

BOOK XII. THE Duke ofSavoy, whom the English, un-
^--"" 'der the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this;
TheFre.h ttime, pushed on the siege with the greatest vi-
endeavour gour. An army so numerous, and so well fuppli-
to relie-.,e
te town. ed with every thing requisite, carried on its ap-

proaches with great advantage against a garrison
which was flill uo feeble that it durst seldom ven-
ture to disturb or retard the enemies operations
by sallies. The admiral, sensible of the approach-
ing danger and unable to avert it, acquainted his
uncle the constable Montmorency, who had the
command of the French army, with his fituati-
on, and pointed out to him a method by which
he. might throw relief into the town. The con-
stable, solicitous to save a town, the loss of which
would open a pafrage for the enemy into the heart
of France; and eager to extricate his nephew
out of that perilous situation, in which zeal for
the publick had engaged him; resolved, though
auare of the danger, to attempt what he desired.
WVith this view he marched from La Fere to-
wards St. Quintin at the head of his army,
which was. not by one half so numerous as that
of the enemy, and having given the command of
a body of cholen men to Coligny's brother Dan-
delot, who was colonel general of the French in-
fantr/, he ordered him to force his way into the
i,\,r: hv that avenue which the admiral had re-
pre' ted as :nolt practicable, while he himself
wi. the main army would give the alarm to the
ei'linies camp on the opposite fide, and endea-
v .ir to dr.:w all their attention towards that quar-
August ,o. t,-r. Dandelot executed his orders with greater

i. rrepidity than coudutd. His soldiers rushed on
w:t.h uich headlong impetuofit), that though it
broke the first body of the enemy which ftod in
th ir way, it threw themselves into the utmost
ct,:.ufion; and being attacked by frefl troops
which closed in upon them on every fide, the

greater

greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dande- BOOK XII
lot, with about five hundred of the mos adven- -
turous, and mofft fortunate, making good his en- '7
trance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Conflable, in executing tis The battle

. \. c

i A C i(ot St. -Lin,-

part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of tin.
the besiegers, as rendered it impollible to retreat
with safety in the face of an enemy so much lu-
perior in number. The Duke of Savov iiftant-
ly perceived-Montmorency's error, ,nd prepar-
ed, with the pretence of mind and abilities of a
great general, to avail himself of it. He drew
up his army in order of battle, with the greatest
expedition, and watching the moment when the
French began to file off towards La Fere, he de-
tached all his cavalry under the command of the
count of Egmont to fall on their rear, while he,
at the head of his infantry, advanced to support
him. The French retired at first in perfect or-
der, and with a good countenance; but when
they saw Egmont draw near with his formidable
body of cavalry, the shock of which they were
conscious that they could not withstand, the pro-
fpett of imminent danger, added to the diftruft'of
their general, whose imprudence every oldier
now perceived, struck them with general confler-
nation. They began insensibly to quicken their
pace, and those in the rear began to press to vio-
lently on such as were before them, that in a
short time their march resembled a flight rather
than a retreat. Egmont, observing their confufi-
on, charged them with the greareft fury, and in
a moment all their Genfdarmerie, the pride and
Ilrength of the French armies in that age, gave
way and fled with precipitation. The infantry, 'rots defat
however, whom the conlfable, by his presence re,,I.
and authority, kept to their colours, fill con-
tinued their retrear, until the enemy brought

B b3 ofme

BOOK XII some pieces of cannon to bear upon their centre,

. "' which threw them into such disorder, that the ca-
557. valry renewing their attack, broke in, and the

rout became universal. About four thousand of
the French fell in the field, and among those the
Duke of Anguyen a Prince of the blood, toge-
ther with fix hundred gentlemen. The Constable,
as soon as he perceived the fortune of the day to
be irretrievable, rufled into the thickest of the
enemy, with a resolution not to survive the cala-
mity, which his ill-conduA had brought upon his
country; but having received a dangerous wound,
and being wafted with the loss of blood, he was
surrounded by some Flemish officers, to whom he
was known, who protected him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Be-
fides the conflable, the Dukes of Montpenfier
and Longueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many
officers of diflindion, three hundred gentlemen,
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken
prisoners. All the colours belonging to the in-
fantry, all the ammunition, and all the cannon,
two pieces excepted, fell into the enemies hands.
The victorious army did not lose above fourscore
men i.

The sirses- THis battle, no less fatal to France than the
fa of it. ancient victories of Cressy and Agincourt, gained

by the English on the fame frontier, bore a more
near resemblance to these, in the suddenness of
the rout; in the rashness of the commander in
chief; in the number of persons of note slain or
taken; and in the (mall loss sustained by the
enemy. It filled France with equal contler-
nation. Many inhabitants of Paris with the fame
precipitancy and trepidation, as if the enemy

i Thuan. 65. Harsi Annal. Brabant. ii. 69z. Herrera,
9 i.

had been already at their gates, quitted the city, BooK XII.
and retired into the interior provinces. The -^
King, by his prefenceand exhortations, endeavour- 557
ed to console and to animate flich as remained,
and applying himself with the greatert diligence
to repair the ruinous fortifications of the city,
prepared to defend it against the attack which he
instantly expected. But happily for France, Phi-
lip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness
of the Admiral de Coligny, not only saved the ca-
pital from the danger to which it was exposed,
but gained the nation a short interval, during
which the people recovered from the terror and
dejection occasioned by a blow no less revere than
unexpected, and Henry had leisure to take mea-
fures for the publick security with the spirit which
became the sovereign of a powerful and martial
people.

PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited Philip ,

the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received P" t"1

"i. ,

with all the exultation of military triump!; and
such were his transports of joy on account of an
event, which threw so much lunfre on the begin-
ning of his reign, that they softened his severe
and haughty temper, into an unuufial flw of
courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy approached,
and was kneeling to kifs his hands, he caught
him in his arms, and embracing him with
warmth, "It becomes me, fays he, rather to kifs
your hands, which have gained me such a glori-
ous and almost bloodless vidtory."

As Coon as the rejoicings and congratulations Hi. delibr-

on Philip's arrival were over, a council of war ,.,tI'ng

, h

was held in order to determine how they might lpr'rfccution
improve their victory to the befl advantage. The ot le ''"...
J)uke of Savoy, seconded by several of the ablest

J1 b 4 officers

BooK XII officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they

"'.`' should immediately relinquish the siege of St.
1557; Quintin, the reduction of which was now an ob-

ject below their attention, and advance directly
towards Paris; that as there were neither troops
to oppose, nor any town of strength to retard
their march, they might reach that capital while
under the full imprefion of the astonishment and
terror occasioned by the rout of the army, and
take pofffllion of it without refitance. But Phi-
lip, less adventurous or more prudent than his ge-
nerals, preferred a moderate but certain advan-
tage, to an enterprize of greater splendour, but
of more doubtful fucceis. He represented to the
council the infinite resources of a kingdom so
powerful as France; the great number as well
as martial spirit of its nobles; their attachment
to their sovereign; the vast advantages with which
they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable defiruction, which mufi be
the consequence of their penetrating too rashly
jnto the enemy's country, before they had fe-
cured such a communication with their own, as
might render a retreat safe, if upon any difafle-
'ous event that should become necessary. On all
there accounts, he advised the continuance of the
siege, and his generals acquiesced the more readi-
Jy in his opinion, as they made no doubt of being
makers of the town ir a few days, a loss of time
of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might ealily repair it by their
subsequent activity J.

St. Quintin THE weakness of the fortifications, and the
Sefended by small number of the garrnfon, which could
Admiral
Coligny, no longer hope either for reinforcement, or

I Belcar. Commentar. di Reb. Gallic, gol.

relief,

relief, seemed to authorise this calculation of BooK XI
Philip's generals. But, in making it, they did ' '
not attend sufficiently to the character of Ad- 557.
miral de Coligny, who commanded in the town.
A courage undismayed and undilconcertedamidft
the greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in re-
sources, a genius which rouzed and seemed to ac-
quire new force upon every dilfafcr, a talent of
governing the minds of men, together with a ca-
pacity of maintaining his ascendant over them
even under circumstances the most adverse and
diltrefsfil, were qualities which Coligny posset-
fed in a degree superior to any general of that
age. These qualities were peculiarly adapted to
the fiation in which he was now placed; and as
he knew the infinite importance to his country of
every hour which he could gain at this jundure,
he exerted himself to the utmost in contriving
how to protrat the siege, and to detain the ene-
my from attempting any enterprize more dange-
rous to France. Such were the perseverance and Iuhich is t.
Ikill with which he conduCed the defence, and ,ltby as.
ulch the fortitude and patience with which he ani-
mated the garrison, that though the Spaniards,
the Flemings, and the Englilh, carried on the
attack with all the ardour which national emulati-
on inspires, he held out the town seventeen days.
He was taken prisoner, at last, on the breach, Auguf. 27.
overpowered by the superior number of the
enemy.

HeNRY availed himself, with the utmost ati- Henry's

vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well- ,h"3ad;,lS'
timed obstinacy had afforded him. He appoint- of his klng-
ed officers to collect the scattered remains of"°m'
the constable's army; le issued orders for le-
vying soldiers in every part of the kingdom;
lie commanded the ban and arriere ban of the
frontier provinces inflantly to take the field, and

to

BooK XII. to join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy'
r'- ' he recalled the greater part of the veteran troops

1557. which served under the Marechal Briffac at Pied.

mont; he sent courier after courier to the Duke
of Guise, requiring him, together with all his ar-
my, to return instantly for the defence of their
country; he dispatched one envoy to the Grand
Signior, to solicit the afliftance of his fleet, and
the loan of a fum of money; he sent another in.
to Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the
north of England, that by drawing Mary's at.
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the king were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his fubjetls. The city
of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred
thousand livres. The other great towns imitated
the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of diftindion en-
gaged to garrison and to defend at their own ex-
pence the towns which lay most exposed to be at-
tacked by the enemy. Nor was this general con-
cern for the publick confined to communities
alone, or to those in the higher sphere of life,. but
diffusing itself among persons of every rank, each
individual seemed disposed to act with as much
vigour as if the honour of the King, and the lafc-
ty of the state had depended on his personal es-
forts m

The vifory PH LI P, who was no firanger either to the pru-
of str. oQu dent measures taken by the French monarch for
tin produc-
tive of few the security of his dominicns, cr to the fpirnt
bfciquenl with which his fubjeats prepared to defend them
ce6. selves, perceived, when it was too late, that ie

had loft an opportunity which could never be re-
called, and that it was now vain to think of pe-
netrating into the heart of France. He aban-

m Mem. de Ribier. ii. 701. 703.

doned,

doned, therefore, without much reluctance, a BooK XIr,
scheme which was too bold and hazardous to be --'
perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper; and '557.
employed his army, during the remainder of the
campaign, in the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of
these, he soon became master; and the reduc-
tion of these two petty towns, together with the
acquisition of St. Qjintin, were all the advanta-
ges which he derived from one of the most deci-
five vitories gained in that century. Philip him-
self, however, continued in high exultation, on
account of his success; and as all his pallions were
tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the
battle of St. Qjintin, which had been fought on
the day consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to
build a church, a monastery, and a palace sacred
to that faint and martyr. Before the expiration
of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice,
in which all these were united, at the Escurial in
the neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame
principle, which dictated the vow, directed the
building. But the plan of the work was so form-
ed as to resemble a gridiron, which, according to
the legendary tale, had been the instrument of
St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwithstanding the
vast and expensive schemes, in which his retflefs
ambition involved him, Philip continued the
building with such perseverance for twenty-two
years, and reserved such vait fums for this monu-
ment of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs
of Spain are indebted to him for a royal refi-
dence, which though not the most elegant, is cer-
tainly the molt sumptuous and magnificent of
any in Europe *.

THE first account of that fatal blow which the The French
French had received at Sr. Quintin was carried to rmy recall-

ed out of
Rome by the courier whomn Henry had sent to Italy,

* Co!rienar Annales d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

recall

-100oo XII. recall the Duke of Guise. As Paul, even with
1-v the afliftance of his French auxiliaries, had scarce

1557. been able to check the progress of the Spanish

arms, he foresaw that as soon as he was deprived
of their prote&ion, his territories must be over-
run in a moment. He remonitrated therefore
with the greatest violence against the departure
of the French army, reproaching the Duke of
Guise for his ill condut, which had brought him
into such an unhappy situation; and complaining
of the King for deserting him 1o ungenerously
under such circumflances. Guile's orders, how-
ever, were peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he
was, found it necefary to accommodate his con-
dut to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ
the mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo
di Medici, in order to obtain peace. Philip, who
had been forced unwillingly to a rupture with
the Pope, and who, even while success crowned
his arms, doubted so much thejuftice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of
pacification, listened eagerly to the first proposals
of this nature from Paul, and discovered lich
moderation in his demands as could scarce have
been expected from a Prince elated with vidory,

A treuy of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and
jpace be' the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met
tween the
pope and at Cavi, and both being equally disposed topeace,
Philip. they, after a short conference, terminated the

war by a treaty on the following terms: That
Paul should renounce his league with France, and
maintain for the future such a neutrality as be-
came the common father of Christendom; Thit
Philip should instantly restore all the towns of the
ect I' iaftical territory of which he had taken polt
t ! i)n ; That the claims of the Caraffa's, to the
c, :lhy of Paliano, and other demefies of the
{ *)naa's lhould be referred to the decision of

tlhe
1

the republick of Venice; that the Duke of Al-Boor XII.
va ihould repair in person to Rome, and after '7.
asking pardon of Paul in his own name, and in '
that of his matter, for having invaded the patri-
mony of the church, should receive the Pope's
absolution from that crime. Thus Paul, through
Philip's scrupulous timidity, finished an unprof-
perous war without any detriment to the Papal
See. The conqueror appeared humble, and ac-
knowledged his error; while he who had been
vanquished retained his usual haughtiness, and
was treated with every mark of superiority n.
The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, re-
paired to Rome, and in the posture of a fuppli-
cant, kifled the feet, and implored the forgive-
ness of that very person, whom his arms had re-
duced to the last extremity. Such was the fllper-
fitious veneration of the Spaniards for the papal
character, that Alva, though perhaps the proudest
man of the age, and accultomed from his infan-
cy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknow-
ledged that when he approached the Pope, he
was so much overawed, that his voice failed, and
his pretence of mind forsook him o.

Bu though this war, which at its commence- Phi;ip ir-
ment threatened mighty revolutions, was brought ftEore Itl:.

centia to,

to an end without occasioning any alteration in oaavio
those States, which were its immediate object, it Farnc'l.
produced effects of considerable consequence in
other parts of Italy. As Philip was extremely
sblicitous to terminate his quarrel with Paul as
speedily as poflible, he was willing to make any
sacrifice in order to gain those Princes, who, by
Joining their troops to the papal and French ar-
my, might have prolonged the war. .With this

n Pallav. lib. xiii. 183. F. Paul. 380. Herrera, vol. i. 310.
'Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Sunamonte liloria di Napoli, iv. 286.

view,

BOOK XII. view, he entered into a negotiation with Odavio

L-V -_/ Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in order to seduce
557, him from his alliance with France, he restored

to him the city of Placentia with the territory de-
pending on it, which Charles V. having seized in
the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, had kept from that time in his poffeflion,
and had transmitted together with his other do-
minions to Philip.

Cormo di THIS fep made such a discovery of Philip's
measures characer and views to Cosmo di Medici, the
for obtain- most sagacious and provident of all the Italian
g Siena. Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplish.

ing his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his
success in this attempt depended entirely on the
delicacy of address with which it was conducted,
he employed all the refinements of policy in the
negotiation which he set on foot for this purpose.
He began with soliciting Philip, whose treasury he
knew to be entirely drained by the expence of
the war, to repay the great tumrs which he had
advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Sie-
na. When Philip endeavoured to elude a de-
mand which he was unable to satisfy, he affeded
to be extremely disquieted, and making no secret
of his disgust, inftru&ed his ambassador at Rome
to open a negotiation with the Pope, which seem-
ed to be the effect of it. The ambassador exe-
cuted his commiflion with such dexterity, that
Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely alienated
from the Spanish interest, proposed to him an al-
liance with France, which should be cemented
by the marriage of his eldest son to one of Hen-
ry's daughters. Cosmo received the overture
with such apparent fatisfadion, and with so ma-
ny profelions of gratitude for the high honour of
which he had the profpet, that not only the

Pope's

Pope's ministers, but the French envoy at Rome BooK XIl,
talked confidently, and with little reserve, of the v-
acceflion of that important ally, as a matter cer- ' 557
tain and decided. The account of this was
quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo, who fore-
saw how much it would alarm him, had dif-
patched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into the
Netherlands, that he might be at hand to observe
and take advantage of his consternation, before
the first impreflion which it made should in any
degree abate. Cosmo was extremely fortunate
in the choice of the instrument whom he em-
ployed. Toledo waited, with patience, until he
discovered with certainty, that Philip had receiv-
ed such intelligence of his uncle's negotiations
at Rome, as must have filled his suspicious mind
with fear and jealousy; and then craving an au-
dience, he required payment of the money which
had been borrowed by the Emperor, in the most
earnest and peremptory terms. In urging that
point, he artfully threw out several dark hints
and ambiguous declarations, concerning the ex-
tremities to which Cosmo might be driven by a re-
fuFal of thisjuft demand, as well as by other grie-
vances of which he had good realbn to complain.

PH I LI P, atoniihed at an address in such a firain, Their rc-

from a Prince lb far his inferior as the Duke of ce!'
Tuscany, and comparing what he now heard with
the information which he had received from Italy,
immediately concluded that Cosmo had ventured
toaflume this boldand unulual tone on the profpedt
of his union with France. In order to prevent
the Pope and Henry from acquiring an ally, who
by his abilities and the situation of his dominions
would have added both reputation and flrength
to their confederacy, he oflnred to grant Colmo
tie investiture of Siena, if hle would content to

accept

Booi xII accept of this, as an equivalent for the films due
'"-*' Ito him, and engage to furnish a body of troops to-

1557. wards the defence of Philip's territories in Italy,

against any power who (hould attack them; As
soon as Cosmo had brought Philip to this, which
was the object of all his artifices and intrigues, he
did not protrac the negotiation by any unnecef.
fary delay, or any excess of refinement, but
closed eagerly with the proporal, and Philip, in
spite of the remonstrances of his ablefl counfeli
lors, signed a treaty with him to that effed p.

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his

rights than Philip, or lels willing to relinquish any
territory which he pofleffed, by what tenure so-
ever he held it, there unnufual conceiflons to the
Dukes of Parma and Tufcdny, by which he wan-
tonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defend-
ing which, his father had employed many years,
and wafted much blood and treasure, cannot be
accounted for from any motive, but his super-
ftitious desire of extricating himself out of the
war which he had been forced to wage against
the Pope. By these treaties, however, the ba-
lance of power among the Italian flates was
poized with greater equality, and rendered lets
variable than it had been since it received the first
violent fllock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of
France. From this period Italy ceased to be the
great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain,
France, and Germans, contended for power or
for fame. Their dissentions and hostilities were
nevertheless as frequent and as violent as ever;
but being excited by new objects, they slained
other regions of Europe with blood, and render-
ed them, in their turn, miserable by the devaf:
tations of war.

p Thuan. lib. xviii. 6a4. Herrera, i. 263, 275. Pallay
lib. xiii. 180.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame BOOK XII.

day that his adversary the Duke of Alva made --I
his ignominious fubmifflons to the Pope. He sep'557.
was received in France as the guardian angel The Duke
of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy ofGuife's
seemed to be forgotten, while his former fervi- France.
ces, particularly his defence of Metz, were re-
counted with exaggerated praise; and he was
welcomed in every city through which he pas-
fed, as the reflorer of publick security, who, as-
ter having set bounds by his conduct and valour
to the victorious arms of Charles V. returned
now at the call of his country, to check the for-
midable progress of Philip's power. The re-
ception which he met with from Henry was no
less cordial and honourable. New titles were
invented, and new dignities created in order
to distinguish him. He was appointed lieute-
nant-general in chief both within and without
the kingdom, with ajurifdition almost unlimit-
ted, and hardly inferior to that which was posses-
fed by. the king himself. Thus, through the
singular felicity which attended the Princes of
Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own schemes
contributed to aggrandize them. The calami-
ties of his country, and the ill conduct of his
rival the Constable, exalted the Duke of Guise
to a height of dignity and power, which he
could not have expected to attain by the most
fortunate and most compleat filccefs of his own
ambitious projects.

THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform ofme- Tecd the

thing suitable to the high expectations of his h,°my.l
countrymen, and that he might justify the ex-
traordinary confidence which the King had re-
posed in him, ordered all the troops, which
could be got together, to assemble at Champaigne.
Though the winter was well advanced, and had
set in with extreme rigour, he placed himself

VOL. III. C c at

BooK XII. at their head, and took the field. By Henry's

C'-"' activity and the zeal of his fubjets, so many fol-
'557' diers had been raised in the kingdom, and such

considerable reinforcements had been drawn
from Germany and Swifferland, as formed an
army refpedable even in the eyes of a vitori-
ous enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it put in
motion at such an uncommon season, began to
tremble for his new conquests, particularly St.
Quintin, the fortifications of which were hi-
therto but imperfetly repaired.

Heinvelts BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more
Calais. important enterprize; and after amusing the e-
Janulry ft. nemy with threatening successively different

towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned
suddenly to the left and invested Calais with his
whole army. Calais had been taken by the
English under Edward III. and was the fruit of
that monarch's glorious victory at Cressy. Be-
ing the only place that they retained of their
ancient and extensive territories in France, and
which opened to them, at all times, an easy
and secure pafiage into the heart of that king-
dom, their keeping poffeflion of it soothed the
pride of the one nation as much as it mortified
the vanity of the other. Its situation was natu-
rally so strong, and its fortifications deemed so
impregnable, that no monarch of France, how
adventurouis soever, had been bold enough to
attack it. Even when the domeftick strength
of England was broken and exhausted by the
bloody wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted
from foreign objecs, Calais had remained un-
disturbed and unthreatened. Mary and her
council, compoied chiefly of Ecclefiafticks, un-
acquainted with military affairs, and whose
whole attention was turned towards extirpating
heresy out of the kingdom, had not only ne-

glected

gle&ed to take any precautions for the safety of BOOK Xll.
this important place, but seemed to think that the ''
reputation of its (trength alone was rufficient for '558.
its security. Full of this opinion, they ventured,
even after the declaration of war, to continue a
practice which the low state of the Queen's si-
nances had introduced in times of peace. As
the country adjacent to Calais was overflowed
during the winter, and the marshes around it
became impalsable, except by one avenue, which
the forts of St. Agatha and Newnhambridge
commanded, it had been the cuflom of the En-
glifh to dismiss the greater part of the garrison
towards the end of autumn, and to replace it in
the lpring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the Itsdefence-
governor of Calais, remonstrate against this ill- lels ate.
timed parsimony, and represent the poflibility
of his being attacked suddenly, while he had
not troops sufficient to man the works. The
privy council treated these remonfirances with
scorn, as if they had flowed from the timidity or
the rapaioufnefs of the governor; and some of
them, with that confidence which is the compa-
nion of ignorance, boasted that they would de-
fend Calais with their white rods againftany ene-
my who should approach it during winter*. In
vain did Philip, who had passed through Calais
as he returned from England to the Netherlands,
warn the Queen of the danger to which it was ex-
posed; and acquainting her with what was ne-
ceffary for its security, offer to reinforce the gar-
rifon during winter with a detachment of his
own troops. Mary's counsellors, though obfe-
quious to her in all points wherein religion was
concerned, distrusted, as much as the refl of
their countrymen, every proposition that came
from her husband; and lulpecting this to be an
artifice of Philip's, in order to gain the com-

Carte, iii. 345.

C c 2 mand

BOOR XI. mand of the town, they negle&ted his intel-

ligence, declined his offer; and left Calais with
5 less than a fourth of the men requisite for its de-

fence.

cuife push- IT was his knowledge of this, which encou-
es thefiege raged the Duke of Guise to venture on an enter-
with vigour, .

prize, that furprized his own countrymen no
less than his enemies. As.he knew that its fuc-
cess depended on conducting his operations with
such rapidity, as would afford the English no
time for throwing relief into the town by Tea,
and prevent Philip. from giving him any inter-
ruption by land, he pushed the attack with a
degree of vigour little known in carrying on
sieges, during that age. He drove the English
from Fort St. Agatha at the first afault; obliged
them to abandon the fort of Newnhambridge,
after defending it three days; took the cattle
which commanded the harbour by storm; and,
on the eighthday after he appeared before Calais,
compelled the governor, whose feeble garrison,
which did not exceed five hundred men, was
worn out with the fatigue of sustaining so many

Takes the attacks, and defending such extensive works, to
tOWD. sign a capitulation.

THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the

Englifl time to recover from the consternation
occasioned by this blow, immediately inveited
Guifnes, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with lcfs vigour, and
after standing one brisk aflault, surrendered the
town. The caltle of Hames was abandoned by
the troops polled there, without waiting the ap-
proach of the enemy.

THUS,
400

THus, in a; few days, during the depth of BSoO XII.

wijntdi,' and at''a time when the fatal battle of --v-
St Qlintin had so deprefred the sanguine spirit Th'558.r
of the French, that their utmost aim was to pro- dor and es-
te& their own country, without dreaming of fe of there
making conquests on the enemy; the enter-
prizing -valour of one man drove the English
out of Calais, after they had held it two hun-
dred and ten years, and deprived them of every
foot of land in a kingdom, where their domini-
ons had been once so extensive. This exploit,
ar'the fame timre that it gave an high idea of
the power and resources of France to all Eu-
rope, 'set the Duke of Guise, in the opinion of
his co6unftrymen, far'above all the generals of
the age. They'celebrated his conquelts with
immoderate transports of joy; while the En-
glifh gave vent to all the paflions, which animate
a high-fpirited people, when any great national
calamity is manifeftly.owing to the ill conduct
of their rulers: '.. Mary and her ministers, for-
mery 'odious, Were now contemptible in their
eyes.' All the' terrors of her severe and arbitra-
ry adrminiftratiol' eould not restrain them from
uttering execrations aid threats against those
who, having wantoniy involved the nation in a
quarrte wherein it was :nowise interested, had, by
their negligence -ot incapacity, brought irrepara-
ble disgrace on their country, and loft the most
valuable possesSion' belonging to the Englilt
crowVn.-' .

. '. : * * L l ' ...

THa French King imitated the conduCt of its
former conqueror, Edward 11I. with regard to
Calai.: He commanded all the English inhabi-
tants to quit the town, and, giving their houses
to his own subje&s, whom he allured to fettle'
there by granting them various immunities, he
left a numerous garrison, under an experienced
governor, for their defence. After this, his

C c 3 victorious

BaOK XII vi&orious army went into quarters of refresh.
<- -J- ment, and the usual inacion of: winter returned,
1558·

Feb.24. MEANWHILE Ferdinand afembled the col.
rChSinetn lege of Eledors at Franckfort, in order to lay
of the tm- before them the deed whereby. Charles V. had
cp'wn. reigned the Imperial crown,. aid transferred it

to him. This he had hiherto: delayed, on ac-
count of some difficulties which had occurred
concerning the formalities reqaiifite in supplying
a vacancy ccafioned by an event, to which there
was no parallel in the annals of the Empire.
These being at length aijufted, the Prince of
Orange executed the commnifion. with which he
had been entrusted by Charles; the Eleiors ac-
cepted of his refignationi'; declared Ferdinand
his lawful fucceflor; and, put hrm in poffielion of
all the ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

The pope BUT when the new Emper.fant Gufman, his
"ck o chancellor, to acquaint the. Pope with this tranf-
ledge Ferdi- action, to. tefiify. his reverence towards the Ho-
rdasEm- ly See, and t signify that,.according to form,

he would soon dispatch an ambassador extraor-
dinary to treat with his. holipefs concerning his
coronation; Paiul, whom neither experience nor
difappointmerts. could teach tp bring down his
lofty ideas of the papal prerogative to such a
moderate. standard as suited the genius of; the
times, refused to admit the envoy into his pie-
fence, and declared all the proceedings at Frank-
fort irregular and invalid. He contended that
the Pope, as the. vicegerent of Christ, was en-
trusted with. the keys both of celetfial and ter-
redrial gpvernmient; that fomrp him the Impe-
rial jurifdliftion was derived, that though his
predecessors had authorized the Elecors to choose
an Emperor, whom the Holy See confirmed,

this

this privilege was confined to those cafes when a BOOK XII.
vacancy was occasioned by death; that the in- --v
ftrument of Charles's resignation had been pre- 1558.
sented in an improper court, as it belonged to
the Pope alone to rejet or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to tftpply his place; that,
setting aside all there objehions, Ferdinand's
eletion laboured under two defects, which alone
were sufficient to render it void, for the Protef-
tant EleCtors had been admitted to vote, tho',
by their apoftacy from the catholick faith, they'
had forfeited that and every other privilege of
the elecoral office; that Ferdinand, by ratify-
ing the conceflions'of several Diets in favour of
hereticks, had rendered himself unworthy of
the Imperial dignity, which was instituted for
the protecion, not for the deftrudion of the
church. But, after thundering out there extra-
vagant maxims, he added, with an appearance of
condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce
all title to the Imperial crown, founded on the
election at Frankfort, make professions of repen-
tance for his palt conduct, and supplicate him,
with due humility, to confirm Charles's refigna-
tion, as well as his assumption to the Empire, he
might expect every mark of favour from his pater-
nal clemency and goodness. Gufman, though he
had laid his account with considerable difficulties
in his negotiation with the Pope, little expeced
that he would have revived these antiquated and
wild pretensions, which astonished him so much
that he scarce knew in what tone he ought to
reply. He prudently declined entering into any
controversy concerning the nature or extent of
the papal jurisdiction, and, confining himself to
the political considerations, which Ihould deter-
mine the Pope to recognize an Emperor alrea-
dy in poffeflion, he endeavoured to place there
in such a light, as lie imagined could
scarce fail to strike Paul, if he were not

C c 4 altogether

BOOK XII. altogether blind to his own interest. Philip
'-v'"' seconded Gufman's arguments with great ear-

1558. neftnefs, by an ambaflador whom he sent to

Rome of purpose, and besought the Pope to
desist from claims so unseasonable, as might not
only irritate and alarm Ferdinand and the Prin-
ces of the Empire, but furnish the enemies of
the Holy See with a new reaion for representing
its jurifdiótion as incompatible with the rights
of Princes, and fiibverfive of all civil authority.
But Paul, who deemed it a crime to attend any
consideration suggested by human prudence or
policy, when he thought himself called to as-
fert .!1- prerogatives of the Papal See, remained
inflexible; and, during his pontificate, Ferdi-
nand was not acknowledged as Emperor by the
court of Rome *

Henry en- WHILE Henry was preparing for the ap-
deaxours th proaching campaign, he received accounts of
Scotsagainlt the issue of his negotiations in Scotland. Long
England. experience having at last taught the Scots the

imprudence of involving their country in every
quarrel between France and England, neither
the solicitations of his ambaflador, nor the ad-
dress and authority of the Queen-regent, could
prevail on them to take arms against a kingdom,
with which they were at peace. On this occa-
sion, the ardor of a martial nobility and of a tur-
bulent people, was restrained by regard for the
publick interest and tranquillity, which, in for-
mer deliberations of this kind, had been seldom
attended to, by a nation always prone to rush in-
to every new war. But though the Scots ad-
hered with fleadinefs to theirpacific system, they
were extremely ready to gratify the French

* Godleveus de Ahdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp.
392. I'alav. lib. xiii. 189, Ribier. ii. 746, 759.

Kilng

King in another particular, which he had given BooK XII
in charge to his ambassador. 8

1558.

THE young Queen of Scots had been affian- Marriage of

ced to the Dauphin, in the year one thousand the Dauphin
five hundred and forty-eight, and having been Queen of
educated since that time in the court of France, Scots.
she had grown up to be the most amiable, and
one of the most accomplished Princefles in that
age. Henry demanded the content of her sub-
jects to the celebration of the marriage, and
a parliament which was held for that pur-
pose, appointed eight commiflioners to re-
present the whole 'body of the nation at that
solemnity, with power to sign such deeds as
might be requisite before it was concluded.
In fettling the articles. of the marriage, the April 4.
Scots took all the precautions, that prudence
could diEate, in order to preserve the liberty
and independence of their country; while the
French used every art to secure to the Dauphin
the condu-t of affairs during the Qgeen's life,
and the succession of the crown on the event of
her demise. The marriage was celebrated with
pomp, suitable to the dignity of the parties, and
the. magnificence of a court, at that rime, the
most splen.did in Europe .*. Thus Henry, in the
courfe,of ,a, few months, had the glory of re-
covering an important poffellion which ancient-
ly belonged to the icrown of Frances and of
adding t,, it the acquisition of a new kingdom.
By thii;¢ye.r, too,, the Duke of Guise acquired
new coirfideration and, importance ; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of. thd crown,
railing iini ls far. beyond the condition of
other fubjeds, as leemed to renderithl, credit he
had gained by his great, actions, no ilefsiperma-
ment than it was extensive, ; i ;:

* Keith's hiftoryofScotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps
Diplotn. v. 21.

BooK XII.

'"' WHEN the campaign opened, soon after the

Th^ cm- Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was
paiga open- placed at the head of the army with the fame
ed. unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-

ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjeets,
that the troops under his command were both
numerous and well appointed; while Philip,
exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of
the preceding year, had been obliged to
dismiss so many of his forces during the winter,
that he could not bring an army into the field
capable of making head against him. The
Duke of Guise did not lore the favourable op-
portunity which his superiority afforded him.
He invested Thionville in the dutchy of Lux-
emburg, one of the strongest towns on the
frontier of the Netherlands, and of great im-
portance to France by its neighbourhood to
Metz; and, notwithstanding the obstinate va-
june %a. lour with which it was defended, he forced it to

capitulate after a siege of three weeks*.

The French t BUT the success of this enterprize, which it
army de
feated t was expeced would lead to other conquelts, was
Gravelines. more than counterbalanced by an event that

happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fition, inverted Dunkirk with an army of four-
teen thousand men, and took it by storm on the
fifth day of the siege. From that he advanced
towards Nieuport, which must have soon fallen
into his hands, if the approach of the Count of
Egmont with a superior army had not made it
prudent to retreat. The French troops were
so much encumbered with the booty which
they had got at Dunkirk, or by ravaging
the open country, that they moved slowly;

Thuan. lib. xx. 690.

and

and Egmont, who had left his heavy baggage BooK XII.
and artillery behind him, marched with such ra- 8
pidity, that he came up with them near Grave-
lines, and attacked them with the utmost im-
petuofity. De Termes, who had the choice of
the ground, having posted his troops to advan-
tage in the angle formed by the mouth of the
river Aa and the fes, received him with great
firmness. Vitory remained for some time in
suspense, the desperate valour of the French,
who foresaw the unavoidable deflruction that
must follow upon. a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the
Flemings, when one of those accidents, to which
human prudence does not extend, decided the
contest in favour of the latter. A squadron of
English ships of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of engagement, entered the
river Aa, and turned its great guns against the
right wing of the French, with such effec as
unmediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through their whole army. The
Flemings, to whom: affitance, so unexpected
and: so seasonable, gave fre(h spirit, redoubling
their efforts, that they might not lose the ad-
vantage which fortune had presented them, or
give the enemy time to recover from their con-
fternation, the rout of the French soon became
uaiverfal. Near two thousand were killed on
the spot a greater number fell by the hands of
the peasants, who, in revenge for the cruelty
with which their country had been plundered,
pursued the fugitives and massacred them with-
out mercy; the reR were taken prisoners, toge-
ther with de Termes their general, and many
officers of diltindion *

' Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

THIS

Boos XIL .

^^ ^ ~THrS fgnal victory,, for! which the: C'ont; ol

The Duke Egmont was:afterwards so ill- requited by Philip
ofGuifeop- obliged the Dike of Guise t6 relinquish all othet
posed to the
viorious :schemes, and; to haften towards the frontier ol
army. Picardy, that- he might oppose the progress ol

the enemy there. This disaster refl'e'ted new
niftre on his reputation, and once more'turned
the eyes of his: countrymen; towards him, as the
only general on whose arms victory always at-
tended, and in whose conduc as wel' as good
fortune, they could cofide: in :every dhnger.
Henry reinforced. Gujfe's army with so many
troops, drawn' from the:adjacent garrifdnos, that
it Coon amounted to forty-thoufand neni 'That
of the enemy, after thejtindtion of- E-grnont
with the Duke of Savoy, was not 'inferior in
number. They encampedr. #'t the diftarice of a
few leagues from one. another; and'each-mo-
narch having'joined his 'refpetive' army, it
was expe.1ted that, after th&eviciffitudes of' good
and bad fuocefs during this and .the forter cam-
paign, a dcifive battle would-at last determine
which of- theh rivals shoutld take the afeendant
for the future, and gitv, law to Europe. But
though. both had :it in their power, neither of
them discovered any inclination to bring the':de-
cifion of, a point of such: importance to depend
upon the uncertain and fortuitbus issue of a ingle
battle. ."The fatal engagements at St. Quintin
and Gravelines were too'..recent to be footnfor-
gotteny and the profpe6t of 'encountering the
fame troops, commanded by the fame generals,
who had twice triumphedover his arms, iifpired
Henry . with .a degree of caution which was
not common to hirp. Philip, of a genius averse
to bold operations in war, naturally leaned to
cautious measures, and would hazard nothing
against a general, so fortunate and success-
ful as the Duke of Guise. Both monarchs,

as

as if -by agreement, .flood on the defensive, and BOOK XIt.
fortifying: their camps carefully, avoided every ''
fkirrmifh or rencounter that might bring on a
general engagement.

WHI tLE the armies continued in this:ination,

peace began to be mentioned in each camp, and
both Henry and Philip discovered an inclina-
tion to liften to any overture that tended to
re-establish it. The kingdoms of France and
Spain had been .engaged during half a century
in almost continual wars, carried on at a great
expence: and produtive of no considerable ad-
vantage to either. Exhautfed by extraordinary
and unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those
to which.the nations of Europe had been accuf-
tomed before the rivalfhip between Charles V.
and Francis I. both nations longed so much for
an;interval of repose, in order to recruit their
ltrength,. that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies necessary for carry-
ing.on hostilities. The private inclinations of
both the Kings concurred with those of their
people.. .Philip was prompted to wish for peace
by his fond desire of returning to Spain. Ac-.
customed from his infancy to the climate and
manners of that country, he was attached to it
with such extreme predilecion, that he was un-
happy in any other part of his dominions. But
as he could not either with decency or safety
quit the Low-Countries, and venture on a
voyage to Spain, during the continuance of war,
the profped of a pacification which would put it
in his power to execute this favourite scheme,
was highly acceptable. Henry was no less de-
firous of being delivered from the burden and
avocations of war, that lie might have leisure
to.turn all his attention, and bend the whole
force of his government towards fupprelfing the

" ~: ,. p lsopinions

Bo<K XIf. opinions of the Reformers, which were spreading

^'~r with such rapidity in Paris and other great towns
155. of France, that they began to grow formidable

to the established church.

An intrigue BESIDES there publick and avowed confide-
in the court . ·
ofFrance f- rations, arising from the slate of the two hostile
cilitatesit. kingdoms, or from the wishes of their refpec.

tive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue car-
ried on in the court of France, which contri.
buted as much as either of the other, to haften
and to facilitate the negotiation of a peace.
The Confiable Montmorency, during his cap-
tivity, beheld the rapid success and growing
favour of the Duke of Guise, with the envious
solicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained
by him, he confidered as a fresh wound to his
own reputation, and he knew with what male-
volent address it would be improved, to diminilh
his credit with the King, and to augment that
of the Duke of Guise. These arts, he was
afraid, might, by degrees5 work on the easy and
ductile mind of Henry, so as to efface all
remains of his ancient affection towards him.
But he could not discover any remedy for this,
unless he were allowed to return home, that he
might try whether, by his presence, he could
defeat the artifices of his enemies, and revive
those warm and tender sentiments which had
long attached Henry to him, with a confidence
so entire, as resembled rather the cordiality of
private friend(hip, than the cold and selfish con-
nection between a monarch and one of his cour-
tiers. While Montrmorency was forming schemes
and wishes for his return to France with much anx-
iety of mind, but with little hope of success, an
unexpeted incident prepared the way for it. The
Cardinal of Lorrain, who had shared with his bro-
ther in the King's favour, and participated of the
power which that conferred, did not bear profpe-

rity

rity with the fame discretion as the Duke of Booc XII.
Guise. Intoxicated with their good fortune, he 'r
forgot how much they had been indebted for '558
their-prefent elevation to their connexions with
the Dutchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed
all to the extraordinary merit of their family.
This led him not only to neglect his benefac-
trefs, but to thwart her schemes, and to talk
with a fircaftick liberty of her character and
person. That singular woman, who, if we may
believe contemporary writers, retained the
beauty and charms of youth at the age of three-
score, and on whom it is certain that Henry still
doated with all the fondness of love, felt this
injury with sensibility, and set herself with ea-
gernefs to revenge it. As there was no method
of supplanting the Princes of Lorrain so effec-
tually, as by a coalition of interests with the
Constable, she proposed the marriage of her
grand-daughter with one of his sons, as the bond
of their future union, and Montmorency readi-
ly gave his content to the match. Having thus
cemented their alliance, the dutchess employed
all her influence with the King in order to con-
firm his inclinations towards peace, and to in-
duce him to take the Rteps necessary for attain-
ing it. She insinuated that any overture of that
kind would come with great propriety from the
Constable, and if committed to the conduct of
his prudence, could hardly fail of success.

HENRY, long accuflomed to devolve all as- Henry corn-
fairs of importance on the Conflable, and need- mits the -

gotiation to

ing only this encouragement to return to his an- Montrno
cient habits, wrote to him immediately with his rency
uiual familiarity and affection, impowering him,
at the fame time, to take the first opportunity of
founding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Montmorency made his application to
Philip by the most proper channel. He opened

him self

BooKXII. himfelfto the Duke of Savoy, who, notwith.

5''g' standing the height of preferment to which he

had been raised, and the military glory which
he had acquired in the Spanish service, was
weary of remaining in exile, and languished to
return into his dominions. As'there was no prof-
pet of his recovering poffeflion of there by force
of arms, he confidered a definitive treaty of
peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain reftitu-
tion. Being no itranger to Philip's private wish-
es with regard to peace, he easily prevailed on
him not only to discover a disposition on his part
towards accommodation, but to permit Mont-
morency to return, on his parole, to France,
that he might confirm his own sovereign in his
pacifick sentiments. Henry received the Con-
flable with the most flattering marks of regard;
absence, instead of having abated or extinguish-
ed his friendship, seemed to have given it new
ardour; and he aflumed, from the moment of
his appearance in court, a higher place, if pofli.
ble, in his affection, and a more perfect afcen-
dant over his mind, than ever. The Cardinal of
Lorrain and Duke of Guise, prudently gave way
to a tide of favour too itrong for them to oppose,
and confining themselves to their proper depart-
ments, permitted, without any struggle, the
Constable and Dutchess of Valentinois to direct
publick affairs at their pleasure. They soon
prevailed on the King to nominate plenipotenti-
aries to treat of peace. Philip did the fame.
The abbey of Cercamp was fixed on as the place
of congress; and all military operations were
immediately terminated by a suspension of
arms.

WHILE there preliniinary fieps were taking

towards a treaty which restored tranquillity to
Europe, Charles V. whose ambition had so long

diflurbed

disturbed it, ended his days in a monastery of BooR XIL
St. Juftus. When Charles entered this retreat, '-c
he formed such a plan of life for himself, as '558' ,
would have suited the condition of a private
gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table
was neat but plain; his domefticks few; his in-
tercourfe with them familiar; all the cumber-
some and ceremonious forms of attendance on
his person were entirely abolished, as deftrudtive
of that social ease and tranquillity which he court-
ed in order to sooth the remainder of his days.
As the mildness of the climate, together with
his deliverance from the burdens and cares of
government procured him, at first, a considerable
remillion from the acute pains with which he
had been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps,
more complete fatisfadtion in this humble soli-
tude, than all his grandeur had ever yielded
him. The ambitious thoughts and projects
which had so long engrossed and disquieted him,
were quite effaced from his mind: Far from ta-
king any part in the political tranfadtions of the
Princes of Europe, he restrained his curiosity
even from any inquiry concerning them ; and
he seemed to view the busy scene which he had
abandoned with all the contempt and indiffe-
rence arising from his thorough experience of
its vanity, as well as from the pleasing reflec-
tion of having disentangled himself from its
cares.

OTHER amusements, and other objects now His imure-

occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the ment"in his
plants in his garden with his own hands; some- rcere
times he rode out to the neighbouring wood on
a little horse, the only one that he kept, attended
by a single servant on foot. When his infirmi-
ties confined him to his apartment, which of-
ten happened, and deprived him of there more
afive recreations, he either admitted a few gen-

VOL. II. D d tlemen]

BooK XHI. tlemen who resided near the monastery to visit him,

- and entertained them familiarly at his table; or
'558. he employed himfelfin fludying the principles

and in forming curious works ofmechanifm, of
which he had always been remarkably fond,
and to which his genius was peculiarly turned.
With this view he had engaged Turriano, one
of the most ingenious artifis of that age, to ac-
company him in his retreat. He laboured toge-
ther with him in framing models of the most
useful machines, as well as in making experi-
ments with regard to their refpestive powers,
and it was not seldom that the ideas of the mo-
narch afifted or perfected the inventions of the
artist. He relieved his mind, at intervals, with
flighter and more fantaftick works of mecha-
nijin, in falhioning puppets, which by the firuc-
ture of internal springs, mimicked the gestures
and aclions of men, to the no small astonish-
ment of the ignorant monks, who beholding
movements, which they could not comprehend,
omnetimes distrusted their own senses, and some-
times fufpefted Charles and Turriano of being
in compac with invisible powers. He was par-
ticularly curious with regard to the conftruti-
on of clocks and watches, and having found,
after repeated trials, that lie could not bring
any two of them to go exactly alike, he reflected,
it is said, with a mixture of furprize and regret
on his own folly, in having bellowed so much
time and labour on the more vain attempt of
bringing mankind to a precise uniformity of
sentiment concerning the intricate and myfte-
rious doctrines of religion.

Hismorc BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed
uptio^s. of the reft of his time, he conflantly reserved a

considerable portion of it for religious ex-
ercifes. He regularly attended divine ser-

vice

vice in the chapel of the monastery, every BOOK Xll
morning and evening; he took great pleafire l
in reading books of devotion, particularly the 55 v
works of St. Augustine and St. Bernard; and
converted much with his. confessor, and the prior
of the monastery on pious fubjets. Thus did
Charles pase the first year of his retreat, in a
manner not unbecoming a man perfectly difen-
gaged from the affairs of the present life, and
tlanding on the confines of a future world
either in innocent amusements, which soothed
his pains, and relieved a mind worn out with
excefive application to business; or in devout
occupations, which le deemed necessary in pre-
paring for another tfate.

But about fix months before his death, the The clures

gout, after a longer intermiflion than usual, re- ofhiadcatl-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His shattered conflitution had scarce vigour
enough remaining to withfland such a shock. It
enfeebled his mind as much as his body, and
from that period we scarce discern any traces of
that found and masculine underltanding, which
distinguished Charles among his contemporaries.
An illiberal and timid fLperftition depressed his
spirit. He had no rclilh for amusements of any
kind. He endeavoured to conform, in his man-
ner of living, to all the rigour of monaftick
auflerity. He desired no other society than that
of monks, and was almost continually employed
with them in chanting the hymns in the Missal.
As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself the
discipline in secret with such severity, that the
whip of cords which be employed as the inftru-
ment of his punishment, was found after his de-
cease tinged with his blood, Nor was he satisfied
with thele acts of mortification, which, how-
ever severe, were not unexampled. The timo-
rous and distrustful solicitude which always ac-

D d 2 companies

BooK Xll. companies superstition still continued to dif-
'^'es^ quiet him, and depreciating all that he had done,

r558. prompted him to aim at romething extraordi-

nary, at some new and singular at of piety that
would display his zeal, and merit the favour of
heaven. The as on which he fixed was as wild
and uncommon, as any that superstition ever
suggested to a weak and disordered fancy. He
resolved to celebrate his own obsequies before
his death. He ordered his tomb to be erefted
in the chapel of the monastery. His domefticks
marched thither in funeral procession, with black
tapers in their hands. He himself followed in
his shroud. He waslaid in his coffin, with much
solemnity. The service for the dead was chant-
ed, and Charles joined in the prayers which
were offered up for the reft of his foul, ming-
ling his tears with those which his attendants
ihed, as if they had been celebrating a real fu-
neral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling holy
water on the coffin in the usual form, and all the
assistants retiring, the doors of the chapel were
ihut. Then Charles arose out of the coffin and
withdrew to his apartment, full of these awful
sentiments, which such a singular solemnity was
calculated to inspire. But either the fatiguing
length of the ceremony, or the impreflion which
this image of death left on his mind, asseted him
so much, that the next day he was seized with a
fever. His feeble frame could not long resist its
violence, and he expired on the twenty-firft of
September, after a life of fifty-eight years, fix
months, and twenty-five days *.

* Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. p. i . Thuan. 723. Sandov.

ii. 6o9, &c. Miniana Contin. Mariana, vol. iv. 216. Vcray
Zuniga vida de Carlos, p. 1 1.

As

As Charles was the first prince of the age in BOOK XII.

rank and dignity, the part which he adted, wlie-'-
ther we confider the greatness, the variety, orHi'h8¢ac
the success of his undertakings, was the moftter.
conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation
of his conduct, not from the exaggerated
praises of the Spanifl hiilorians, or the undiftin-
guifhing censure of the French, that a just idea
of Charles's genius and abilities is to be col-
leated. He possessed qualities so peculiar, as
strongly mark his characer, and not only dif-
tinguifh him from the Princes who were his
contemporaries, but account for that superiority
over them which he so long maintained. In
forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as
well as by habit, cautious and considerate. Born
with talents, which unfolded themselves (lowly,
and were late in attaining maturity, lie was ac-
customed to ponder every fubje& that demanded
his consideration with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of his mind
towards it, and dwelling upon it with a serious
application, undiverted by pleasure, and hardly
relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in
silence in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his refolutlon with a
decisive firmnefi, which seldom follows fich
flow consultations. In copfequence of this,
Charles's measures, instead of reernbling the
desultory and irregular sallies of Henry VII I. or
Francis I. had the appearance of a conliltent
system, in which all parts were arranged, the
effects were foreseen, and the accidents were
provided for. His promptitude in executinl,
was no less remarkable than his patience in deli-
beration. He consulted with phlegm, but he
acded with vigour; and did not difeover greater
lagacity in his choice of the meaeures which ic
was proper to purlie, than fertility of genius

D d 3 in

BooK XIl. in finding out the means for rendering his pur-
~'~'J suit of them successful. Though he had natu-

rally so little of the martial turn, that during the
most ardent and bufling period of life, he re-
mained in the cabinet inascive, yet when he
chose at length to appear at the head of his ar-
mies, his mind was so formed for vigorous
exertions in every direction, that he acquired
flch knowledge in the art of war, and such ta-
lents for command, as rendered him equal in re-
putation and success to the most able generals
of the age. But Charles pofeffied, in the most
eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knpwing men,
and of adapting their talents to the various
departments which he allotted to them. From
the death of Chievres to the end of his reign, he
employed no general in the field, no minister
in the cabinet, no ambaflador to a foreign court,
no governor of a province, whose abilities were
inadequate to the trust which he reposed in them.
Though deflitute of that bewitching affability
of manners, which gained Francis the hearts of
all who approached his person, he was no stranger
to the virtues which secure fidelity and at-
tachment. He placed unbounded confidence in
his generals; he rewarded their services with
munificence; he neither envied their fame, nor
discovered any jealousy of their power; Almost
all the generals who conducted his armies may
be placed on a level with those illustrious perfo-
nages, who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory ; and. his advantages over his
rivals are to be ascribed so manifestly to the fu-
perior abilities of the commanders whom he let
in opposition to them, that this might seem to
detract in Come degree, from his own merit, if
the talent of discovering and employing such
instruments were not the most undoubted proof
of a capacity for government.

THERE

THERvE were, nevertheless, defeEts in his BooK XI.

political character which must considerably abate ""'
the admiration due to his extraordinary tak Ets. '558
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for a. opinion
prevalent in his own age, that ' , ad fornied
the chimerical project of efhlbiiihing an uni-
versal monarchy in Eurcpe, it is certain that his
desire of being diftirguiflhed as a conqueror in-
volved him in continual wars, which exhausted
and oppressed his fubjecs, and left him little
leisure for giving attention to the interior police
and improvement of his kingdoms, the great
objets of every Prince who rrkes the happiness
of his people the end of his government. Charles,
at a very early period of life, having added
the Imperial crowt to the kingdoms of Spain,
and to the hereditary dominions of the houses
of Aufiria and Burgundy, this opened to him
such a vast field of enterprize, and engaged
him in schemes so complicated as well as ardu.-
oils, that feeling his power to be.unequal to the
execution of there, he had often recourse to low
artifices unbecoming his superior talents, and
Sometimes ventured on such deviations from in-
tegrity as were dishonourable in a great Prince.
His insidious and fraudulent policy appeared
more conspicuous, and was rendered more odi-
ous, by a coniparifon with the open and unde-
signing character of his contemporaries Francis I.
and Henry VIII. This difference, though occa-
sioned chiefly by the diversity of their tempers,
mufl be ascribed, in some degree, to such an op-
position in the principles of their political con-
duct as affords some excuse for this defet in
Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve as a
justification of it. Francis and Henry feidoni
acted but from the impulle of their pafiions, and
rushed headlong towards the object in view.
Charles's measures being the rfiiult ol cool

D d 4 reflection,

BOOK XII. reflection, were diipofed into a regular fyfiem,
.'. ,,and carried on upon a concerted plan. Persons

58- who at in the former manner naturally pursue

the end in view without assuming any difgiiife,
or displaying much address. Such as hold the
latter course are apt, in forming as well as in
executing their designs, to employ such re-
finements, as always lead to artifice in condud
and often degenerate into deceit.

THE circumstances transmitted to us, with

respect to Charles's private deportment and
character, are fewer and less interesting, than
might have been expected, from the great num.
ber of authors who have undertaken to write
an account of his life. These are not the object
of this history, which aims at representing the
transactions of the reign of Charles V. not at
dilineating his private virtues or defecs.

Conference MEANW H ILE the plenipotentiaries of France,
p,°c'to Spain and England continued their conferences

at Cercamp; and though each of them, with
the usual art of negotiators, made at first very
high demands in name of their refpetive courts,
yet as they were all equally desirous of peace,
they would have conrented reciprocally to such
abatements and reftritions of their claims as
nuft have removed every obstacle to an accom-
modation. The death of Charles V. was a new
motive with Philip to harfen the conclusion of a
treaty, as it increased his impatience for return-
ing into Spain, where there was pow no person
greater or more illufirious than himself. But in
spite of the concurring wishes of all the parties
jnterefled, an event happened which occasioned
an unavoidable delay in their negotiations.
About a month after the opening of the confe-
rences at Cercamp, Mary of England ended

hes

her short and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth BooK XlT.
her sifter was immediately proclaimed Q.!een `w-''
by the English with univerfaljoy. As the powers No'5.58
of the English plenipotentiaries expired on the Death of
death of their mistress, they could not proceed YEngland.
until they received a commiflion and inftrudions
from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's eleva- renry and
tion to the throne with equal solicitude. As Philipcourt

Elizabeth

during Mary's jealous administration, under the her fuccef-
most difficult clrcumfiances, and in a situation for
extremely delicate, iie had condu&ed herself
with prudence and address far exceeding her
years, they had conceived an high idea of her
abilities, and already formed expectations of a
reign very different from that of her sifter.
Equally sensible of the importance of gaining her
favour, both monarchs set themselves with emu-
lation to court it, and employed every art in
order to insinuate them selves into her confidence.
Each of them had something meritorious, with
regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his own behalf.
Henry had offered her a retreat in his dominions,
if the dread of her sifter's violence should force
her to fly for safety out of England. Philip had,
by his powerful intercession, prevented Mary from
proceeding to the most fatal extremities against
her. Each of them endeavoured now, to avail
himself of the circumstances in his favour. Henry
wrote to Elizabeth soon after her acceflion
with the warmest exprellions of regard and
friendship. H- represented the war which had
unhappily been kindled between their kingdoms,
not as a national quarrel, but as the effeds of
Mary's blind partiality to her husband and fond
compliance with all his wishes. He entreated
hier to disengage herself from an alliance
yhich had proved so unfortunate to England,

and

Boo XII. and to content to a separate peace with him,
'"T~- without mingling her interest with those of

58 Spain, from which they ought now to be al-

together disjoined. Philip, on the other hand,
unwilling to lose his connection with England,
the importance of which during a rupture with
France he had so recently experienced, not only
vied with Henry in declarations of esteem for
Elizabeth, and in profeflions of his resolution to
cultivate the ftrideft amity with her, but in
order to confirm and perpetuate their union, he
offered himself to her in marriage, and under-
took to procure a difpentation from the Pope to
that effect.

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two
dc'iberati- Monarchs attentively, and with that provident
ing her con. discernment of her true interest which was con-
dua. fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave some

encouragement to Henry's overture of a separate
negotiation, because it opened a channel of
correspondence with France. which the might
find to be of great advantage, if Philip should
not discover sufficient zeal and solicitude for fecu-
ring to her proper terms in the joint treaty. But
lhe ventured on this with the utmost reserve and
caution, that she might not alarm Philip's furpi
cious temper, and lose an ally in attempting to
gain an enemy*. Henry himself, by an unpar-
donable act of indiscretion, prevented her from
carrying her intercourse with him to such a length
as might have offended or alienated Philip. At
the very time he was courting Elizabeth's friend-
ship with the greatelt afliduity, he yielded with
an inconliderate facility to the solicitations of
the Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his dagllh-

* Sorbes, i. p. 4.

ter-

ter-in-law the Queen of Scots to assume the ti- Ioed XlI.
tie and arms of England. This ill-timed pre- '-"%'
tension, the source of many calamities to the .1t'S
unfortunate Queen of Scots, extinguished at
once all the confidence that might have grown
between Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its
place distrust, resentment and antipathy. Eliza-
beth found that she muff unite her interests
closely with Philip's, and expet peace only
from negotiations carried on in conjultion
with him t.

As she had granted a commiflion, immediate- She im-

ly after her accelfron, to the fame slenipotenti- powers her
aries whom her sifter had employed, the now to treat of
inftrtued them to ad in every point in concert p"ce.
with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take
no ftep until they had previously consulted with
them §. But tho' she deemed it prudent to as-
fume this appearance of confidence in the Spa-
nilh Monarch, she knew precisely how far to
carry it; and discovered no inclination to accept
of that extraordinary proposal of marriage which
Philip had made to her. The English had ex-
pressed so openly the detestation of her sifter's
choice of him, that it would have been highly
imprudent to have exasperated them by renew-
ing that odious alliance. She was too well ac-
quainted with Philip's harsh imperious temper,
to think of him for a husband. Nor could she
admit a dispensation from the Pope to be fuffi-
cient tb authorize her marrying him, without
condemning her father's divorce from Catherine
ps Aragon, and acknowledging of confluence
that her mother's marriage was null and het

t Strype's Annals of the Reformation, i. i t. Carte's Hitt.
of Engl. vol. iii. p. 375. § Forbes's full view, i. i. 37, 4.

own

Boo, XII. own birth illegitimate. But tho' she determined
, 8-v. not to yield to Philip's addresses, the situation

s55s' of her affairs rendered it dangerous to rejec

them; she returned her answer, therefore, in
terms which were evasive, but so tempered with
refpee, that, tho' they gave him no reason to be
secure of success, they did not altogether extin-
.guifh his hopes.

Negotiati- BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence
ons at Cha- with which she concealed her sentiments and in-
teau-Cam-
brenfi. tensions concerning religion, for some time after

her acceflion, she so far gained upon Philip, that
he warmly elpoused her interest in the confe,

1 59. rences which were renewed at Cercamp, and after-
February 6. wards removed to Chateau-Cambrefis. A de-

finitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims
and pretensions of so many Princes, required
the examination of such a variety of intricate
points, and led to such infinite and minute de-
tails, as drew out the negotiations to a great
length. But the Constable Montmorency ex-
erted himself with such indefatigable zeal and
indufiry, repairing alternately to the courts of
Paris and Brussels, in order to obviate or re-
move every difficulty, that all points in dispute
were adjusted, at length, in flich a manner, as to
give entire fatisfaCion, in every particular, to
Henry and Philip; and the last hand was ready
to be put to the treaty between them.

Difficulties THE claims of England remained as the on,
with r"gard ly obfacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded
to the
claims of the reflitution of CaJais, in the most perempto-
Englund. ry tone, as an efential condition of her content-

ing to peace; Henry refused to give up that
important conquest ; and both feerned to have
taken their resolution with unalterable firmness.
Philip warmly Supported Elizabeth's pretensions

to

to Calais, not merely from a principle of equi- BooK XII.
ty towards the Englim nation, that he might .'
appear to have contributed to their recovering 1559.
what they had loft by espousing his cause; nor
solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this
manifestation of zeal for her interest; but in
order to render France less formidable, by fe-
curing to her ancient enemy this easy access in-
to the heart of the kingdom. The earnestness/
however, with which he seconded the arguments
of the English plenipotentiaries, soon began to
relax. During the course of the negotiation,
Elizabeth, who now felt herself firmly feated on
the throne, began to take such open and vigo-
rous measures not only for overturning all that
her sifter had done in favour of popery, but
for establishing the protestant church on a firm
foundation, as convinced Philip that his hopes of
an union with her had been from the beginning
vain, and were now desperate. From that pe-
riod, his interpositions in her favour became
more cold and formal, flowing merely from re-
gard to decorum, or from the consideration of
remote political interests. Elizabeth, having
reason to expet filch an alteration in his con-
duEt, quickly perceived it. But as nothing
would have been of greater detriment to her peo-
ple, or more inconfilent with her schemes of
domeftick administration, than the continuance
of a war with France, the saw the neceflity of
submitting to such conditions as the situation of
her affairs imposed, and that she must lay her
account with being deserted by an ally who was
now united to her by a very feeble tie, if she
did not speedily reduce her demands to what
was moderate and attainable. She accordingly
gave new inftrudions to her ambafladors; and
Philip's plenipotentiaries acting as mediators be-
tween the French and them *, an expedient was

* Forbe, i. S9.

fallen

PooKXII. fallen on, which jutified, in Come degree, Eli-
-.*w..1 zabeth's departing from the rigour of her firif
'559- demand with regard to Calais. All lesser arti-

cles were fettled without much difcuflion or de-
lay. Philip, that he might not appear to have
abandoned the English, insisted that the treaty
between Henry and Elizabeth should be con-
cluded in form, before that between the French
monarch and him. The one was signed on the
second day of April, the other on the day fol-
lowing.

Articles of THE treaty of peace between France and
peace be- England contained no articles of real impor-
France and tance, but that which refpeded Calais. It was
EDgland, stipulated that the King of France should retain

poieflion of that town, with all its dependen-
cies, during eight years ; that, at the expirati-
on of that term, .he should reltore it to Eng-
land; that in cafe of non-performance, he
should forfeit five hundred thousand crowns,
for the payment of which urnum, seven or eight
wealthy merchants, who were not his fubjets,
should grant security; that five persons of dif-
tindion lhould be given as hostages till that
security were provided ; that, although the for-
feit of five hundred thousand crowns should be
paid, the right of England to Calais should till
remain entire, in the fame manner as if the
term of eight years were expired; that the
King and Queen of Scotland should be included
in the treaty; that if they, or the French King,
should violate the peace by any hostile action,
Henry should be obliged instantly to restore
Calais; that on the other hand, if any breach
of the treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then
Henry and the King and Queen of Scots were
absolved from all the engagements which they
had come under by this treaty.

NOTWITH-
426

NOTWITHSTANPING the studied attention BK XII.

with which so many precautions were taken, it '
is evident that Henry did not intend the refti- The5viws
tution of Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth of both par-
expeded it. It was hardly poflible that she tfpethr't
could maintain, during the course of eight years, there.
such perfect concord both with France and Scot-
land, as not to afford Henry some pretext for
alledging that the had violated the treaty. But
even if that term lhould elapse without any
ground for complaint, Henry might then choose
to pay the fum fipulated, and Elizabeth had no
method of aflerting her right but by force of
arms. However, by throwing the articles in
the treaty with regard to Calais into this form,
Elizabeth satisfied her filbjeits of every denomi-
nation; she gave men of discernment a striking
proof of her address, in palliating what (he could
not prevent; and amused the multitude, to
whom the final surrender of a place of such im-
portance would havp appeared altogether infa-
mous, with the profpet of recovering in a short
time that favourite poffemfion.

THE expedient which Montmorency employ- An expeli-

ed, in order to facilitate the conclusion of ent which
peace between France and Spain, was the nego- peace be-
tiating two treaties of marriage, one between rWnce en
Elizabeth, Henry's eldeftdaughter, and Philip, Spain.
who supplanted his. son, the unfortunate Don
Carlos, to whom that Princess had been pro-
mifed in the former conferences at Cercamp,
the other between Margaret, Henry's only fitter,
and the duke of Savoy. For feeble as the
ties of blood often are among Princes, or how
little soever they may regard them when pushed
on to at by motives of ambition, tlley alline
on other occasions the appearnce of being tl
far influenced by these domeflick affcetions, as
to employ them to justify measures and conce:-

sions

fIooK XII. sions which they find to be neceflary, but know
'-v"v to be impolitic or dishonourable. Such was the

'559' use Henry made of the two marriages to which

he gave his consent. Having secured an honour-
able eflablifhment for his sifter and his daughter,
he, in consideration of there, granted terms both
to Philip and the duke of Savoy, of which he
would not, on any other account, have ventured
to approve.

The terms THE principal articles in the treaty between
ofpicifica- France and Spain were, That a sincere and pert-

petual amity should be established between the
two crowns and their refpetive allies;. that the
two monarchs should labour in concert to pro-
cure the convocation of a general council, in
order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
fore unity and concord to the Christian church;
that all conquests made by either party, on this
fide of the Alps, since the commencement of the
war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one,
should be mutually restored; that the dutchy
of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont, the
country of Brefle, and all the other territories
formerly fubjeft to the dukes of Savoy, should
be restored to Emanuel Philibert, immediately
after the celebration of his marriage with Margaret
of France, the towns of Turin, Qgiers, Pignerol,
Chivaz and Villanova excepted, of which
Henry should keep poffeflion until his claims
on that Prince, in right of his grand-mother,
should be heard and decided in course of law;
that as long as Henry retained these places in
his hands, Philip ihould be at liberty to keep
garrisons in the towns of Vercelli and Asti; that
the French King should immediately evacuate
all the places which he held in Tuscany and the
Sienefe, and renounce all future pretensions to
them; that he should restore the Marquisate of
Montserrat to the duke of Mantua ; that he should

receive

receive the Genoese into favour, and give up to BooK XIT.
them the towns which he had conquered in the "'
island of Corsica; that none of the Princes or
flates, to whom these cessions were made, fhdbld
call their fubjecs to account for any part of
their conduct while under the dominion of their
enemies, but should bury all past tranadtions .
in oblivion. The Pope, the Emperor, the Kings
of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the
King and Queen of Scots, and almost every
Prince and slate in Christendom, were compre-
hended in this pacification as the allies either of
Henry or of Philip *.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re- Which
established in Europe. All the causes of discord eflablifhe.,

tranquillity

which had so long embroiled the powerful mo- in Europe.
narchs of France and Spain, which had tranf-
mitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles
to Philip, and from Francis to Henry, seemed
to be wholly removed, or finally terminated:
The French alone complained of the unequal
conditions of a treaty, into which an ambitious
minister, in order to recover his liberty, and an
artful mistress, that file might gratify her resent-
ment, had seduced their too easy monarch.
They exclaimed loudly against the folly of
giving up to the enemies of France, an hundred
and eighty-nine fortified places, in the Low-
Countries or in Italy, in return for the three
insignificant towns of St. Q.intin, Ham and
Catelet.- They confidered it as an indelible itain
upon the glory of the nation, to renounce in one
day territories so extensive, and so capable of
being defended, that the enemy could not have
hoped to wrest them out of their hands, after
many years of victory and success.

r Recueil des Traitez, t. ii. 287.
VOL. III.

BUT
E e

BooK XII. B T Henry, without regarding the sentiments
'"V'. of his people, or being moved by the remon-
TheSpea frances of his council, ratified the treaty, and
between executed with great fidelity whatever he had
France and
Spain. flipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy re-

paired with a numerous retinue to Paris, in
order to celebrate his marriage with Henry's
filter. The duke of Alva was Cent to the fame
capital, at the head of a splendid embassy, to
espouse Elizabeth in the name of his master.
They were received with extraordinary magni-

Derth of ficence by the French court. Amidst the re-
Hienry.
July io. joicings and festivities on that occasion, Henry's

days were cut short by a singular and tragical
accident. His son, Francis 11. a Prince under
age, of a feeble conflitution, and of a mind frill
Aug. is. weaker, succeeded him. Soon after, Paul ended

his violent and imperious Pontificate, at enmity
with all the world, and disgusted even with his
own nephews. They, persecuted by Philip,
and deserted by the succeeding Pope, whom
they had raied by their influence to the Papal
throne, were condemned to the punishment
which their crimes and ambition had merited,
and their death was as infamous, as their lives
had been criminal. Thus all the personages,
who had long sustained the principal characters
on the great theatre of Europe, disappeared
about the fame time. A more known period
of history opens at this aera; other ators ap-
pear on the flage, with different views and
different passions; new contests arose, and new
schemes of ambition occupied and disquieted
mankind.

A general UPON reviewing the tranfations of any active
e hols period, in the history of civilized nations, the
period. changes which are accomplished appear wonder-

fully disproportioned to the efforts which llave
been exerted. Conquests are never very ex-
tensive or rapid, but among nations, whole pro-
grefs in improvement is extremely unequal.

W hen

When Alexander the Great, at the head of a BooK XrI
gallant people, of simple manners, and formed
to war by admirable military infitutionsp in-
vaded a state funk in luxury, and enervated by
excessive refinement; when Genchitcan and
Tamerlane, with their armies of hardy barba-
-ians, poured in upon nations, enfeebled by the
climate in which they lived, or by the arts and
commerce which they cultivated, they, like a
torrent, swept every thing before them, fubdu-
ing kingdoms and provinces in as Ihort space
of time, as was requisite to march through
them. But when nations are in a similar slate,
and keep peace with each other in their advances /z-' -
towards refinement, they are not exposed to
the calamity of sudden conquest. Their acqui-
fitions of knowledge, their progress in the art
of war, their political sagacity and address, are
nearly equal. The fate of fates in this fitua-
tion, depends not on a single battle. Their in-
ternal resources are many and various. Nor are
they themselves alone interefled in their own
safety, or active in their own defence. Other
flates interpose, and balance any temporary ad-
vantage which either party may have acquired.
After the fiercest and moil lengthened conreft,
all the rival nations are exhausted, none are
conquered. At length a peace is concluded,
which re-instates each in poffeflioil of almost the
fame power, and the fame territories.

SUCH was the state of Europe during the reign The nationl
of Charles V. No Prince was so much fiperior "' ElurolLe

1

. . . V in a ( l1ilar

to the reft in power, as to render his efforts ir- (atedlling
resistible, and his conquests easy. No nation ' Siteynth"
had made progress in improvement so far be-
yond its neigbours, as to have acquired a very
manifelt pre-emiience. Each flare derived fbme
advantage, or was subjeCt to rome inconveni-
ence, from its situation or its climate; each
was diftinguithed by something peculiar in the

E e 2 genius

BOOK XII. genius of its people, or the constitution of its go-

- vernment. But the advantages possessed by one,

were counterballanced by circumstances favour-
able to others; and this prevented any from at-
taining such superiority as might have been fatal
to all. The nations of Europe in that age, as
in the present, were like one great family; there
were some features common to all, which fixed
a resemblance; there were certain peculiarities
conspicuous in each, which marked a distinction.
But there was not among them that wide diver-
fity of characer and of genius which, in almost
every period of history, hath exalted the Euro-
peans above the inhabitants of the other quarters
of the globe, and seems to have destined the one
to rule, and the other to obey.

A remaika- BUT though the near resemblance and equa-
ble change lity in improvement among the different nations
in the slate
of Europe, of Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V.
during the from being distinguished by such sudden and
reign of
Charles V. extensive conquefis, as occur in rome other pe-

riods of history, yet, during the course of his
administration, all the considerable states in
Europe suffered a remarkable change in their
political situation, and felt the influence of
events, which have not hitherto spent their force,
but still continue to operate in a greater or in a
less degree. It was during his reign, and in
consequence of the perpetual efforts to which his
enterprizing ambition rouzed them, that the
different kingdoms of Europe acquired internal
vigour, that they discerned the resources of
which they were possessed, that they came both
to feel their own strength, and to know how to
render it formidable to others. It was during
his reign, too, that the different kingdoms ot
Europe, formerly single and disjoined, became
so thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately
connected with each other, as to form one great

political

political system, in which each took a station, BOOK XII.
wherein it has remained since that time with less ""
variation, than could have been expected after
the events of two active centfries.

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of The pro-

the house of Austria, were not only greater ho''sfor of
than those of any other power, but more dif- Austria.
cernible and conspicuous. I have already enu-
merated the vast territories which descended to
Charles from his Austrian, Burgundian, and
Spanish ancestors*. To there he himself added
the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had been
too little, the bounds of the universe were ex-
tended, and a new world fubjeded to his com-
mand. Upon his resignation, the Burgundian
provinces, and the Spanish kingdoms with their
dependencies, both in the old and new worlds,
devolved to Philip. But Charles transmitted
his dominions to his son, in a condition very
different from that in which he had received
them. They were augmented by the accession
of new provinces; they were habituated to obey
an administration which was no less vigorous
than steady; they were accustomed to expensive
and persevering efforts, which, though necef-
fary in the contests between civilized nations,
had b'en little known in Europe before the fix-
teenth century. The provinces of Friesland,
Utrecht and OveryfTel, which he acquired by
purchase from their former proprietors, and the
dutchy of Gelders, of which he made himself
master, partly by force of arms, and partly by
the arts of negotiation, were additions of great
value to his Burgundian dominions. Ferdinand
and Isabella had tranfinitted to him all the pro-
vinces of Spain, from the bottom of the Py-
renees to the frontiers of Portugal; but as he

* Vol. ii. p. z.

E e 3 maintained

Boot XII. maintained a perpetual peace with that king-
V--v-m dom, amidst the various efforts of his enterpriz-

ing ambition, he made no acquisition of terri-
tory in that quarter.
Particularly CHARLES had gained, however, a vait ac-

"n Span. cession of power in this part of his dominions.

By this success in the war with the commons of
Caitile, he exalted the regal prerogative on the
ruins of the privileges of the people. Though
he allowed the name of the Cortes to remain,
and the formality of holding it to be continued,
he reduced its authority and jurisdiction to no-
thing, and modelled it in such a manner, that
it became rather ajunto of the servants of the
crown, than an assembly of the representatives
of the people. One member of the conftitu-
tion being thus lopped off, it was impoflible but
that the other mutt feel the stroke, and susser
by it. The suppression of the popular power
rendered the ariftocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the
age, or allured by the honours which they en-
joyed in a court, exhausted their fortunes in mi-
litary service, or in attending on the person of
their Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did
not observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain diltinc-
tion of being covered in pretence of their fove-
reign, stripped them by degrees of that real
power which they poffiefed while they formed
one body, and acted in concert with the people.
Charles's success in abolishing the privileges of
the commons, and in breaking the power of the
nobles of Castile, encouraged Philip to invade
the liberties of Aragon, which were flill more
extensive. The Castilians, accustomed to sub-
jeCtion themselves, aflifted in imposing the
yoke on their more happy and independant
neighbours. The will of the lovereign be-
came the supreme law in all the kingdoms of

Spain;

Spain; and Princes who were not checked in BOOK XII.
their plans by the jealousy of the people, nor
controuled in the executing them by the power
of the nobles, could both aim at great objects,
and call forth the whole strength of the monar-
chy in order to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal preroga- Also in o-

tive, rendered the monarchs of Spain masters at ,Europe.
home, he added new dignity and power to their
crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet possession of the kingdom
of Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped
by fraud, and held with difficulty. He
united the dutchy of Milan, one of the most
fertile and populous provinces in Italy, to the
Spanish crown; and left his successors, even
without taking their other territories into the
account, the most considerable Princes in that
country, which had been long the theatre of
contention to the great powers of Europe, and
in which they had struggled with emulation to
obtain the superiority. When the French, in
consequence of the treaty of Chateau-Cambrefis,
withdrew their forces out of Italy, and fnally
relinquished all their schemes of conquest on
that fide of the Alps, the Spanish dominions
there rose in importance, and enabled their
Kings, as long as the monarchy retained any
degree of vigour, to preserve the chief sway
in all the tranfadions of that country. But
whatever acceflion either of interior authority
or of foreign dominion Charles gained for the
monarchs of Spain in Europe, it was iiiconfi-
derable when compared with hlis acquisitions in
the new world. He added, there, not provinces,
but empires to his crown. He conquered terri-
tories of fuich immenle extent; he dilcovered lclit
inexhaustible veins of wealth, and opened liuch
boundless prospeCts of every kind, as must lhave
rouzed and called forth to ation his iicceflbr,

E e 4 til'

BooK XII. tho' his ambition had been much less ardent

'*- -- than Philip's, and muf have rendered him not

only enterprizing but formidable.

Progrefsof WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian fa-
the Germanmily rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the
branch of
the house younger, of which Ferdinand was the head,
ofAuftria. grew to be considerable in Germany. The an-

cient hereditary dominions of the house of Au-
firia in Germany, united to the kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had
acquired by marriage, formed a refpedable
power, and when the Imperial dignity was added
to there, Ferdinand poflefeed territories more
extensive than had belonged to any Prince,
Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head
of the Empire during several ages. Fortunate-
ly for Europe, the disgust which Philip conceiv-
ed, on account of Ferdinand's refuting to relin-
quith the Imperial crown in his favour, not
only prevented for Come time the separate mem-
bers of the house of Austria from afting in con-
cert, but occasioned a visible alienation and ri-
valfhip. By degrees, however, regard to the
interest of their family extinguished this impoli-
tic animosity. The confidence which was na-
tural returned; the aggrandizing of the houle
of Austria became the common object of all their
schemes; they gave and received assistance alter-
nately towards the execution of them; and
each derived consideration and importance fiom
the other's success. A family so great and so
aspiring became the general object of jealousy
and terror. All the power as well as policy of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order
to check and humble it. Nothing can give a
more striking idea of the ascendant which it had
acquired, and of the terror which it had inspired,
than that after its vigour was spent with extraor-
dinary exertions ot its strength, after Spain

was

was become only the shadow of a great name, BooK X11.
and its monarchs were funk into debility and V
dotage, the house of Austria still continued to
be formidable. The nations of Europe had so
often felt its fuperiour power, and had been so
constantly employed in guarding against it, that
the dread of it became a kind of political habit,
the influence of which remained when the causes,
which had formed it, ceased to exist.

WHILE the house of Austria went on with Acquisition

such success in enlarging its domions, France of thel.egs
made no considerable acquisition of new territory. during the
All its schemes of conquest in Italy had proved chigofV.
abortive; it had hitherto obtained no establish-
ment of consequence in the new world; and as-
ter the continued and vigorous efforts of four
fucceflive reigns, the confines of the kingdom
were much the fame as Louis XI. had left them.
But though France made not such large strides
towards dominion as the house of Austria, it
continued to advance by steps which were more
secure, because they were gradual and less ob-
served. The conquest of Calais put it out of
the power of the English to invade France but at
their utmost peril, and delivered the French
from the dread of their ancient enemies, who,
previous to that event, could at any time pene-
trate into the kingdom by that avenue, and
thereby retard or defeat the execution of their
best concerted enterprizes againll any foreign
power. The important acquisition of Metz co-
vered that part of their frontier which formerly
was most feeble, and lay most exposed to insult.
France, from the time of its obtaining there ad-
ditional securities against external invasion, muff
be deemed the most powerful kingdom in Europe,
and is more fortunately situated than any on the
continent either for conquests or defence. From
the confines of Artois to the bottom of the

Pyrenees,

BOOK XII. Pyrenees, and from the British channel to the
-^- frontiers of Savoy and the coast of the Medi-

terranean, its territories lay compat and unmin-
gled with those of any other power. Several of
the considerable provinces, which, by their hav-
ing been long subje&t to the great vassals of the
crown, who were often at variance or at war
with their master, had contraced a spirit of in-
dependence, were now accustomed to recognize
and to obey one sovereign. As they became
members of the fame monarchy, they afiumed
the Sentiments of that body into which they were
incorporated, and co-operated with zeal towards
promoting its interest and honour. The power
and influence wrested from the nobles were feiz-
ed by the crown. The people were not admit-
ted to ihare in these spoils; they gained no new
privilege; they acquired no additional weight in
the legislator. It was not for the fake of the
people, but in order to extend their own prero-
gative, that the monarchs of France had laboured
to humble their great vassals. Satisfied with
having brought them under entire fubjetion to
the crown, they discovered no solicitude to free
the people from their ancient dependance on the
nobles of whom they held.

l,,lablci A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus
fume an united at home and secure from abroad, was
higher Itati- entitled to form great designs, because he felt
oeapnowrs himself in a condition to execute them. The
of Euiope. foreign wars which had continued with little in-

terruption from the acceflon of Charles VIII.
had not only cherished and augmented the mar-
tial genius of the nation, but by inuring the
troops during the course of long service to the
fatigues of war, and accustoming them to obe-
dience, had added the force of discipline to
their natural order. A gallant and ative body
of nobles who confidered themselves as idle and

ufelels,

useless, unless when they were in the field; who BooK XII.
were scarce acquainted with any pastime or ex-
ercife but what was military; and who knew
no road to power, or fame, or wealth, blt war,
would not have suffered their sovereign to remain
long in inaction. The people, little acquainted
with the arts of peace, and always ready to take
arms at the command of their superiors, were
accustomed by the vail expence of long wars,
carried on in distant countries, to bear impofiti-
ons, which, how inconsiderable soever they may
seem if efiimated by the exorbitant rate of mo-
dern acions, appear immense when compared
with the fums levied in France, or in any other
country of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis
XI. As all the members of which the state was
compored were thus impatient for action, and ca-
pable of great efforts, the schemes and operations
of France must have been no less formidable to
Europe than those of Spain. The superior ad-
vantages of its situation, the contiguity and com-
paCtnefs of its territories, together with the pe-
culiar slate of its political constitution at that
juncture, must have rendered its enterprizes still
more alarming and more decisive. The King
poffefled fulch a degree of power as gave him
the entire command of his (ubjeds; the people
were firangers to those occupations and habits
of life which render men averse to war, or unfit
for it; and the nobles, tho' reduced to fubordi-
nation necessary in a regular government, till
retained the high undaunted spirit which was tl:e
effect of their ancient independence. Tile vigour
of the Feudal times remained, their anarchy was
at an end; and the Kings of France could avail
themselves of the martial ardour which that fin-
gular inflitution had kindled or kept alive,
without being exposed to any of the dangers or
inconveniencies which are inseparable from it
when in intire force.

A KINGDOM

BOOK XIT. A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps, ca-
c*C-" pable of greater military efforts, than at any
Circum- ,
stances other period in its progress. But how formid-
whichpre- able soever or fatal to the other nations of
vented the
immediate Europe the power of such a monarchy might
effeas of have been, the civil wars which broke out in
their power. France, saved them at that juncture from feel-

ing its effects. These wars, of which religion
was the pretext and ambition the cause; where-
in great abilities were displayed by the leaders
of the different factions, and little conduct or
firmness were manifetled by the crown under a
fucceflion of weak Princes, kept France occu-
pied and embroiled for half a century. During
these commotions, the internal strength of the
kingdom was much watled, and such a spirit of
anarchy was spread among the nobles, to whom
rebellion was familiar, and the restraint of laws
unknown, that a considerable interval became
requisite, not only for recruiting the internal
vigour of the nation, but for re-eflablifhing the
authority of the Prince; so that it was long be-
fore France could turn her whole attention to-
wards foreign transactions, or adt with her pro-
per force in foreign wars. It was long before
the rose to that ascendant in Europe, which the
has maintained since the adminifiration of Car-
dinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well
as extent of the kingdom, the nature of her
government, and the character of her people,
entitle her to maintain.

Progress of. WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew
England into power and consequence, England likewise
with relpea&
to its i.te made considerable progress towards regular
rior fate. government and interior strength. Henry VIII.

probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any conififent plan, of which his nature was
incapable, pursued the scheme of depressing

the
44o

the nobility, which the policy of his father BOOK XII.
Henry VII. had begun. The pride and caprice -
of his temper led him to employ chiefly new
men in the adminifiration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or leaf fcrupu-
lous; and he not only conferred on these such
plenitude of power, but exalted them to such
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and de-
graded the ancient nobility. By the alienation
or sale of the church lands, which were difli-
pated with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as
well as by the privilege granted by the ancient
landholders of felling their eflates, or disposing
of them by will, an immense property, for-
merly locked up, being brought into circula-
on, put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree
of vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and exceflive flow of wealth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain ;
a moderate acceflion in England to the film in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakened the
ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to use-
ful enterprize. !n France, what the nobles loft
the crown gained. In England, the commons
were gainers as well as the King. Power and
influence accompanied of course the property
which they acquired. They role to confidera-
tion among their fellow fubjeds; they began to
feel their own importance; and extending their
influence in the legislative body gradually, and
often when neither they themselves nor others
foresaw all the effect of their claims and pre-
tensions, they at last attained that high authority,
to which the British constitution is indebted for
the existence, and must owe the preservation of
its liberty. At the fame time that the Engli(h
constitution advanced towards perfection, fe-

veral

BOOK XII. A KINGDOM in such a slate is, perhaps, ca-
Cic4i pable of greater military efforts, than at any
lances other period in its progress. But how formid-
whichpre- able soever or fatal to the other nations of
vented the
imrediate Europe the power of such a monarchy might
cffeas of have been, the civil wars which broke out in
their power. France, saved them at that junture from feel-

ing its effedts. These wars, of which religion
was the pretext and ambition the cause; where-
in great abilities were displayed by the leaders
of the different factions, and little conduct or
firmness were manifefled by the crown under a
succession of weak Princes, kept France occu-
pied and embroiled for half a century. During
these commotions, the internal strength of the
kingdom was much wafted, and such a spirit of
anarchy was spread among the nobles, to whom
rebellion was familiar, and the refiraint of laws
unknown, that a considerable interval became
requisite, not only for recruiting the internal
vigour of the nation, but for re-effablifhing the
authority of the Prince; so that it was long be-
fore France could turn her whole attention to-
wards foreign tranfadions, or adt with her pro-
per force in foreign wars. It was long before
the rose to that ascendant in Europe, which she
has maintained since the adminifiration of Car-
dinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well
as extent of the kingdom, the nature of her
government, and the characer of her people,
entitle her to maintain.

Progress o. WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew
England into power and consequence, England likewise
with relpeet
to its int- made considerable progress towards regular
ior nate. government and interior strength. Henry VIII.

probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any consistent plan, of which his nature was
incapable, pursued the scheme of deprefling

the
44°

the nobility, which the policy of his father BooK XII.
Henry VII. had begun. The pride and caprice " '
of his temper led him to employ chiefly new
men in the adminiitration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or least fcrupu-
lous; and he not only conferred on these such
plenitude of power, but exalted them to such
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and de-
graded the ancient nobility. By the alienation
or sale of the church lands, which were difli-
pated with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as
well as by the privilege granted by the ancient
landholders of felling their estates, or disposing
of them by will, an immense property, for-
merly locked up, being brought into circula-
on, put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree
of vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and exceflive flow of wealth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain ;
a moderate accefion in England to the fium in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakened the
ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to use-
ful enterprize. !n France, what the nobles loft
the crown gained. In England, the commons
were gainers as well as the King. Power and
influence accompanied of course the property
which they acquired. They role to confidera-
tion among their fellow subje&s; they began to
feel their own importance; and extending their
influence in the legislative body gradually, and
often when neither they themselves nor others
foresaw all the effect of their claims and pre-
tensions, they at last attained that high authority,
to which the British confitution is indebted for
the existence, and must owe the preservation of
its liberty. At the fame time that the Engli(h
constitution advanced towards perfection, fe-

veral

BOOK XII. veral inltances brought on a change in the ancient

' fyffem with refpet to foreign powers, and intro-
duced another more beneficial to the nation. By
disclaiming the supremacy and jurifdi&ion of
the Papal See, considerable fums were saved to
the nation, of which it had been annually drain-
ed, by remittances to Rome for dispensations and
indulgences, or in order to defray the expence
of pilgrimages into foreign countries *, or by
payment of annates, first fruits, and a thousand
other taxes which that artful and rapacious court
levied on the credulity of mankind. The idea
of a jurifdition different from the civil power,
and claiming not only to be independent but
superior to it, a wild solecism in government,
apt not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending direcly to disturb society, was
finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more refpeable, when no rank
or character exempted any person from being
amenable to the fame courts, from being tried
by the fame judges, and from being acquitted or
condemned by the fame laws.

with re- BY the loss of Calais the English were exclu-
fpe& to the
affairs of ded from the continent. All schemes for invading
theconti- France became of course as chimerical as they

had formerly been pernicious. The views of the
English were confined, first by neceflity, and
afterwards from choice, within their own island.
That rage for conquest which had possessed
the nation during many centuries, and waft-
ed its firength in perpetual and fruitless wars,

The loss which the nation sustained by mos of theie

articles is obvious, and must have been great. Even that
by pilgrimages was not inconsiderable. In the year 1428,
license was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit
the Ihrine of St. James of Compoftella in Spain. Rymer,
vol. x. p. In 1434, the number of pilgrims to the fame
place was 2460. Ibid. p. . In 1445, they were 20oo. vol.
xi. p.

at

at length ceased. Those acive spirits which BooK XII.
had known and followed no profession but war,
fought for occupation in the arts of peace, and
their country benefited as much by the one as
it had suffered by the other. The nation, exhaust-
ed by frequent expeditions to the continent,
recruited, and acquired new firength; and when
rouzed by any extraordinary exigency to take
part in foreign operations, the vigour of its
efforts were proportionally great, because they
were only occasional and of a short continuance.

THE fame principle which had led England With ref-

to adopt this new system with regard to the tSand.t
powers on the continent occasioned a change in
its plan of conduct with refpet to Scotland, the
only foreign state, with which, on account of
its situation in the fame island, the English had
such a close connection as demanded their perpe-
tual attention. Instead of prosecuting the anci-
ent scheme of conquering that kingdom, which
the nature of the country, defended by a brave
and hardy people, rendered dangerous if not
impracticable; it appeared more eligible to en-
deavour at obtaining such influence in Scotland
as might exempt England from any danger or
disquiet from that quarter. The national pover-
ty of the Scots, together with the violence and
animosity of their factions, rendered the execu-
tion of this plan easy to a people far superior to
them in wealth. Their popular leaders were
gained the ministers and favourites of the crown
were corrupted; and such abfblute direction of
their councils acquired, as rendered the opera-
tions of the one kingdom dependant in a great
measure on the sovereign of the other. Such per-
fedt external security added to the interior ad-
vantages which England now poilelled, mufll oon

have

Boox XII. have raised it to new consideration and impor4

tance; the long reign of Elizabeth, equally
conspicuous for wisdom, for steadiness, and for
vigour, accelerated its progress, and carried it
with greater rapidity towards that elevated fRa-
tion which it hath since held among the powers
of Europe.

Changes in DURING the period in which the political state
the political of the great kingdoms underwent such changes,
Rate of the
secondary revolutions of considerable importance happened
powers in in that of the secondary or inferior powers.
Europe. Those in the Papal court are most obvious, and

of more extensive consequence.

The mod IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned the
confideable rife of that fpiritualjurifdiftion which the Popes
of the fix- claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have traced
teenth cen- the progress of that authority which they possess
tury in the
court of as temporal Princes *. There was nothing pre-
Rome. vious to the reign of Charles V. that tended to

circumscribe or to moderate their authority, but
science and philosophy, which began to revive
and to be cultivated. The progress of these,
however, was flill inconsiderable; they always
operate slowly; and it is long before their influ-
ence reaches the people, or can produce any fen-
fible effect upon them. They may perhaps gra-
dually, and in a long course of years, undermine
and shake an established system of false religion,
but there is no instance of their having overturn-
ed one. The battery is too feeble to demolish
those fabricks which superstition raises on deep
foundations, and can strengthen with the roft
consummate art.

* Vol. . p. 124.

LUTHER

LUTHER had attacked the papal supremacy BooK xlI

with other weapons, and with an impetuosity more Th".
formidable. The time and manner of his at- revolt "
tack concurted with a multitude of circumstances, gains the

doctrines of

which have been explained, in giving him imme- the church
diate success. The charm which had bound man-. 'fdRthm
kind for so many ages was broken at once. The power of
human mind, which had continued long as tamethc Pop.
and passive, as if it had been formed to believe
whatever was taught, and to bear whatever was
imposed, routed of a sudden and became inqui-
fitive, mutinous, and disdainful of the yoke to
which it had hitherto submitted. That wonder-
ful ferment and agitation of mind, which, at this
distance of time, appears unaccountable or is con-
demned as extravagant, was so general, that it
must have been excited by causes which were
natural and of powerful efficacy. The kingdoms
of Denmark, Sweden, England and Scotland,
and almost one half of Germany threw off their
allegiance to the Pope, abolished his jurifdi6ion
within their territories, and gave the fandion of
law to modes of discipline and systems of doctrine
which were not only independent of his power,
but hostile to it. Nor was this spirit of innova-
tion confined to those countries which openly re-
volted from the Pope; it spread through all Eu-
rope, and broke out in every part of it with va-
rious degrees of violence. It penetrated early into
France and made progress apace. The number
of converts to the opinions of the Reformers was
so great, their zeal so enterprizing, and the abi-
lities of their leaders so distinguished, that they
soon ventured to contend for filperiority with the
ef'ablifhed church, and were Sometimes on the
point of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Ger-
many, which continued to acknowledge the Pa-
pal supremacy, as well as in the Low-Countries,
the Protestant doctrines were secretly taught, and

VOL. III. F f had

BOOK XIL had gained so many proselytes, that they were ripe

,'-~
d for revolt, and were teftrained tierely by the

dread of their rulers from imitating the example
of their neighbours, and- alfiting their indepen-
dance. Even in Spain and in Italy, fymptorns
of the fame disposition to (hake off the yoke ap-
peared. The pretensions of the Pope to infalli-
ble knowledge and supreme power were treated
by many persons of eminent learning and abili-
ties with such scorn, or impugned with such ve-
hemence, that the most vigilant attention of the
civil magifirate, the highest frains of pontifical
authority, and all the rigour of the inquisitorial
jurifdidion were requisite to check and extin-
guilh it.

Thisrbnrd TErt defectionof to many opulent and powerful
ged the ex- kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal blow to
tent of the.
Pope' do. its grandeur and power. It abridged the dominions
onlls of the Popes in extent, it diminished their reve-

nues, and left them fewer rewards to bestow on the
ecclefiafticks of various denominations, attached
to them by vows of obedience as well as by ties of
interef, and whom they employed as instruments
to establish or support their usurpations in every
part of Europe. The countries too which now
disclaimed their authority, were thole which for-
merly had been most devoted to it. The empire
of superstition differs from every other species of
dominion; its power is often greatest, and most
implicitly obeyed in the provinces most remote
from the feat of government; while such as are
situated nearer to that are more apt to discern the
artifices by which it is upheld, or the impostures
on which it is founded. The personal frailties or
vices of the Popes, the errors as well as corruption
of their administration, the ambition, venality and
deceit which reigned in their court, fell immedi-
ately under the observation of the Italians, and

could

could not fail of diminishing that refped which BOOK XlI.
begets fubmiflion. But in Germany, England, 't '
and the more remote countries, these were either
altogether unknown, or being only known by re-
port, made a flighter impreflion. Theirveneration
for the Papal dignity increased with their distance
from Rome; and that, added to their gross igno-
rance, rendered them equally credulous and paflive.
In tracing the progress of the Papal domination,
the boldefft and most successful instances of en-
croachment are to be found in Germany and o-
ther countries distant from Italy. In there its
impositions were heaviest, and its exaEions the
morl rapacious; so that in estimating the dimi-
nution of power which the court of Rome susser-
ed in confequenc: of the Reformation, not only
the number but the character of the people who
revolted, not only the great extent of territory,
but the extraordinary obsequiousness of the fubjeats
which it loft, must be taken into the account.

NOR was it only by this defection of so many nd obliged

kingdoms and flates which it occasioned, that the change the
Reformation contributed todiminifh the power of fpiritoftheir
the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them to adopt a government.
different fyflem of condud towards the nations
which continued to recognize theirjurifditlion, and
to govern them by new maxims and with a milder
spirit. The Reformation taught them, by a fatal
example, what they seem not before to have appre-
hended, that the credulity and patience of man-
kiid might be overburdened and exhausted. They
became afraid of venturing on any such exertion
of tieir authority as might alarm or exasperate
their fubjeds, and excite them to a new revolt.
They saw a rival church ellablifhed in many
countries of Europe, the members of which were
on the watch to obefrve any errors in their admini-

F f z firation,

BOOK XII. ftration, and eager to expose them. They were

LYY ^ sensible that the opinions adverse to their power

and usurpations were not confined to their enemies
alone, but had spread even among the people who
till adhered to them. Upon all these accounts, it
was no longer poflible to lead and to govern their
flock in the fame manner as in those dark and
quiet ages, when faith was implicit, when fibmif-
sion was unreserved, and all tamely followed and
obeyed the voice of their shepherd. From the
ara of the Reformation, the Popes have ruled ra-
ther by address and management than by authority.
The flile of their decrees is the fame, but the es-
fedt of them is very different. Those Bulls and
Interdicts which, before the Reformation, made
the greatest Princes tremble, have since that period
been disregarded or despised by the molt inconfi-
derable. Those bold decisions and ads ofjurif-
dietion which, during many ages, not only passed
uncenfured, but were revered as the awards of a
sacred tribunal, would, since Luther's appearance,
be treated by one part of Europe as the effed of
folly or arrogance, and be detested by the other
as impious and unjust. The Popes, in their ad-
ministration, have been obliged not only to accom-
modate themselves to the notions of their adhe-
rents, but to pay some regard to the prejudices
of their enemies. They seldom venture to claim
new powers, or even to insist obstinately on their
ancient prerogatives, left they should irritate the
former; they carefully avoid every measure that
may either excite the indignation or draw on them
the derision of the latter. The policy of the court
of Rome has become as cautious, circumfped,
and timid, as it was once adventurous and vio-
lent; and though their pretensions to infallibility,
on which all their authority is founded, does not al-
low them to renounce anyjurifdiction which they

have

have at any time claimed or exercised, they find BooK Xal.
it expedient to susser many of their prerogatives a'
to lie dormant, and not to expose themselves by
ill-timed attempts towards reviving there, to the
rifque of loling that remainder of power which
they still enjoy. Before the sixteenth century,
the Popes were the movers and directors in every
considerable enterprize; they were at the head
of every great alliance; and being confidered as
arbiters of the affairs of Christendom, the court
of Rome was the centre of political negotiation
and intrigue. From that time, the greatest ope-
rations in Europe have been carried on indepen-
dant of them; they have funk almost to a level
with the other petty Princes of Italy; they con-
tinue to daim, though they dare not exercise,
the fame spiritual jurifdition, but scarce retain
,any shadow of the temporal power which they
anciently poflefied.

B.UT how fatal soever the Reformation may The Refor-

have been to the power of the Popes, it contri- trib'edto
buted to improve the church of Rome both in improve the
science and in morals. The desire of equalling hurh both
the Reformersin rhofe talents which had procured and morals.
them refpeEt; the neceflity of acquiring the know-
ledge requisite for defending their own tenets, or
refuting the arguments of their opponents; toge-
ther with the emulation natural between two ri-
val churches, engaged the Roman Catholic cler-
gy to apply themselves to the fludy ofufeful fci-
ence, which they cultivated with such afliduity
and success, that they have gradually become as
eminent in literature, as they were in some periods
infamous for ignorance. The fame principle oc-
cafioned a change no left considerable in the man-
ners of the clergy of the Romish church. Various
causes which have formerly been enumerated,
had concurred in introducing great irregularity,

F f 3 and

BOOK XII. and even dissolution of manners among the Po-
<-^- pish clergy. Luther and his adherents began their

attack on the church with such vehement invec-
tives agai.ift there, that in order to remove the
scandal, and silence their declamations, greater
decency of conduct became neceflsary. TheRe-
'formers themselves were so eminent not only for
the purity but even austerity of their manners,
and had acquired such reputation among the peo-
ple on that account, that the Roman Catholick
Clergy must have soon loft all credit, if they had
not endeavoured to conform in some measure to
their standard. They knew that all their aCtions
fell under the revere infpedion of the Protestants,
whom enmity and emulation prompted to observe
every vice, or even impropriety in their condut;
to censure them without indulgence, and to ex-
pose them without mercy. This rendered them,
of course, not only cautious to avoid such enor-
mities as might give f:ffence, but studious to ac-
quire the virtues that might merit praise. In
Spain and Portugal, where the tyrannical jurif-
dietion of the inquisition crushed the Protestant
faith as soon as it appeared, the spirit of Popery
continues invariable; lcience has made small pro-
grefs, and the character of ecclesiastics has un-
dergone little change. But in those countries
where the members of the two churches have
mingled freely with each other, or have carried
on any considerable intercourse, either commer-
cial or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the
ideas as well as in the morals of the Popish eccle-
fiaftics, is manifcft. In France, the manners of
the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become
decent and exemplary in an high degree. Many
of them have been distinguished for all the acccni-
plifhments and virtues which can adorn their pro-
fefllon i and differ greatly from their predecessors

before

before the Reformation, both in their maxims BOOK XII.
and in their conduct.

NOR has the influence of the Reformation been The effeas
felt only by the inferior members of the Roman of it extend

to the cha-

Catholick Church ; it has extended to the See of rater of the
Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Vio- opes the'
lations of decorum, and even trespasses againtl
morality, which passed without censure in those
ages, when neither the power of the Popes, nor
the veneration of the people for their character,
had any bounds; when there was no hostile eye to
observe the errors in their conduEt, and no adver-
saries zealous to inveigh against them; would be
liable now to the f-vereft animadversion, and ex-
cite general indignation or horror. Inftcad of ri-
valling the cuurts of temporal princes in gaiety,
and lurpaffing them in licentiousness, the Popes
have fiudied to afluime manners more severe and
more fuirable to their ecclesiastical charater. The
chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted, during
two centuries, by any Pontiffthat refembledAlex-
ander V'. or Itveral of his predecessors, who were a
di'graceto religion and tohumran nature.Through-
out this long fucceffio-. of Popes. a wonderful
decorum of conduct, compared witl that of pre-
ceding ages, is observable. Many of them have
been confpicuols for the virtues becoming their
high station; al:d by their humanity, their love of
literature, and their moderation, have made rome
atonement to mankind for the crimes of their
predeceflbrs. Thus the beneficial influences of
the Reformation have been more extensive than
they appear on a superficial view; and this great
division in the Christian church hath contributed,
in tme measure, to encreafe purity of manners,
to diffuse science, and to inspire humanity. Hillo-
ry recites such a number of (hocking events, occa-

sioned

BOOx XII. sioned by religious dissensions, that it must afford

particular fatisfadion to trace any one salutary or
beneficial effect to that source, from which so
many fatal calamities have flowed.

State of the THE republick of Venice which, at the begin.
veick of ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so for-

midable, that almost all the potentates of Eu.
rope united in a confederacy for its defirudtion,
declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendour. The Venetians not only loft a great
part of their territory in the war excited by the
league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as vi-
gour of the state were exhausted by their extraor-
dinary and long continued efforts in their own de-
fence; and that commerce by which they had ac-
quired their wealth and power began to decay,
without any hopes of its reviving. All the fatal
consequences to their republick, which the saga-
city of the Venetian senate foresaw on the first dif-
covery of a passage to the Eaft-Indies by the Cape
of Good Hope, took place. Their endeavours to
prevent the Portuguese from establishing them-
selves in the Eat-Indies, not only by exciting the
Soldans of Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to
turn their arms against such dangerous intruders,
but by affording secret aid to the infidels in order
to insure their fuccels ', proved ineffetual. The
activity and valour of the Portuguese surmounted
every obRfacle, and obtained such firm footing in
that fertile country, as secured to them large pof-
feflions, together with influence still more exten-
five. Lisbon, inflead of Venice, became the
flaple for the precious commodities of the Eatt.
The Venetians, after having poffefTed for jna-
ny years the monopoly of that beneficial com-
merce, had the mortification to be excluded from

z Frcher. Script. Rcr. *German. vol. ii. 529.

almost

almost any share in it. The discoveries of the Boor XIIL
Spaniards in the western world, proved no less fatal ' '
to inferior branches of their commerce. The ori-
ginal defets which were formerly pointed out
in the constitution of the Venetian republick
continued, and the disadvantages with which it
undertook any great enterprize, increased rather
than diminished. The sources from which it de-
rived its extraordinary riches and power being
dried up, the interior vigour of the Rate declined,
and of course, rendered its external operations less
formidable. Long before the middle of the fix-
teenth century, Venice ceased to be one of the
principal powers in Europe, and became a fecon-
dary and subaltern state. But as the senate had the
address to conceal its diminution of power, under
the veil of moderation and caution; as it made no
rath effort that could discover its impotence; as
the symptoms of political decay in Rates are not
soon observed, and are seldom so apparent to their
neighbours as to occasion any sudden alteration in
their conduA towards them, Venice continued
long to be confidered and refpeded. She was
treated not according to her present condition, but
according to the rank which she had formerly
held. Charles, as well as the monarchsof France
his rivals, courted her afliftance with emulation
and solicitude in all their enterprizes. Even down
to the close of the century, Venice remained not
only an object of attention, but a considerable
feat of political negotiation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the firlf Cosmo di Me- OfTufany.

dici, and Lawrence, his grandson, had acquired in
the republick of Florence by their beneficence and
abilities, inspired their descendants with the ambi-
tion of usurping the sovereignty in their country,
and paved their way towards it. Charles placed
Alexander di Medici at the head of the republick, A. D. Xo
and to the natural interest and power of the family

added

BooK XII. added the weight and credit of the Imperial pro-
1-"' tection. Of these, his filcceflor Cosmo, firnamed

the great, availed himself; and eitablifhing his
supreme authority on the ruins of the ancient re-
publican constitution, he transmitted that, toge-
ther with the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany,
to his descendants. Their dominions were com.
posed of the territories which had belonged to the
three commonwealths of Florence, Pita, and Sie-
na, and formed one of the most refpedable of the
Italian itates.

Oftheduke TH E dukes of Savoy, during the former part of
of Savoy. the sixteenth century, poffefled territories which

were not considerable either for extent or value;
and the French, having seized the greater part of
them, obliged the reigning duke to retire for safety
to the itrong fortress of Nice, where he shut him-
seif up for several years; while his son, the Prince
of Piedmont, endeavoured to better his fortune,
by serving as an adventurer in the armies of Spain.
The peace of Chateau Cambrefis reRored to him
his paternal dominions. As these are environed
on every hand by powerful neighbours, all whose
motions the dukes of Savoy must observe with the
greatest attention, in order not only to guard against
the danger of being furprized and overpowered,
but that they may choose their fide with discern-
ment in those quarrels wherein it is impossible for
them to avoid taking part, this peculiarity in their
situation seems to have had no inconsiderable in-
fluence on their character. By rouzing them to
perpetual attention, by keeping their ingenuity al-
ways on the stretch, and engaging them in almoR
continual action, it hath formed a race of Princes
more sagacious in discovering their true interest,
more decisive in their resolutions, and more
dexterous in availing themselves of every oc-
currence which presented itself, than any per-

haps

haps that can be singled out in the history of ooK XIf.
matnkind. By gradual acquisitions the Dukes of 'V
Savoy have added to their territories as well as
to their own importance; and afpiring.at length
to regal dignity, which they obtained about half
a century ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank
among the monarchs of Europe.

THE territories which now form the republick ofthe U-

of the united Netherlands, were loft during the vace,.
first part of the sixteenth century, among the nu-
merous provinces subjed to the house of Austria';
and were then so inconsiderable, that hardly one
opportunity of mentioning them hath occurred in
all the busy period of this history. But soon as-
ter the peace of Chateau Cambrefis, the violent
and bigotted maxims of Philip's government,
carried into execution with unrelenting vigour by
the Duke of Alva, exatperated the free-people of
the Low-Countries to such a degree, that they
threw off the Spanish yoke, and asserted their an-
cient liberties and laws. These they defended
with a persevering valour, which occupied the
arms of Spain during half a century, exhausted
the vigour, ruined the reputation of that monar-
chy, and at last constrained their ancient masters
to recognize and to treat with them as a free in-
dependent state. This state founded on liberty,
and reared by industry andb:conomy, had growr
into reputation, even while struggling for its er
iftence. But when peace and security allowedst
to enlarge its views, and to extend its commece,
it rose to be one of the most refpedable as 1ell
as enterprizing powers in Europe. /

THE transactions of the kingdoms in the .ortll

of Europe, have been fedoum attended to In tile
course of this history.

RU~SSI

BooK XII RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism
%-~^ and obscurity from which it was called, about

fs. the beginning of the present century, by the cre-

ative genius of Peter the Great, who made his
country known and formidable to the ret of Eu-
rope.

OfDenmark IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of
adsweden. Charles V. great revolutions happened in their con-

ititutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical. In the
former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded from
the throne and expelled the country, a new Prince
was called by the voice of the people to aTffme the
reigns of government. In the latter, a fierce peo-
ple, rouzed to arms by injuries and oppreflion,
Ihook off the Danish yoke, and conferred the re-
gal dignity on its deliverer, Guflavus Ericson, who
had all the virtues of a hero and of a patriot.
Denmark, exhausted by foreign wars, or weak-
ened by the diflentions between the King and the
nobles, became incapable of such efforts as were
requisite in order to recover the ascendant which
it had long possessed in the North of Europe.
Sweden, as soon as it was freed from the domi-
nion of Rrangers, began to recruit its strength,
and acquired in a short time such interior vigouir,
that it became the first kingdom in the North.
Early in the subsequent century, it rose to such a
high rank among the powers of Europe, that it
iad the chief merit both in forming and condut-
ig that powerful league, which protected not
o-y the Protestant religion, but the liberties of
Gemany against the bigotry and ambition of the
hoife of Aufria. :f,

INDEX.
I __ _ _ _ _ _ __

# INDEX TO THE SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.

I

N

D

E

X

TO T H E

SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman numerals direct to the volume, and the figures

to the page.

A.
A BSOLUTION, the form of that

used by father Tetzel in Germany,

II. 80.
ldorai, the faction of, afifts the Impe-
rial general Colonna in the redution
of Genoa, II. 149.
Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to

Charles V. under William de Croy,
lord of Chievres, II. m2. His cha-
ra&er, 22. Sent by Charles with
power to afrume the regency of Caf-
tile on the death of his grandfather,
27. His claim admitted by Cardi-
nal Ximenes, and executed in con-
juntion, ib. Authorized by Charles
to hold the cortes of Valencia, which
refuses to assemble before him, 63.
Made viceroy of Castile on the de-
parture of Charles for Germany, 66.
His eletion remonitrated against by
the Caflilians, ib. Is chosen Pope,
145. Retrofpe/t of his conduEt in
Spain during the absence of Charles,
157. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
Segovians, who repulse him, tb.
Sends Fonseca to besiege the city,
who is repulsed by the inhabitants of
Medina del Campo, 158. Apolo-
gizes for Fonseca's conduCt to the

Vol. III.

people, zg9. Recalls Fonseca and
difmifles his troops, ib. His autho-
rity disclaimed by the Holy Junta,
161. Deprived of power by them,
163. His ill reception on his arrival
at Rome, on being chosen to the Pa-
pacy, 187. Restores the territories
acquired by his predeceflor, 188.
Labours to unite the contending
powers of Europe, ib. Publishes a
bull for three years truce among
them, 189. Accedes to the league
againlt the French King, 190. His
death, 197. The sentiments and
behaviour of the people on that oc-
cafion, ib. A retrofpe& of his con-
duct towards the Reformers, o26.
His brief to the diet at Nuremburgh,
207. Receives a lift of grievances
from the diet, o09. His conduct to
the Reformers, how esteemed at
Rome, at1.
Afrira, The Spanish troops sent by Car-

dinal Ximenes against Barbarossa,
defeated there, II. 36.
A.fie.-Mortes, interview between the

l mperor Charles and Francis, there,
II. 414.
Aix la Chbpelle, the Emperor Charles

C g crowned

crowned there, II. 77. Ferdinand
his brother crowned Kipg of the Ro-
mans th'ere, 334.

dlarrcn, Don Ferdinand. Francis I; of

France, taken prisoner at the battle
of Pavia, committed to his custody,
II. 229. Conducts Francis to Spain,
238. Delivers up Francis in purfu-
ance of the treaty of Madrid, z54.
Is sent ambassador to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of his treaty,
268. Pope , lement VII. taken pri-
soner by the Imperialills, is com-
mitted to his custody, 287.
Albany, John Stuart duke of, com-

mands the French army lent by
'Francis I. to invade Naples, II. 214.
Albert, of Brandenriurgh, grand mailer

of the Teutonic Order, becomes a
convert to the doctrines of Luther,
11. 263. Obtains of Sigismund King
of Poland the inveltiture o! Prussia,
ereteu into a dutchy, ,64. Is put
under the ban of the empire, ib.
His family fixed in the inheritance of
Prussia, ib. Commands a body of
troops in behalf of Maurice of Sax-
ony, but endeavours to assert an in-
dependency, 111. 250. Defeats and
takes the Duke d'Aumale prifener,
and joins the l'mperor at Metz, 271.
Iscondemned by the Imperial Cham-
ber for his demands on the bishops of
:Bambert and Wortfburg, 2bo A
league formed agalnft him, 281. Is
defeated by Maurice, 282. Is again
defeated by Henry of Brunswick,
284. Is driven out of Germany and
ilies in exile, h,. His territories re-
stored to his collateral heirs, ib.
Albfr', Flealor of Mentz, the publication

of indulgences in Germany committed
to'him, 11. 80.
Alexadstltr V. 'Pope, remarks on the

pontifitfte tb, I1. 102.

Jlexamlrer'di Medici. See MFDIci.
Aflgers, how it was seized by Barba-

rolfa, 11. .65 Is seized by the bro-
'ther of the fame name, on the death
of the Iorrer, 366. Is taken under
the protclion of the Porte, ib. Is
governed by Hafcen Aga in the ab-
lence of lIaibalolla, 471. Is belieg-
ed by the Emperor Charles V. 474.
Charles forced to re-imbark by bad
weather, 478.

Alrafhkid, brother of Muley Hafcen

'King of Tunis, solicits the protction
of Barbarolla ag.int. him, 11. 367.
His treacherous treatment by Bar-
baroefa, 368.

TO THE

AIve, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand'

ofAragon, in his dispute with the
Archduke Philip concerning the re-
gency of Castile, 11. 9. Forces the
Dauphin to abandon the siege of Per-
pignan, III. 8. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the
EleCtor of Saxony to death, 145.
Detains the Landgrave prilbner by
the Emperor's order, 55. Com-
mands under the Emperor, the army
destined against France, 270. Is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 319. Enters the Ecclefiafli-
cal territories and seizes the Cam.
pagna Romana, 368. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, 369. Nego-
tiates a Peace between Philip and
the Pope, with Cardinal Caraffa,
392. Goes to Rome to afc pardon
of the Pope for his hostilities, 393. Is
sent to Paris in the name of Philip to
espouse the Princess Elizabeth, 430.

Amer^rff, a nobleman of Holland, as.

focirted by Charles V. with Cardi-
nal Ximenes, in the regency of Caf-
tile, II. 34.
Anabaptifls, the origin of that fe& de-

duced, II. 348. Their principal te-
nets, 349. Their settlement at
Munster, 350. Charaser of their
principal leaders, ib. They seize the
city of Munlier, 35t. They efta-
blilh a new.form of government there,
ib. Choose Bocold King, 355. Their
licentious practices, ib. A confede-
racy of the German Princes formed
againlt them, 356. Are blockaded
in Munfier by the bilhop, 357. The
city taken and great slaughter made
of them, 358. Their King put to
death, 35,. Charaaer of the fcet
since that period, ib. See Matthlas
and Bctold.
An.leria, his authority cited in proof

of the extortions of the Flemish mii-
nilters of Charles V. II. 45.

Ankhlt, Prince of, avows the opinions

of Martin Luther, II. 2o6.
Annats to the court of Rome, what,

11. 113.

AIragn, how Ferdinand became pof-

sessed of that kingdom, II. a. The
cortes of, acknowledges the Alch-
duke Philip's title to the crown, 3.
Antient enmity between this king-
dom and ('allile. 7. Navarre added
to this crown by the arts of Ferdi
nand, 19. Arrival of Charles V
46. The cortes not allowed to al
lemble in his name, ib. The refrac.

tU,!.

tory behaviour of the Aragonians,
ib, They refute restitution of the
kingdom of Navarre, 47. Don John
Lanuza appointed regent, on the de-
parture of Charles for Germany, 66.
Who compotes the diftutbances there,
184. .The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival
in Spain, i 86. See Spain.
Ardres, an interview there between

Francis I. and Henry Vlil. of Eng-
land, II. 75.
.fturras, Charles son of Philip and Jo-

anna, acknowledged Prince ot, by the
Cortes o; Caltile, II. 14.
,Aug/burg, a diet called there by Charles

V. 11. 328. His public entry into
that city, 329. The confession of
faith named Irom this city, drawn
up by Melan&thon, 329. Resolute
behaviour of the protestant Princes
at, 330. Its tbrm of government
violently altered, and rendered sub-
mnifive to the Emperor, 181. The
diet reassembled there, 193. The
diet takes part with the Emperor
against the city of Magdeburg, 200.
Is seized by Maurice of Saxony, 238.
Another diet at, opened by Ferdi-
nand, 326. Cardinal Morone attends
the diet as the Pope's nuncio, 327.
Morone departs on the Pope's death,
329. Recess of the diet on the sub-
ject of religion, 332. Remarks on
this recess, 337. The diet again as-
fembled there, III. 16z. Is intimi-
dated by being surrounded with the
Emperor's Spanish troops, ib. The
Emperor re-eltablifhes the Romish
worlhip, in the churches of, ib. The
diet, by the Impeuror's order, peti-
tions the Pope for the return of the
council to Trent, 169. A Iyftem of
theology laid before the diet by the
Emperor, 174. The archbishop of
Mentz, declares, without authority,
the diet's acceptance of it, 174.
Avila, i convention of thle ialecon-

tents in Spain held thles, 11. 16o.
A conilerelcy tcrmeld tlie I Ily Jurl-
ta, formed there, 161. \Vhich diil
claims the authority of Adiian, rb.
The Holy Junta removeJ to Toide-
fillas, 161. See Ytita.
Al/riia, by what means the house of,

became so lormilualli' in (t:Cini, iY,
II. Z89. The extraiodinialv auti-
fitions of the hoiufe of, in ilw perlln
of the Emperor Charles V. 111. 433,
436.

B.
BarbaroSa, Horuc, his rife to the king-

doms of Algiers and Tunis, II. 36.
Defeats the Spanilh troops sent a-
gainlt him by cardinal Ximenes, ib.
His parentage, 364. Commences
pirate with his brother Hayradin. ib.
How he acquired poflefioin of Al-
giers, 365. Infests the coafls of
Spain, 366. Is reduced and killed
by Comares the Spaulfh Governor of
Oran, 1b.
Ba barclla, Hayradin, brother to the

former of the fame name, takes pof-
session of Algiers on his biother's
death, 11 366. Puts his dominions
under the protecion of the Gland
Signior, ib. Obtains the command
ot the Turkish fleet, ib. His trealde-
rous treatment ot Alrafchid, brother
to the King ot Tunis, 368. heizes
Tunis, 369. Extends his depreda-
tions by tea, ,b. Prepares to resist
the Emperor's armament against him,
371. Goletta and his fleet taken,
372. Is deteated by ( harles, 374.
Tunis taken, 375. Makes a defrene
on Italy, 111. 18. Burns Rheggio,
ib. Besieges Nice in conjunaion
with the French, but is forced to
retire, ib. Is difmifTed by Francis, 30.
Barbary a summary view of the revo-

lutions of, 11. 363 Its division into
independant kingdoms, ib. Rife of the
piratical States, 364 See BarbarofJa.
Barcelona, the publick entry of the Em-

pelor Charles V. into that city as its
count, II. 320. The treaties of
Charles with the Italian States, pub-
liflied there, 324.
Bayard, chevalier, his character, II.

135. His gallant defence of Mezi-
eres, hefieged by the Impeiialifts, ib.
Obliges them to iaife the siege, ib.
Hi. noble behaviour at his death,
203. His refpe&lul funeral, 204.
Bc/li;,, M. his erroneous account ot the

education of Chailes V. correLed,
II 21. Iot4. Hi. account of the
dil;flnrous rotieat ot the Emperor
(harles V. firm his invasion of Pro-
vence, II. 403.
Bibl', a tiaiillation of, undertaken by

Martinll uher, and its efcfscs in
opening the eyes of the people, II.
2.05.
Bret.al, battle olf, hetween Colunna and

Maitlalieal ILautiec, II. 147.
Bol d or Bcukel, John, ajourneyman

taylor, becomes a leader of the Ana-
Laptiltl at Munlter, II. 350. Suc-

(; ag cecdi

ceeds Matthias in the direction of
their affairs, 353. His enthufiaRick
extravagances, b. Is chosen King,
354. Marries fourteen wives, 355.
Beheads one of them, 357. Is put
to a cruel death at the taking of
Munster, 358. See Anabaptifis.
Bohemia, the Archduke Ferdinand cho-

Len King ot, 1I. 289. Ferdinand
encroaches on the liberties of the
Bohemians, III 160 The Refor-
mation introduced by John Huss and
Jerome of Prague, ib. Raise an ar-
my to no purpose, ib. Is closely con-
fined in the citadel of Mechlin, 204.
Bologna, an interview between the Em-

peror Charles V. and Pope Clement
VII. there, iI. 321. Another meeting
between them there, 339.
Bonnivet, admiral of France, appointed

to command the invasion of Milan,
II. 195. His charater, ib. En-
ables Colorma to defend the city of
Milan by his imprudent delay, 196.
Forced to abandon the Milanese, o22.
Is wounded and his army defeated by
the Imperialists, 203 Stimulates
Francis to an invafior of the Milanese,
219. Advises Francis to besiege Pa-
via, zzi. Advises him to give battle
to Bourbon, who advanced to the
relief of Pavia, 226. Is killed at the
battle of Pavia, 227.
Rouffir, sent by Francis I. King of

France, to negotiate a peace with
Charles V. II. 38.
Bouillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of,

declares war against the Emperor
Charles, at the infligation of Francis,
11. 134. Is ordered by Francis to
disband his troops, ib. His territories
reduced by the Emperor, 135.
Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of

England, Ill. 35. Taken, 43.
Bourbon, Charles Duke of, his charac-

ter, II. Iml. The causes of his dif-
content with Francis, 1. ib. His dutch-
ess dies, 192. Rejects the advances
of Louise the King's mother, ib. His
eltate sequestered by her intrigues,
293. Negotiates secretly with the
Emperor, ib. Is included in a treaty
between the Emperor and Henry
VIII. of England, ib. Is taxed by
the King with betraying him, which
he denies, 194. Escapes to Italy,
195. Directs the measures of the
Imperial army under Lannoy, 0ol.

ro THE

Defeats the French on the banks of
the Seffia, 203. Instigates Charles
to an invasion of France, 215. Ad-
vances to the reliet of Pavia, 214.
Defeats Francis and takes him pri-
soner, 27. Hastens to Madrid to
secure his own interests on the inter-
view between Charles and Francis,
240. His kind reception by Charles,
247. Obtains a grant of the dutchy
of Milan, and is made general of the
Imperial army, 248. Obliges Sforza
to surrender Milan, 271. Is forced
to oppress the Milanele to satisfy his
troops mutinying for pay, 276. Sets
Morone at liberty, and makes him his
confident, ib. Appoints Leyva go-
vernor of Milan, and advances to in-
vade the Pope's territories, 278. His
disappointed troops mutiny, ib. He
determines to plunder Rome, 281.
A rrives at Rome and assaults it, 284.
Is killed, ib.
Brandinburgt, Eletor of, avows the

opinions of Luther, II. 206.

- Albert of. See Albert.
Bruges, a league concluded there be-

tween the Emperor and Henry VIII,
of England, against France, II. 137.
Brunfiwick, Duke of, avows the opinions

of Luther, II. 206.
--- Henry Duke of, driven from
his dominions by the Protestant Princes
of the league of Smalkalde, III. 24.
Raises men for Francis, but employs
them to recover his own dominions,
5. Is taken prisoner, ib.
Buid, siege of, by Ferdinand King of

the Romans, II. 468. Is treacherously
seized by Sultan Solyman, 469.

C.
Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in

Germany, appointed to examine the
doctrines of Martin Luther, 1I. 18.
Requires Luther peremptorily to re-
trat his errors, ib. Requires the
Elector of Saxony to surrender or
banish Luther, go. His conduCtjuf-
tified, 91.

Calair, an ineffectual congress there be-

tween the Emperor and Francis, un-
der the mediation of Henry VIII. II.
136. The careless manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary
Queen of England, 398. Ineffec-
tual remonstrances of Philip, and
Lord Wentworth the governor, con-

cerning

concerning its defencelels slate, 399.
Is invelted and taken by the Duke of
Guile, 400. The Englifl inhabitants
turned out, '401. Stipulations con-
cerning, in the treaty of Chateau
Cambrefis, 46.
Cambray, articles of the peace concluded

there, between the Emperor Charles,
and Francis of France, II. 315. Re-
marks on this treaty, 316.
Campe, peace of, between Henry VIII.

and Francis, Ill. 84.
Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from

Pope Clement VII. to the second ;iet
at Nuremberg; II. 2.i. Publifies
articles for reforming the inferior
clergy, 113. Advises Charles to n-
golous measures against the Protef-
tants, 331.
Capitulat:io of the Germanick body,

signed by Charles V. and prescribed
to all his successors, II. 60.
Car-affa. Cardinal, his precipitate elec-

tion, 11. 342. Is appointed legate
to Bologna, ib. Reasons of'his dif-
gust with the Emperor, 343. Per-
fuades the Pope to solicit an alliance
with France againlt the Emperor,
344, 346, 348. His infiduous com-
miflion to the court of France, 363.
His public entryinto Paris, hb. Ex-
horts Henry to break his truce with
the Emperor, 364. Ablolves Henry
from his oath, 366. Negotiates a
peace between the Pope and Philip,
with the Duked' Alva, 392. The fate
of him and his brother on the death of
Pope Paul, 430.
Carignan, besieged by the count d'Fn-

guien, and defended by the marquis
de Guaflo, 111. 30. GCallo defeated
in a pitched battle, 31. The town
taken, 33.
Carlofladrus, imbibes the opinions of

Martin Luther, at Wittemburg, II.
97. His intemperate zeal, 104. Awed
by the reproofs of Luther, 1o5.
Caflallo, Marquis of Piadeno. See

Pliajeno.
Caflile, how Isabella became possessed

of that kingdom, II. a. The Arch-
duke Philip's title acknowledged by
the Cortes of that kingdom, 3. Ila-
bella dies and leaves her hulband
Ferdinand of Aragon, regent, 6. Ser-
dinand resigns the clown of, ib. Fel-
dinand acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, 7. Enmity between this
kingdom and Aragon, ib. The par-
ticular dislike of the Cafrilians to
FIrdiinand, #b. The regency of, joint-

ly veRted in Ferdinand, Philip and
Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
ii. Declares against Ferdinand, it.
The regency of, resigned by Philip
to Ferdinand, 13. Philip and Joanna
acknowledged King and Queen by
the Cortes, 14. lIeath of Philip, ik.
The perplexity of the Castilians on
Joanna's 'incapacity for government,
ib. Ferdinand gains the regency and
the good will of the CaRilians by his
prudent adminintration, 18. Oran
and other places in Barbary annexed
to this kingdom by Ximenes, rb. Xi-
menes appointed regent by Ferdi-
nand's will, until the arrival of Charles
V. 25. Charles aflumes the regal
title, 18. Ximenes procures its ac-
knowledgment, 29. The nobility de-
pressed by Ximenes, 30. The gran-
dees mutiny against Ximenes, 31.
The mutiny suppressed, tb. Ximenes
resumes the grants made by Ferdi-
nand to the nobles, 32. The bold re-
ply of Ximenes to the discontented
nobles, 33. Other associates in the
regency appointed with Ximenes at
the inlligation of the Flemilh courtiers,
34. Ximenes dies, 42. Charles,
acknowledged King by the Cortes,
on 'his arrival, with a reservation in
favour of his mother Joanna, 43.
The C ftilians receive unfavourable
imprfnllons of him, 44. Disgusted by
his paitiality to his Flemish minilter,
1b. Sauvage made chancellor, ib.
William de Croy, appointed arch-
bifliop of Toledo, 45. The principal
cities confederate and complain of
their grievances, 47. The Cleigy of,
refuse to levy the tenth of benefice#
granted by the Pope to Charles V.
62. Interdined, but the interdia ta-
ken off, by Charles's application, ib.
An infurreaion these, 64. Increase
of difaffedion, 65. Cardinal Adri-
an appointed regent, n the depar-
ture of Charles for Germany, 66.
The views and pretensions of the
commons, in their infilrrefions, I19.
The confederacy called the Holy
Junta formed, 160 The proceedings
of which arc carried on in the name
of Queen Joanna, 16z. Receives rir-
culatory letters from Charles tor the
insurgents to lay down their arms,
with promises of pardlon, 164 1 he
oohles undertake to fupprels the in-
furgentr, 16R. Raise an army agaiQ,)!
them under the Conde de Haro, 1-o.
Haro gets poffeflionof Joanna, 171

G g 3 Expcdien;

Expedients by which they raise mo-
ney for their troops, 173. Unwilling
to proceed to extremities with the
Junta, ib. The army of the Junta
routed and Padilla executed, 177.
Dissolution of the Junta, 179. The
moderation of Charles toward the in-
furgents on his arrival in Spain, 186.
He acquires the love of the Caflilians,
187. See Spain.
Catherine of Aragon, is divorced from

Henry VIII. of England, II. 347.
Dies, 420.
Catherine a Boria, a nun, flies from her

cloifte, and marries Martin Luther,
II. 262.

Catherine Medici. See MEDICI.
Cavi, peace concluded there between

Pope Paul IV. and Philip II. of
Spain, III. 392.

Certainf,, negotiations for peace entered

into there between Philip II. of Spain,
and Henry II. of France, III. 412,
420. The negotiations removed to
Chateau Cambrefis, 424. See Cha-
teau CambfJir.
Characters of men, rules for forming a

proper estimate of them, 111. 67.
Applied to the cafe of Luther, ib.
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, his

observations on the manners of the
clergy, in his letter to the Archbishop
of Mentz, II 104. Note.
Charles V. Emperor, his descent and

birth, 11. i. How he came to in-
herit such extensive dominions, ,h.
Acknowledged Prince of Aflurias,
by the Coites of Castile, 14. His
father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy and
hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand
toward him, 19. Left heir to his do-
minions, 20. Death of Ferdinand,
ai. His education committed to Wil-
liam de Croy, lord of Chicvres, ib.
Adrian of Utrecht appointed to be
his preceptor, ib. The firfl opening of
his charac&er, 22. Assumes the go-
vernment of' Slanders and attends to
business, 23. Sends Cardinal Adrian
to be regent of Castile, who exe-
cutes it jointly with Ximcnes, 27.
Assumes the regal title, 28. His ti-
tle admitted with difficulty by the
Caflilian nob lity, 29. Perluaded to
add associate regents to Ximenes, 34.
His Flemilh couit corrupted by the
avarice of Chievrcs, 36. Perfitaded
by Xiirenes to visit Spain, but how
that journey is retarded, 37. The pre-
sent slate of hit afrais, ib. Concludes
a peace at Noyen with Francis I. of
prance, and the conditions of the

treaty, 38. Arrives in Spain, 40.
His ungrateful treatment of Ximenes,
42. His public entry into Valladolid,
43. Is acknowledged King by the
Cortes, who vote him a tree gift, ib.
The Castilians receive unfavourable
impreflinns of him, 45. Disgusts them
by his partiality to his Flemifl mi-
nifters, ib. Sets out for Aragon, 45.
Sends his brother Ferdinand to visit
their grandfather Maximilian, ib.
Cannot assemble the Cortes of Aragon
in his own name, 46. The op-
position made by that assembly to
his desires, ib. Refuses the Appli-
cation of Francis I. for restitution of
the kingdom of Navarre, ib. Ne-
glets the remonstrances of the Calli-
lians, 47. Death of the Emperor
Maximilian, 48. View of the pre-
sent IRate of Europe, ib. How Maxi-
milian was obftruted i;: securing the
Empire to him, 49. Francis I. as-
pires to the Imperial clown, ib.
Circumltances favourable to the pre-
tensions of Charles, o5. The Swiss
cantons espouse his cause, 53. Appre-
henfions an'l conduct of Pope Leo X.
on the occasion, ;4. Assembling of
the diet at Frankfort, 56. Frederick
Duke of Saxony refuses the offer of
the Empire and votes for him, 57.
And refuses the presents offered by
his ambassadors, 58. Concurring cir-
cumfiances which favoured his elec-
tion, ih. His eleCtion, 59. Signs and
confirms the capitulation of the Ger-
manick body, 60. The eleRion noti.
fled to him, ih. Afrnmce the title ot
majelly, hb. Accepts the impeii1l dig-
nity ofered by the count Palatine
ambassador from the Elecors, 62.
The clergy of Caflile refutl the tenth
of benefices granted him by the Pope,
ib. Procures the interdict the kingdom
is laid under for refusal, to be taken
off, ib. Empowers cardinal Adrian
to hold the Corles of Valencia, 63.
The nobles refuse to assemble without
his presence, ib. Authoiifes the in-
furgents there to continue in arms, ib.
Sumnions the Cortes of Callile to
meet in Galicia. 64. Narrowly e-.
capes with his Flemish minillers from
an infuireclion on that account, 65.
Obtains a donative from the Cortes,
66. Prepares to leave Spain, and
appoints regents, ib. Embarks, ib.
Motives of this journey, 67. Rife of
the rivalfhip between him and Francin
I /,. Courts the favour of Henry
VIII. of England and his miniller

cardinal

tctrdnnal Wolfey, 73. Visits Henry at
Dover, 74. Promises Wolfey his in-
terest for the papacy, 75. Has a fe-
cond interview with.Henry at Grave-
lines, 76. Offers to submit his diffe-
.rences with Francis to Henry's arbi-
tration, ib. His magnificent corona-
tion at Aix-la-Chapelle, 76. Calls a
diet at Worms, to check the refor-
mers, 77. Causes which hindered his
espousing the party of Martin Luther,
izl. Grants Luther a sale conduO
to the diet of Worms, 122. An edit
publilned against him, ih. His em-
barraffment at this time, iz6 Con-
cludes an alliance with the P(,pe, 130.
The conditions of the treaty). .:.
Death of his minister Chievres, and his
advantages to him, 131. Invasion of
Navarre by Francis, 132. The French
driven out, and their general L'Flf-
parre taken prisoner, 133. War de-
clared against him by Robeit de la
Marck, lord of Bouillon, who rava-
ges Luxemburg, 134. Reduces Bou-
illon, and invades France, 135. His
demands at the congress at Calais,
136. Has an interview with cardinal
Wolfey at Bruge,, and concludes a
league with Henriy V11. against
France, 137. Pope Leo declares for
him againit France, 140 The French
driven out of Milan, 143, 147. Vilits
England in his paluage to Spain, x5o.
Cultivates the good will of cardinal
Wolfey, and creates the F.arl of Sur-
rey his high admiral, ib. (;rants the
illand of Malta to the Klnight oif St.
John, expeilcd from Rhsiods by so-
iyman the magnificent, 153. Arrives
in Spain, 154. A rctrolipe oi his
proreedings in relation to the infur-
reclinns in Spain, 163. Ilruescircula-
t.ry letters t;fr the Insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promiles of
F[ardon, 164. H is prudent modKerali-
.on toward the inlurgents, on his ar-
rival in Spain, 186. Acqluires the
love of the Caflilians, 187. I'.ncra
into a league with Charlec Duke of
Bourbon, 193. Why he did not en-
deavour to get Wolfey elcrced Pope,
IgS. Invades Guienne and Burgundly,
but without luccefs, 2oo. Ilis tr,,,ps
in Milal mutiny fIor want of pay, hul
Rle patifiled by Morone, zoz. Uinder-
t.a:.s an invafinn of I'rovence, zi;.
Olders l'cfcara to hefigce Marfillh..,
216. I'letala oblilgd io retirc, 2[i.
}Iilcorinceted iv the l'rernlh <vcr-
r.tnning the llilatnclc again, zno.

The revenues of Naples mortgaged
to raise money, ib. His troops de-
feat Francis and take him prisoner
at the battle of Pavia, 2z8. His as-
fe&ed moderation at receiving the
news, 229. Avails himself of a tiea-
ty concluded between Lannoy and
Pope Clement, but refuies to ratify
it, 135 His army in Pavii mutiny,
and are obliged to be ;tiha>itded,
236. His deliberations on tl.e pro-
per improvement of his diladvatiages,
tb. His pliopolitions to Francis, z37.
After n:any del;ay., grants S!or7a
the inveflituicr or Milan, 240. Mo-
rone' intiig'Je; bet:a)r: to him i.y
Ptfcara, 243. (, .it-,l Pefcaia to
continue his nego,)iations wilh Mo-
rone, 244. His l goilou,, tJleutnent
of Franiis, 245 Vilits Francis. 246.
His kind reccption of the Dukt of
Bourbon, 247 Grants Bourbon the
dutchy of Mlilan, and appoints h;im
general in chief of the imptiial ar-
my there, 248. Fruitlef negotiati-
ons ior the delivery of Francis, ;b.
Treaty of Madrid, with Francis. 250.
)elivers up Francis, z54. .arries
Isabella of Portugal, ib. An alliance
formed againl him 'at Ccgnac, 266.
Sends ambassadors to }Franci to ir-
qriire the tulfilment of the treat) of
Madrid, 26. Prepares for ar aga ;int
Francis, 270. The Pope reduced to
an accommodation with him, 27j.
The exhausted Hlate of his final:cr,
27,. 11* troops under liouiilr):r <iil-
tleltid and mutinous ior \walt ,! ,. 1:,
ib liourbon alTaults Rome, ndii is
slain, but the city taken, 284. Tlic
Prilce of Orange general on Bltur-
hon's death, takes the cafle ot t.
Angelo, and the P'ope {rifor'cr, 2:"7.
The l.miperor's conltll(n r tilihat ,c-
caifon, 288. His drl.finiiori v.ith liei
Pope, low far ;avounali) I., Ill' r'-
limatiion, 290. lHi: ,

inil, I

, i.. to

the diet at Spires, i!. ih , i.i.l) ii i')
againfl the l','|t, al,d hritr to lhe
card na!', v;rI 'l anil I n1l:,ud(
Ile Pr. ;li.|i l! 1II , 2o4 Is ic' l 'ir
filp 1 .

:. I.y l .i 'o' tt.' . , i a il', 7293.

)cliv' rl'. 'I I' |,pc foi ar infi,,, ".9t.
lli ('tvrtl ts tlo HIenry aini Ilanici:,
300 Their ('(cllialion o1 v ir
ngai:fl himn, 3l,2 1 tlhaillngedl by
lFi ncis ito ligle comlbat, ill. An-

resvw l)otin ievirt!. frm l'art'. to
ilimn, ! Ili' >r, cs dtea!t tilhe lreih
in Ilaly, 31.t , 1, 2. li:. i nwt ilies
lor delriC:g aln icotinimd:ltioii, i l,

t; 4 Co'liti l,,I

Concludes a separate treaty with the
Pope, 314. Terms of the peace of
Cambray concluded with Francis, by
the mediation of Margaret of Austria
and Louise of France, 315. Remarks
on the advantages gained by him in
this treaty, and on his conduct of the
war, 316. Visits Italy, 320. His
policy on his public entry into Bar-
celona, ib. Has an interview with
the Pope at Bologna, 321. Motives
for his moderation in Italy, ib. His
treaties with the States of, 322. Is
crowned King of Lombardy and Em-
peror of the Romans, 324. Sum-
mons a diet at Spires to confider the
fRate of religion, 315. His delibera-
tions with the Pope, relpeting the
expediency of calling a general coun-
cil, 327. Appoints a diet at Augf.
burg, 328. Makes a public entry
into that city, 329. His endeavours
to check the reformation, #b. Reio-
lute behaviour of the protestant
Princes toward him, 330. His severe
decree againfl the Protestants, 33!.
Proposed his brother Ferdinand to
be eleCted King of the Romans, 332.
Is opposed by the Protestants, 333.
Obtains his ele&ion, 334. Is desirous
of an accommodation with the Pro-
teftants, 336. Concludes a treaty with
them at Nuremberg, 337. Raises
an army to oppose the Turks under
Solyman, and obliges him to retire,
338. Has another interview with
the Pope, and prefies him to call a
general council, 339. Procures a
league of the Italian States to secure
the peace of Italy, 341. Arrives at
Barcelona, 342. His endeavours to
prevent the negotiations and meeting
between the Pope and Francis, 344.
Undertakes to expel Barbarossa from
Tunis, and restore Muley Hafcen,
370. Lands in Africa, and besieges
Goletta, 371. Takes Goletta, and
seizes Barbarossa's fleet, 373. De-
feats Barbarossa and takes Tunis,
374. Restores Muley Hafcen, and
the treaty between them, 376. The
glory acquired by this enterprize, and
the delivery of the Christian captives,
377. Seizes the dutchy of Milan on
the death of Francis Sforza, 389.
His policy with regard to it, ib. Pre.
pares for war with Francis, 390.
His invetive againt Francis at Rome
before the Pope in Council, 391. Re-
marks on this tranfaaition, 394. In-
vades France, 395. Enters Provence
and finds it desolatcd, 409, oeliege*

Marseilles and Arles, 4o0. His miser.
able retreat from Provence, 403. His
invasion of Picardy defeated, 404. Is
accused of poisoning the Dauphin, 405.
Improbability of its truth, jb. His
conjecture concerning the dauphin's
death, 406. Slanders invaded by
Francis, 407. A suspension of arms
in Slanders, how negotiated, 408.
A truce in Piedmont, 409. Motives
to there truces, ib. Negotiation for
peace with Francis, 412. Concludes
a truce for ten years at Nice, 413.
Remarks on the war, 4b. His inter-
view with Francis, 414. Courts the
friendship of Henry VIII. of England,
410. Indulges the ProteRant Princes,
421. Quiets the apprehensions of the
Catholick league, 425. His troops
mutiny, 417. Assembles the Cortes of
Caflile, 418. Destroys the ancient
constitution of the Cortes, 429. In-
fance of the haughty spirit of the
Spanilh grandees, 430. Desires per-
mifilon of Francis to pass through
France to the Netherlands, 438. His
reception in France, 439. His rigo-
rous treatment of Ghent, 441. Re-
fuses to fulfill his engagements to
Francis, 443. Appoints a friendly
conference between a deputation of
Catholick and Protestant divines be-
fore the diet at Ratisbon, 462. Re-
fult of this conference, 464. Grants
a private exemption from oppressions
to the Protestants, 465. Undertakes
to reduce Algiers, 467. Is near be-
ing cast away by a violent storm, 474.
Lands near Algiers, hb. His soldiers
exposed to a violent tempest and rain,
475. His fleet Ihattered, 476. His
fortitude under these disasters, 478.
Leaves his enterprize and embarks
again, ib. Is distressed with another
fturm at sea, 479. Takes advantage
of the French invasion of Spain, to
obtain subsidies from the Cortes, 111.
9. His treaty with Portugal, ib.
Concludes a league with Henry VIII.
sl. Particulars of the treaty, z .
Over-runs Cleves, and his barbarous
treatment of the town of Duren, 15.
His behaviour to the Duke of C leves,
16. Besieges Landrecy, ib. Is join-
ed by an English detachment, 17.
Is forced to retire, ib. Courts the
favour of the Protestants, z3. His
negotiations with the Proteflants at
the diet of Spires, 25. Procurer,
the concurrence of the diet in a war
gioint Fraacis, 28. Negotiates a fe-

paratc

pirate peace with the King of Den-
mark, ib. Invades Champagne, and
invades St. Difiere, 34. Want of con-
cert between his operations and thole
of Henry, who now invades France, 36.
Obtains St. Difiere by artifice, ib. His
difreffes and happy movements, 38.
Concludes a separate peace with Francis,
39 His motives to this peace, 40 His
advantages by this treaty, 42. Obliges
himself by a private article to exter-
minate the Protestant herrfy, 43. Is
cruelly afflicled with the gout, 45. Diet
at Worms, 47 Arrives at Worms and
alters his condua towards the Protcf-
tants, 49. His condut on the death of
the l'uke of Orleans, 53. His diflinu-
lation to the Landgrave of Helle, 69.
Concludes a truce with Solyman, 73.
Holds a diet at Ratifion, 74. His de-
claration to the Ptoteltant deputies 77.
His treaty with the Pope, concluded by
the cardinal of Trent, ib. His circular
letter to the Protestant members of the
Cermanick body, 79. The Protestants
levy an army against him, 86. Is un-
prepared against them, 87. Puts them
under the ban of the Empire, 88 The
Protestants declare war against him, 90.
Marches to join the troops sent by the
Pope, 92. Farnese the Pope's legate
returns in disgust, 94. His prudent de-
clenfion of an aaion with the Protef-
tants. 96. Is joined by his Flemish
troops, 97. Proposals of peace made
by the Protestants. io6. Their army
disperse, tb. His rigorous treatment of
the Protestant Princes, 1o8 Difmiifes
part of his army, ll. The Pope ie-
calls his troops, 1 l. His reflection on
Fiefco's infunrelion at Genoa, 1i6. Is
alarmed at the hostile preparations of
Francis, 130. Death of Francis, 13z.
A parallel drawn between him and Fran-
cis, ib. Consequences of Francis's
leath to him, 135. Marches against
the Elexor of Saxony, 136. Passes the
Elbe, 138. Defeats the Saxon army,
141. Takes the Fleaor prisoner, 141.
His harlh reception of him, 1,. Invllts
Wittemherg, 143. Condemn the Elec-
tor to death, by a court-martial, 145.
The Ele&or by treaty surrenders the
elelorate, 148. The harsh terms im-
posed by him on the Landgrave of Herfe,
15o His haughty reception of the
Lansgrave, 153. Detains him prisoner,

154. Seizes the warlike flores of the
league, 158. Hiscruel exations, 159.
Assembles a diet at Augtburg, 16z. In-
timidates the diet by his Spanish troops.
ib. Re-establishes the Romilh worship
in the churches of AugIburg, ib. Seizes
Placentia, 166. Orders the diet topeti-
tion the Pope for the return of the coun-
cil to Trent, 169. Protells against the
council of Bologna, 171. Causes a sys-
tem of faith to be prepared for Germany,
172. Lays it before the diet, 174. The
Jlterim opposed, 178. And rje&ted by
the Imperial cities, 179. Reduces the
city of Augsburg to lubmiffion, 181.
Repeats the fame violence at Ulm, ib.
( arries the Eletor and Landgrave with
him into the Low-countries, 183. Pro-
cures his ion Philip to be recognized by
the States of the Netherlands, 184.
Establishes the Interim there, i81. Re-
assembles the diet at Augfiurg, under
the influence of his Spaniffi troops, 193.
The city of Magdeburg refutes to admit
the Interim and prepares for refifaince,
ioo Appoints Maurice Elec1or of Sax-
ony to reduce it, ib. Promises to pro-
teat the Proteflants at the council of
Trent, 202. Arbitrarily releases Mau-
rice and the EleCtor of Brandenburg,
from their engagements tothe Landgrave
for the recovery of his liberty, 203. Er.-
deavouis to secure the Empire for his fan
Philip, o05. His brother Ferdinand re-
fuses to sign his pretensions, ib. Besieges
Parma, but is repulsed, zi1. Proceeds
rigoroufy against the Proteflants, z13.
Endeavours to support the council of
Trent, 214. Pots Magdcburg under the
ban el the F.mlpii, zb. .hlolves tl.e
city, zi9. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Proitllant de-
puties, conccrning their fife conduOt,
.22. Begins, to fiirpca . Mauric- of Saxo.
ny, 233. Cilcliilnitnces which contri-
buted to dcctiv him with regard to
Maurice, 2a;. Manuiite takes the field
againt him. 237 Mauiite feronded by
Henry II of France, 238. Hisdillreli
and conflernation, 230 An iief(Telual
negotiation with Maurice, ian. Flies
from Infprnck, 244. Relcales the Fllec-
tor of Saxony, 24(;, Is solicited to fa-
til'y the demands of Maurice, ; '.. His
present dititulties, 2q3. Refuifr' any
dire& compliance with the derr.rdls of
Maurice, 256 Is disposed to yield by

the

the progress of Maurice's operations, 57.
Makes a peace with Maurice at Paffau,
259. Refletions on this treaty, 160.
Turns his arms against France, 166.
Lays siege to Metz, 270. Is joined by
Albert of Brandenburgh, 271. His army
distressed by the vigilance of the Duke of
Guise, 172. Raises the siege and re-
tires in a shattered condition, 274. Cos-
mo di Medici asserts his independency
against him, 275. Siena revolts againIt
him, 276. Is dejeced at his bad fuc-
cess, 279. Takes Terrouane and de-
molifhes it, 286. Takes Hefdin, i6.
Proposes his son Philip as a husband to
Mary Queen of England, 199. The ar-
ticles of the marriage, 300. Marches to
oppose the French operations, 308. Is
defeated by Henry, 309. Invades Pi-
cardy, ib. Grants Siena, subdued by
Cosmo di Medici, to his son Philip, 318.
A diet at Augsburg opened by Ferdinand,
326. Leaves the interior adminifiration
of Germany to Ferdinand, 329. Applies
again to Ferdinand to resign his preten-
lions of fucceflion to Philip, but is re-
fused, 330. Recess of the diet of Augf-
burg on the fubje& of religion, 332. A
treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV.
and Henry II. of France against him,
349. Resigns his hereditary dominions
to his son Philip, ib. His motives for
retirement, 350. Had long meditated
this resignation, 353. The ceremony of
this deed, 354. His speech on the occa-
lion, 355. Resigns also the dominions
of Spain, 358. His intended retirement
into Spain retarded, 359. A truce for
five years concluded with France, 360.
Endeavours in vain to secure the Imperial
crown for Philip, 370. Resigns the Im-
perial crown to Ferdinand, 372. Sets
out for Spain, ib. His arrival and recep-
tion in Spain, 373. Is distressed by his
son's ungrateful negleet in paying his
pension, 374. SiKes his retreat in the
monastery of St. Juflus in Plazencia, lb.
The situation of this monastery, and his
apartments, described, 375. Contrast
between the conduct of Charles and the
Pope, ib. His manner of life in his re-
treat, 413. His death precipitated by
his monaftick severities, 415. Celebrates
his own funeral, 416. Dies, ib. His
charater, 417. A review of the llate of
Europe during his reign, 431. His rc-
quifitions to the crown of Spain,
435.

Chateau Cambrefis, the conferences for

peace between Philip II. of Spain,
and Henry II. of France, removed thi-
ther from Cercamp, 11. 424. The
peace retarded by the demand of Eli-
zabeth,ofEngland forreftitution of Ca-
lais, rb. Particulars of the treaty sign-
ed there between England and France,
4z6. Terms of the pacification be-
tween Philip and Henry, 428.
Cheregato, nuncio from the Pope to the

diet at Nuremburgh, his inftruaions,
11. 207. Opposes the assembling a
general council, 208.
Chtevres, William de Croy, lord of, ap-

pointed by Maximilian to superintend
the education of his grandson Charles,
II. z2. Adrian of Utrecht made pre-
ceptor under him, ib. His direcion of
the studies of Charles, 23. His avarice
corrupts the Flemish court of Charlec,
36. Negotiates a peace with France,
38. Endeavours to prevent an inter-
view between Charles and Ximenes,
39. Attends Charles to Spain, 4o.
His ascendancy over Charles, 44. Hi.
extortions, Ib. His death and the
supposed causes of it, 130.
ChrJijmans, primitive, why averse to the

principles of toleration, Il. 334.

Clement VII. pope, his ele&ion, II. 197.

His character, ib. Grants Cardinal
Wolfey a legantinecommiflion in Eng-
land for life, i98. Refuses to accede
to the league against Francis, 201.
Labours to accommodate the diffe-
rences between the contending partie,
ib. His proceedings with regard to
the Reformers, z21. Concludes a
treaty of neutrality with Francis, 2,.
Enters into a separate treaty witll
Charles after the battle of Pavia, and
the consequences of it, 234. Joins in
an alliance with Francis Sforza, and
the Venetians, againll the Emperor,
266. Absolves Francis from his oatll
to observe the treaty of Madrid, 267
Cardinal Colonna leizes Rome. and in-
vells him in the caltle of St. Angelo,
274. Is forced to an accommodation
with the Imperialilfs, ib. His revenge
againfl the Colonna family, 277. In-
vades Naples, ib. His territories in-
vaded by Bourbon, and his perplexitl
on the occasion, 279. Concludcs a
treaty with lIannoy viceroy of Naple,
280. His conllernation on Bourbon'
motions towards Rome, 283. Rome
taken, and himfeli bcfieged in the

callle

cafle of St. Angelo, 185. Sur-
rendeis himself prisoner, 287. The
Florentines revolt againit him, 294.
Pays Charles a ransom for his liberty,
with other flipulations, 299. Makes
his escape from confinement, 300.
Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec,
ib. Is jealous of the intentions of
Francis, and negotiates with Charles.
306. His motives and fleps towards
an accommodation, 313. Concludes
a separate treaty with Charles, 314.
His interview with the Emperor at
Bologna, 311. Crowns Chatles King
of Lornbar(ly and Emperor ol the Po-
mans 324. His repreli'ntations to
the Emperor against calling a general
council, 328. Has another interview
with Charles at Bologna, and the dif-
ficu!tics raised by him to the ailing a
general council, 339. Agrees to a
league of the Italian States or the
peace o: Italy, 341. His interview
and treaty with Franc's, 344. Mar-
ries Catharine di ledici to the Duke
of Orleans, 345. His protraftion of
the affair of the divorce solicited by
Henry VIII. ib. Reverses Cranmer's
sentence of divorce, under pena.ly of
excommunication, 346. Henry re-
nounces his fuprem-cy. 'b. His death,
347. Refle&ions on his Pontiff ate, ib.
Cler;y, Romilh, remarks on the immo-

ral livesot, and how they contributed
to the progress of the Reformation, II.
103. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, 104. Their ufur-
pations in Germany, during the dif-
putes concerning invetltures, lo6.
Their other opportunities of aggiln-
l;izing themselves there, 107. Their
personal immunities, ,b Their en-
croachments on the laity, loR. The
dreadful effecs of spiritual cenfuics,
lo9. Their devices to licure their
urfirpations, Iro. The united cffet
of all there circumfiances, 114. 01'-
pofr the advancement of learning in
Germany, 117.

C.Iurs, invadedt and over-run by the Em-

peror Charles V. III. 15. Cruel
treatment of l)uren, rb. Humiliating
fihmiffion of the Duke, 16.
Cnritpcrdol ng, a leader of the Analap-

tills at Munster, an account ol, II.
35i, 354 See Anabap. rfl.
Coynae, an alliance formed there agair f

Charles V. by the Pope, theVenerians,
the Duke of Milan, and Francis 1.
1!. 266.

Cdoligli, admiral, governor of Picardy,

defends St. Quintin againfl the Spanifi
general Emanuel Phillibert Duke of
Savoy, 111. 383. His brother D'An-
delot defeated in an endeavour to join
the garrilbn, 384. But D'Andelot
enters the town, 385. His character,
389. The town taken by assault and
himself t ken prisoner, iv.
Cclo;ne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and

Bohemia, brother to the Emperor
Charles V. elected King of the Ro-
mans by the college of Elecors there,
11. 334.
--- Herman. count de Wied, arch-

bishop and elector ol, inclines to the
Reformation, and is opposed by his
canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III. 51. Is deprived and
excommunicated, 71 Feiigns, ieo.
Colonna, Ca.rdinal : onpeo, his characler.

and rivalfhip with P'opl Cl ment VII.
II. 273 Scizes Rome, and inveis
the Pole in the cattle of St. Angelo,
274. Is degrad d, and the reft of the
family excommunicated by the Pope,
277. Is prevailed on by the Pope
when prisoner with the Imperialills,
to solicit his delivery, 299.
-- P'Pr.fper, the Italian general, his

character, II. 141. Appointed to
command the troops in the invasion of
Milan, ib. Drives the French out of
Milan, 143. His armv how weaken-
ed at the death of Pope Leo X. 144.
Defeats Marechal de Lautrec at Bi-
cocca, 147. Reduces (;enoa. 149.
The bad tlate of his troolq when the
French invade Milan, 196. Is en-
abled to defend the city by the ill con-
du&t of Bonnivet the French com-
mander, rb. Dies, and is succeeded
by I.annoy, 201.
Conti 'los, an Aragonian gentleman. em-

ploved by Ferdinand of Arag 'n, to
obtain JIainna's conlent to !iis rcrency
ot Caflile, II. 9. Thrown into a
dung,.on hy the Aichdul'k Philip, i1/.
Cnn/'i7io, nl' Autiburg, drawn up by

Melarnthin, II. 379.
Ccn/lanr, ic privileges or that city

taken awav Iy the Empelor ('halres
V. tor dilohedicnce to the Intetrin,
111. 185.
Crf.roltn oil arhary, an account of the

rift' o, II. 3t4 See Al i, rs,Ulinrarlrn.
(.¥rtcl ol Aragor, a(knowledtlg(c the

Archduke Phili,i's title to thc croVwn,
II 3 Not allnwed to alfemble in
the name of Charles V. Their op-

p11fi;1on

position to his desires, ii. Is pre-
vailed on by the Emperor to recognize
his son Philip as successor to that king-
dom, II1. 9. See Spain.
Cortes of Castile, acknowledges the Arch-

duke Philip's title to the crown, II.
3. Is prevailed on to acknowledge
Ferdinand regent, according to ifa-
bella's will, 7. Acknowledges Philip
and Joanna King and Queea of Car-
tile, and their Con Charles, Prince of
Asturias, 14. Declares Charles King,
and votes him a free gift, 43. Sum-
moned by Charles to meet at Com-
potella inGaLicia, 64. Tumultuary
proceedings thereupon, 65. A dona-
tive voted, 66. Loses all its influ-
ence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 1t8: Its backwardness to
grant supplies for the Emperor's wars
in Italy, 275. Refuses his prefling
solicitations for a supply, 298. Assem-
bled at Toledo to grant supplies to the
Emperor, 418. The remonftrancee
of, 429. The ancient constitution of,
subverted by Charles, ib. See Spain.
-- of Valencia, prevailed on by the

Emperor Charles V. to acknowledge
his son Philip successor to that king-
dom, III. 9. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Flo-

rence for the Pope, expelled by the
Florentines, on the Pope's captivity,
II. 194.

Comno di Medici. See Medici.
Crasmer, archbishop of Canterbury, an-

nuls the marriage of Henry VIII. with
Catharine of Aragon, which was re-
suoed to Henry by the Pope, II. 345.
His sentence reversed by the Pope, 346.
Crefpy, peace of, between the Emperor

and Francis, III. 39.
Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres,

made archbishop of Toledo, by Charles
V. II. 45. Dies, 181.

D.
D'Albert, John, expelled from his king-

dom of Navarre by Ferdinand of Ara-
gon, 11. 19. Invades Navarre, but is
defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 35.

D'Alembert, M. his observations on the

order of Jesuits, II. 456. Note.

D'Andelot, brother to Coligni, is de-

feated by the Duke of Saxony, in an
endeavour to succour St Quintin, III.
384. But enters the town with the
fugitives, 385. The town taken by
assault, 389.

Daatpbin of France, eldefR on of Francia

I. is delivered up, with the Duke of
Orleans, to the Emperor Charles V.
in exchange for his father, as hostage
for the performance of the treaty of
Madrid, 254. His death imputed to
poison, 405. The most probable cause
ot it, 406.

- late Duke of Orleans, second
son of Francis I. commands an army
and invades Spain, 1II. 7. Is forced
to abandon the siege of Perpignan, 8.
Is dissatisfied at the peace of Crefpy,
44. Makes a secret protestation a-
gainft it, ,b.
-- of France, son of Henry II. con-

trac6ed to Mary the young Queen of
Scotland, ll. 168. Is married to
her, 405.
Denmark, a rummary view of the revo-

lutions in, during the sixteenth cen-
tury, 1II. 456.
-- King of, joins the Protestant

league at Smalkalde, II. 424.
De Retz, Cardinal, writes a history of

Fiefco's conspiracy, while a youth, III.
115. ,Vote.

Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II.

of France, affilts the Guiles in per-
fuading Henry to an alliance with
Pope Paul IV. against the Emperor,
J1I. 346. Induces Henry to break
the treaty of Vaucelles, 365. Mar-
ries her grandaughter to one of Mont-
morency's sons, 411. Joins Mont-
morency againR the Guises, lb.
Doria, Andrew, affilft Lautrec in sub-

duing Genoa, II. 196. Conquers and
kills Moncada in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naples, 305.
His chara&er, 307. Is difgulted with
the behaviour of the French, ib, Re-
volts to the Emperor, 308. Opens
to Naples a communication by Tea, ,b.
Rescues Genoa from the French, 310.
Restores the government of, to the
citizens, 31 . The refpet paid to
his memory, 311. Attends the Em-
peror Charles in his difaltrous expgdi-
tion againlt Algiers, 473. His partial
fondnelf for his kinsman Gianneino,
111. 114. Hisnarrow escape in La-
vagno's infurrefion, Iza. Returns on
Lavagno's death, and the dilperfion of
his party, 125. SeeGenoa and Lvagno.
- iannetino, his chara&er, Ill. I 4.
Is murdered by Lavagno's confp)ira-
tors, 1ll.
Dosnr, an interview there between Henry

VIII. and the Emperor Charles V.
I1. 74.

Drasut

DragO t a corsair, commands the Turkish

fleet which ravages the coafls of Na-
ples, 11I. 278.
Ds Prat, chancellor of France, his cha-

rafter, II. 192. Commencesa law-
suit against Charles Duke of Bourbon,
for his estate, at the instigation of
Louise the King's mother, ib.
Duelling, the cuflom of, how rendered

general, II. 303. Its influence on
manners 304.
Duren in Cleves, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. the inhabitants put to the
sword, and the town burnt, III. 15.

E.
Eccins, an adversary of Luther's, holds a

publick disputation with him at Leip-
sic, on the validity of the Papal autho-
rity, II. 94.
Ecclefiaflical censures of the Romish

church, the dreadful effecs of, 1. 109.

Reservation, in the recess of

the diet of Augsburg, remarks on, II.
Edinbrgb, plundered and burnt by the

earl of Hertford, III. 35.
Edoard VI. of England, his character,

1II. 298.
Egmont, count of, commands the cavalry

at the battle of St. Quintin, and puts
Montmorency's troops to flight, III.
385. Engages Marelhal de Termes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival
of an Englilh squadron, 407.
Egypt, how and by whom added to the

Ottoman Empire, II. 5o.
Ehrenburgb, the caRtle of, taken by Mau-

rice of Saxony, 111. 242.
Eigaotas, a faction in Geneva o termed,

an account of, 11. 386.
Elizabeth fiter of Mary, her acceflion to

the crown of England, III. 421. Her
charater, ib. Is addressed by Philip
of Spain, and Henry of France, for
marriage, ib. Her prudent conduct
between them, 412. How determined
againli Henry, 423. Her motives for
rejecting Philip, tb. Returns Philip
an evasive answer, 424. Demands rc-
Ritution of Calais at the conferences
at Chateau Cambrefis, ib. Efablifhes
the Proteltant religion in EIngland,
415. Treaty between her and Henry
signed at Chateau Cambrefis, 416.
Emmanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy.

See Savoy.
Enagand, by what means that kingdom

was freed from the papal supremacy,
and received the doctrines of the Refor-

mation, II. 346. Mary Queen of,
married to Prince Philip, son of the
Emperor Charles V. contrary to the
fenfeofthe nation, I1. 300. The
marriage ratified by parliament, 303.
Is reluctantly engaged by Philip, now
King of Spain, in the war againRt
France, 381. Mary levies money by
her prerogative to carry on the war,
382. Calais taken by the Duke of
Guise, 400. Guifnes and Hames
taken, ib. Death of Mary and ac-
ceflion of Elizabeth, 411. The Pro-
tefant religion established by Elizabeth,
425. Treaty with France signed at
Chateau Cambrefis, 46. Its interior
strength how increased by the conduct
of Henry VIII. 440. Its power no
longer fruitlessly wafted on the conti-
nent, 442. Alteration of its condu&A
toward Scotland, 443.
Enguiin, the count de, besieges Carig-

nan, III. 30. Defiresof Francis, per-
miflon to engage Guafto, 31. De-
feats GuaRo in a pitched battle, 32.
Erard de la Mark, ambassador of Charles

V. to the diet of Frankfort, his pri-
vate motives for thwarting the preten-
sions of Francis I. of France, to the
Imperial crown, 1I. 58. Signs the ca-
pitulation of the Germanick body, on
behalf of Charles, 60.
Erafmnu, some account of, 1?. 118.

Preceded Luther in hiscenfures against
the Romilh church, ib. Concurs with
him in his intentions of reformation,
119. Motives which checked him in
this, ib.
Efiurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in

memory of the battle of St. Quintin,
Ill. 391.
Europe, a Ihort view of the lRate of, at

the death ot the Emperor Maximilian,
11. 48. The contemporary monarchs
of, all illustrious, at the time of Charles
V. 77. The method of carrying on
war in, how improved beyond the prac-
tice of earlier ages, II. 199. The fen-
timtnts of, on Charles's treatment of
the Pope, 292. A ieview ofthe Rate
of, during the reign of the Emperor
CharlesV II. 431. Theremarkable
change in, at this period, 432. How
affeCted by the revolt of Luther againit
the church of Rome, 445.
Etrtmi, King of Algiers, engages Bar-

barofia in his service, and is murdered
by him, 11. 363.

Excommurnicatir:

Excemmunicatio in the Romish church,

the original infitution of, and the
use made ofit, II. 109.

F.
Farmefe, Alexander, his unanimous

ele&ion to the Papacy, II. 347. See
Paul IlI.
- Cardinal, accompanies the troops

lent by the Pope to the Emperor,
against the army of the ProLeftant
league, 111. 93. Returns difgutted,
94. Leads the troops home again
by the Pope's order, rlz. Contri-
butes to the election of Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, 190.
---- Otavio, grandson of Pope Paul

IlI. endeavours to furprize Parma,
and enters into treaty with the Em-
peror, III. J88. Is confirmed in
Parma, by Julius 11I. 209. Pro-
cures an alliance with France, 211.
Is attacked by the Imperialitts, but
successfully protected by the French,
ib. Placentia restored to him by
Philip II. of Spain, 394.
----- Peter Lewis, natural son of

Pope Paul III. obtains of his father
the dutchies of Parma and Placentia,
Il. 54. His characer, 165. Is
affaflinated, 166.
.Fcrdinand, King of Aragon, how he

acquired his kingdoms, 11. a. In-
vites his daughter Joanna, and her
hulband, Philip Archduke of AuRtria,
to Spain, 3. Becomes jealous of
Philip, ib. Carries on his war with
France vigorously, notwithstanding
Philip's treaty with Lewis, 5. His
Queen Isabella dies, and leaves him
regent of CaRlile, under reftri&tions,
6. Resigns the kingdom of Calfile,
and is acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, ib. His character, 7. His
maxims of government, odious to the
Castilians, ib. Required by P'hilip
to resign his regency, 8. Joanna's
letter of consent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself con-
fined, 9. Is deserted by the Castilian
nobility, ib. Determines to exclude
his daughter from the fucceflion by
marrying, ib. Marries Germaine de
Poix niece to Lewis XII, of France,
1 . A treaty between him and Phi-
lip at Salamanca, by which the re-
gency of Castile is jointly veiled in
them, and Joanna, ib. Prevails on
Henry VII. of England to detain
Philip for three months, when driven
on that coast, z. The Caflilians
declare against him, ib. Resigns the
regency of Castile by treaty, 13.

TO TH E

Interview between him and Philip,
tb. Is absent, at Ntaples, when Phi-
lip died, 17. Returns, and gains
with the regency of Calfile the good
will or the natives by his prudent
adminiftratlon, 18. ' cquires by
dilhonourable means the kingdom of
Navarre, 19. How he deltroyed his
constitution, tb. Endeavours to ex-
clude his grandobn Charles from his
Spanifi fucteflion, 2o. Alters his
will in favour of Charles, ib. Dies,
1. Review of his administration,
24. Ximenes appointed, by his will,
regent of Castile, until the arrival
of Charles V. 25
Ferdtnand, second son of Philip Arch-

duke of Austria born, II. 5. Left
regent of Aragon, by his grandfather
Ferdinand. 2o. This, revoked by a
subsequent will, by which he obtains
only a pension, zi. Dilcontented
with his disappointment, he is taken
to Madrid under the eye of ( ardinal
Ximenes, 27. Sent by Charles V.
to visit their grandfather Maximilian,
45. Is eleted King of Hungary and
Bohemia, 289. Signs a deed called
the Reverse, ib. The Emperor en-
deavours to get him elected King of
the Romans, 33z He is opposed by
the - Protestants, 333. Is crowned
King of the Romans, 334. Forms a
con;ederacy against the Anabaptists
at Munster, 356. Opposes the ref-
toration of Ulric Duke of Wurtem-
berg, 360. Recognizes his title and
concludes a treaty with him, ib. His
kingdom of Hungary wrefled from
him by John Zapol Scaepius, 466.
Besieges the young King Stephen And
his mother in Buda, but is defeated
by the Turks, 468 His mean of-
sers of fubmiflion to the Porte, ib.
which ale rejeeted, 470 Courts
the tavour of the Poteliants, Ill.
23. Opens the d'et at W rms, 47.
Requires it to Iubmit to the dec:fi-
onsof the council ot Trent, 48. A-
grees to ply a tribute to Solyman
for Hungary, 73. Encroaihes on
the liberties of Bohemia, r59. His
rigorous treatment of Pligue, 161.
Disarms the Bohemians, ib. Ob-
tains the fovezeignty of the city of
Conflance, 185. Invades Tranfyl-
vania by invitation of Martinuzzi.
123. Obtains the resignation of
Transylvania Irom Queen Isabella,
225. Orders Martinuzzi to be aflaf-
finated, 217. Enters into negotiation

with

with Maurice on behalf of the Em-
peror, 2zS. His motives for promot-
ing the Emperor's agreeing with Mau-
rice, z55. Isabella and her son Ste-
phen, recover poffeflion of Tranfylva-
nia, 289. Opens a diet at Auglburg,
and excites suspicions in the Protestants,
326. The Emperor leaves the inter-
nal adminifration of German affairs to
him, 329. Is again applied to by the
Emperor to resign his pretensions of
fucceflion to Philip, but refuser, 330.
Endeavours therefore to gain the
friendship of the diet, 33r. Again re-
fuses the Emperor's solicitations, 371.
Charles resigns the Imperial crown to
him, 372. Assembles the college of
Eleaors at Frankfort, which acknow-
ledges him Emperor of Germany,
40z. The Pope refuses to acknow-
ledge him, ib.
Feudal government, a view of, as it

exiftedin Spain, II. 159.
Fie/co, count of Lavagna. See Laoagna.

- Jerome, engages in his bro-

ther's conspiracy, and fails in securing
Andrew Doria, 122. His imprudent
vanity on his brother's death, 124.
Shuts himself up in a fort on his estate,
126. Is reduced and put to death,
131.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt a-

gainft Pope Clement VII. on the news
of his captivity, and recover their li-
berty, II. 294. Are reduced to sub-
je&ion to Alexander di Medici, by the
Emperor, 323. Alexander di Medici,
Duke of affaflinated by his kinsman
Lorenzo, 416. Cosmo di Medici, ad-
vanced to the sovereignty, 417. Col'mo,
fuppdrted by the Emperor, defeats the
partizanj of I.orenzo, 418. Cofino
asserts his independency on the Em-
peror, 11I. 275.
FoSfeca, Antonio de, commander in

chief of the forces in Spain, ordered by
(Cardinal Adrian to besiege the inlur-
gents in Scg,'via, 11. 157. Is denied
liberty of taking military fto:cs, by the
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, d'.
Attacks and almost burns the whole
tovn, 1q8. Is repulied, ib. His
houle at Vall Idolid buint, lb.

Franfe, the acquifiions of that kingdom,

during the reign of the rlnperl]r
Charlle V. Ill. 437. T'he chlaactcr
of the people of, 438. The go"'i co"n-
fleuences of the civil wars in tliat
kingdom to the telt of' Eulope, 4o.

Francis I. King of France, concludes a

peace with Charles V. and the condi-
tions of the treaty, II. 38. Sends a
fruitless embassy to Charles for the
reflitution of Navarre to the young
King, 46. Aspires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Maximilian, 49.
Realons by which he supported his
pretensions, o5. Remarks on the
equipages of his ambassadors to the
German States, 52. His pretensions
adopted by the Venetians, 53. Loses
the election, 59. Rife of the rivallhip
between him and Charles, 67. Courts
the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 73.
Promises Wolfey his interest for the
Papacy, 75. Has an interview with
Henry VIII. of England, ib. Wrestles
with Henry and throws him, ib.
.N:te. His advantages over Charles,
at the commencement of holtilities
between them, 127. Concludes an
alliance with the Pope, 129. Invades
and reduces Navarre, in the name of
Henry D'Albert, son of John, the for-
mer King, 132. The French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre
their general, who is taken prisoner
by the Spaniards, 133. RetakesMou-
son from the Imperialists, 135. In-
vades the Low Countries, but lol'e;
the opportunities of success by impru
dence, lb. Rejecs the demands of
Charles at the congrels at Calais, 137.
A league concluded between Charles
and Henry VIII. againit him, :b. Hi,
imprudent appointment of the Mare-
chal de Foix to the government of Mi-
lan, 139. Ie Foix attacks Reggio,
but is repulscd by the governor Guic-
ciardini the hiltorian, 140. The Pope
declares againllt him, ib. His embal-
rafiments o(n the invasion of Milan,
141. His mother seizes the money
appointed for payment of the Milancle
troops, i6. Milan taken, and the
French driven out, 143. I.evies a Ibo-
dy of Swil's, 146. Who infillt on giv-
ing a precipitate battle to the Imperia-
lills, which is loll, 147. War declared
againit him by Henry VIII. 149. Hii
expedients to lupply his trealury, n'.
The plan 1,tliued by him to ielilt the
inicurlion of the Engliflh, i I. Picardy
inv:;ldcl by Henry, ib. The Venetian:
Iar ue with tl.e l'niplcor ol gainil hlimn,
ly!. ITo which Pope Ah iali, ac ced ;,
I)o. Hi.s exdfleiiiou'; Iovement a-
gainitt the Milanuel;, tb. DI'orncel tel

by the Duke of Bourbon's conspiracy,

Taxes him with betraying his

cause, which Bourbon denies, 194.
Bourbon escapes to Italy and Francis
returns, 195. Appoints the admiral
Bonnivet to command against the Mi-
lanefe, lb. Picardy invaded by the
Duke of Suffolk, who is driven back,
.oo. Repulses the invasion of Guienne
and Burgundy by Charles, ib. His fuc-
cefitul close of the campaign, lb. His
prudent care to disappoint the Imperia-
liRs in their invasion of Provence, 2 16.
Assembles an army, which causes the
Imperialists to retire from Marseilles,
217. Determines toinvade the Mila-
nefe, 218. Appoints his mother Louise
regent during his absence, 219. En-
ters Milan, and takes poiTeflion of the
city, ib. Advised by Bonnivet to be-
siege Pavia, 221. His vigorous attacks
on Pavia, 222. Concludes a treaty
of neutrality with Pope Clement, 213.
His imprudent invasion of Naples, 224.
Resolves by Bonnivet's advice to attack
Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief
of Pavia, 226. Is routed at the battle
of Pavia. 227. Istakenprifoner, 228.
Is sent to the castle of Pizzitchitone
under the custody of Don Ferdinand
Alarcon, 229. Refuses the propofiti-
ons made to him by Charles, 237.
Is carried to Spain on his desire of a
personal interview with Charles, 238.
Is rigorously treated in Spain, 245.
Falls dangerously ill, ib. Is visited by
Charles, 246. Resolves to resign his
kingdom, 249. Is delivered from his
captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 250.
His secret protestations against the va-
lidity of this treaty, 252. Marries
the Queen of Portugal, ib. Recovers
his liberty, and the Dauphin and the
Duke of Orleans delivered up hofages
to Charles for the performance of the
treaty of Madrid, 254. Writes a let-
ter of acknowledgment to Henry VIII.
of England, 164. His reply to the Im-
perial ambassadors, 265. Enters into
a league with the Pope, the Venetians
and Sforza, against Charles, 266. Is
ablolved from his oath to observe the
treaty of Madrid, 267. His behaviour
to the Emperor's second armbafly, 269.
Is dispirited by his former ill success,

70. Enters into a treaty with Henry
VIII. of England against the Emperor,
194, SuccelTfe of his general Lau-

T o T HEi

trec in Italy, z97. His reply to the
Emperor's overtures, 301. Declares
war against him, and challenges him to
single combat, 302. Treats Andrew
Doria ill, who revolts from him to the
Emperor, 308. His army, under Sa-
luces, driven out of Italy, 310. His
troops ia Milan routed, 312. His
endeavours toward an accommodation,
313. Terms of the peace of Cambray,
concluded by the mediation of his mo-
ther Louise and Margaret of AuRria,
315. Remarks on the sacrifices made
by him in this treaty, and on his con-
duq of the wr, 3 6. Leagues secret-
ly ith the Protestant Princes, 334.
His measures to elude the treaty of
Cambray, 342. His negotiations with
the Pope, 343. His interview and
treaty with the Pope, 344. Gives the
Duke of Orleans in marriage to Catha-
rine di Medici, 345. Negotiates a
treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke of
Milan, 379. His envoy Merveille exe-
cuted at Milan for murder, lb. Is dif-
appointed in his endeavours to negoti-
ate alliances against the Emperor, 380.
Invites Melanthonto Paris, 381. Evi-
dences his zeal for the Romilh religion,
382. Causes of his quarrel with the
Duke of Savoy, 384. Seizes the
Duke's territories, 385. His preten-
lions to the dutchy of Milan, on the
death of Francis Sforza, 389. The
Emperor's invective against him before
the Pope in counsel, 391. Is invaded
by Charles, 395. His prudent plan of
defence, 398. Joins the army under
Montmorency, 402. Death of the
Dauphin, 405. Obtains a decree of
the parliament ofParis against the Em-
peror, 406. Invades the Low-Coun-
tries 407. A suspension of arms in
Slanders, and how negotiated, 408.
A truce in Piedmont, 409. Motives
to these truces, b. Concludes an al-
liance with Solyman the Magnificent,
410. Negotiations for a peace with
the Emperor, 412. Concludes a truce
for ten years at Nice, 413. Reflefions
on the war, 6b. His interview with
Charles, 414. Marries Mary of Cuife
to James V. of Scotland, 420. Re-
futes the offers of the deputies of
Ghent, 436. Informs Charles of
the offers made by them, 437 Grante
the Emperor leave to pals through
France to the Netherlands, 439.

His

His receptidn ofthe Emperor, 440. Is
deceived by the Emperor in refpet to
Milin, 443. lise ambassador td the
Porte, Rincon, muidered by the Irm-
taerial governlor of the Milanese, III.
3. Prepares to refert the injury, 4.
Attacks the Emperor with five armies,
6. His first attempts rendered abor-
tive; by the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleans, 8. Renews his negotiati-
ons with Sultan Solyman, 14. Invades
the Low-Countries, 15. Forces the
Emperor to raise the siege ot Landrecy,
17. Dismisses BarbarofTa, 30. Gives
the count d' Enguien permiflion to en-
gage Guaflo, 31. Relieves Paris, in
danger of being furprized by the Erm-
peror, 39. Agrees to a separate peace
with Francis, ib. Henry's haughty
return to his overtures of peace, 44.
Death of the Duke of Orleans, 53.
Peace of Campe, 84. Perceives a ne-
ceffity of checking the Emperbr's am-
bitious designs, 128. Sorns a general
league against him. ib. Dies, 132.
His life and chariater summarily com-
pared with those o Charles, ib. Con-
sequences of his death, 135.
Francis II. his acceflion to the crown of

France, and charact&r, IIl. 430.

Frankfort, the diet of, afeembled for the

choice of an Emperor at the death of
Maximilian, 1I. 56. Names and views
of the Electors, ib. The empire of-
tered to Frederick of Saxony, ib.
Who reje&ts it, with his reasons, 57.
Choofes Charles V. Emperor, 59. His
confirmation of the Germanick privi-
leges required and agreed to, 60. City
of, embraces the reformed religion, 1I.
2o6. The college of Elec&ors afembled
there by Ferdinand, who is acknowledg-
ed Emperor of Germany, 111. 402.

Frederick Duke of Saxony, affemhles

with the other Ele&tors at the diet of
Frankfort, to choose an Emperor, II.
;6. The Empire offered to him, ib.
Rejecs it, and votes for Charles V. 57.
Refuses the presents of the Spanish am-
baffadors, 58. This disinterestcd be-
haviour confirmed by the testimony of
hiforians, ib, Note. Choofes Martin
Luther philosophical professor at his
university of Wittemberg, 83. Encou-
rages Luther in his opluxfition to indul-
gences, 85. Prote&s him aainlt Ca.
jetan, 90. Caufis Luther to be sei'ed
at his return fiin the die at Vauiznm,

VOL. II.

and conceals him at Wartburg, 124.
Dies, 339.
Fregofo, the French ambaflador to Venice,

murdered by the Marquis del Guafto,
the Imperial governor of the Milanese,
11l. 3.
Frondfperg, George, a German noble-

man, some account of, he joins the
army of Charles V. 11. 275.

G.
Generalof the Jesuits, in inquiry into

his office and defpotick authority, III.
448.
Gener.a, an account of its revolt against

the Duke of Savoy, I1. 386.

Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French

general, II. 296. The French endea-
vour to prejudice its trade in favour of
Savona, 307. Is rescued from the
French by Andrew Doria, 310. The
government of, fettled by the difinte-
reftednefs of Doria, 311. The honour
paid to Doria's memory, 312. Is
visited by the Emperor, 3r1. A
scheme formed to overturn the confti-
tution of, by Fiefco, count of Lavag-
no, 111. 116. He afrembles his ad-
herents, 119. The conspirators sally
forth from Lavagno's palace, 1izz
Deputies Cent to know Lavagno's
terms, 1 3. Lavagno drowned, ib. The
infurre&ion ruined by the imprudence
of his brother Jerome Fiasco, 124.
The confpiratorb disperse, ib. Jerome
reduced and put to death, 131.
Germanalas, an association in Valencia,

so termed, on what occasion formed,
11. 18z. Refuse to lay down their
arms, ib. Their resentment levelled
at the nobility, who raise an army a-
gainft them, 183. Defeat the nobles
in several actions, 184. But arc rout-
ed and dispersed by them, ib.
Germany, slate of, at the death of the

E'mperor Maximilian, II. 48. Charles
V. of Spain, and Francis I, of France,
form pretensions to the Imperial crown,
49. Their refpecive reasons offered
in favour of their claims, 50, 51.
Views and interests of the other Eu-
ropean States in relation to the com-
petitors, 52. Henry VIII. of England,
advances a claim, 53. But is difcou-
raged from prosecuting it, 54. How
the Papacy was likely to be affcted
in the choice of an Emperor, ib. Ad-
vice of Pope Leo. X. to the German

H h Princes,

Princes, 55. Opening of the diet at
Frankfort, i. In whom the eletion
of an Emperor is veRted, 56. Views
of the Electors, ib. The Empire of-
sered to Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who
rejets it, andhis resfons, 57. Charles
V. chosen, 59. The capitulation of the
Germanick privileges confirmed' by
him, 60. Charles fete out for, 66.
Charles crowned at Aix la Chapelle,.
76. Commencement of the Reforma-
tion there, by Martin Luther, 78.
Treatment of the bull of excommu-
nication publified against Luther, 96.
The usurpations of the clergy there,
during the disputes concerning invefti-
tures, so6. The clergy of, mostly
foreigners, lo. The benefices of,
nominated by the Pope, i i. The
expedient of the Emperors for restrain-
ing this power of the Pope, ineffeEual,

zi. The great progress of Luther's

doctrines in, no6. Grievances of
the peasants, 255. InfurreEtion in
Suabia, 256. The memorial of their
grievances, %17. The insurrection
quelled, 258. Another infurrecion
in Thuringia, ib. How the house of
Austria became so formidable in, 289.
Proceedings relating to the Reforma-
tion there, 19o. Great progress of
the Reformation there, 314. Ferdi-
nand King of Hungary and Bohemia,
brother to Charles V. elected King of
the Romans, 334. The Protestant re-
ligion eftablihed inzSaxony, 427. The
Protestant religion eftablilhed in the
Palatinate, III. 56. The league of
Smalkalde raise an army against the
Emperor, 86. Ae put under the ban
of the Empire, 88. The Protestant
army dispersed, io6. The Intrim en-
forced by the Emperor, 180. Maurice
of Saxony raises an army, and declares
in favour of the Protestants,137. Mau-
rice favoured even by the Catholick
Princes, and why, 252. Treaty of
Paiau, between the Emperor and Mau-
rice of Saxony, 259. Truce between
the Emperor and Henry of France, 360.
Charles resigns the Imperial crown to
his brother Ferdinand, 372.
Gbeht, an infurrecion there, II. 431.

The pretensions of the citizens, 431.
Form a confederacy against the Queen-
dowager of Hungary, their governess,
433. Their deputies to the Emperor,
how treated by him, ib. Offer to sub-
mit to France, 434. Is reduced by
Charles, 442

Gbibelirt faion in Italy, a view of, UI

171.
Girvo, Don Pedro de, appointed to the

command of the army of the Holy
Junta, It. 17. Resigns his commis-
sion and Padilla replaced, 17i.
Goletta in Africa, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. II 37 1. Gonzaga,.the Im-
perial governor of Milan, procures
Cardinal Farnese to be aaflrinarted, and
takes pofleffion of Placentia for the
Emperor, II1. s66. Prepares to seize
Parm, o09. Is repulsed by the
French, as1.
Granvelle, Cardinal, his artifice to pre-

vail on the count de Sancerre to fur-
render St. Difiere to the Emperor, IIIl
36 Endeavours to lullthe Protestants
into security with regard to the Em-
peror's conduct toward them,. 6. Is
commissioned by Philip to address the
assembly at the Emperor's resignation
of his hereditary dominions,. 357.
Gravelines, an interview there between

the Emperor Charles V. and Henry
VIII. of England, II. 76.
Gropper, canon of Cologne, is appointed

a manager of the Protestant and Ca-
tholick conferences before the diet at
Ratibton, 11. 462. Writes a treatise
to compose the differences between
them, ib. The sentiments of both
parties on this work, 463,
Granada, archbilhop of, president of the

council'ofCaftile, his imprudent ad-
vice to Cardinal Adrian, relating to
the infurreEion in Segovia, II. 57.
GsaoJe,. the Marquis del, appointed go-

vernor of Milan, by the Emperor, II.
404. Procures Rincon the French am-
baslador to the Porte, to be murdered
on his journey thither, Ill. 3. De.
fends Carignan agailnt the French, 30.
Defeated by d'Enguien in a pitched
battle, 32.
Gricciardini, his account of the publica-

tion of Indulgences contradiEted, II. 86.
Defends Reggio against the French,
140. Repulses an attack upon Parma,
by the French, 145. His fentimentu
of the Pope's treaty with Lannoy vice-
roy of Naples, 80o.
Guifi, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is

made governor of Mets by Henry II.
of France, III. 267. His charater,
ib. Prepares to defend it against the
Emperor,z68. Hisbrotherd'Aumale
taken prisoner by the Imperialills, 17 r.
The Emperor raises the ficge, 74.

Hi:

His humane treatment of the diftrefied
and sick Germans left behind, rb. Per-
fathids Hetry to tn alliince with Pope
Pant IV. 346. Marches with' troops
into Italy, 376. Is unable to effe&c
any thing, 377. Is recalled from Italy
after the defeat of St. Qtintirn, 393.
His reception in France 397. Takes
the field against Philip, 398. Invests
and takes Calais from the English, 400.
Takes also Guilhne and Hamies, ib.
Takes Thionville in Luxembourg, 406.
Ouie, Mary of, married to James V. of

Scotland, If. 420. FruRfrates the in-
tended marriage between her daughter
Mary, and prince Edward of England,
111. 29.
Gurk, Cardinal de, why he Favoured the

elecion of Charles V. to the Imperial
crown, II. 58. Signs the capitulation
of the Germanick body on behalf of
Charles, 60.
Gwfmas chancellor to the Emperor Ser-

diriand, is Cent to Pope Paul IV. to no-
tify the eletion, who refuses to fee
him, Il. 402.

H.

Hamburgh, city or, embraces the re-

formed religion, 11. 206.
Hear, the conde de, appointed to com-

mand the army of the CaRilian nobles
agiinft the Holy Junta, II. 171. At-
tacks Tordefillas, and'gets possession of
Queen Joanna, ib. Routs the army of
the Junta, and takes Padilla prisoner,
who is executed, 177.

Hfeea' Aga, deputy governor of Algierr,

his piracies against the ChriRian Hlates,
II. 472. Is besieged in Algiers by the
Emperor Charles V. 474. Makes a
successful rally, 475. The Emperor
forced by bad weather to return back
again, 478.

HaFradio, i potter's Con of Lesbos, com-

mences pirate, II. 364. See Bardb-
roda.

Ilheatbe, ancient, why the principles of

mutual toleration were generally ad-
mitted among them, 111. 334.
Hildo, vice chancellor to Charles V. at-

tends the Pope's nuncio to Smalkalde,
II. 411. Forms a Catholick league in
oppofitiio to the' Protelfnt one, 414.

Hnory II. King o'fPrance, hhl motives for

declining' an alliance with Pope Paul
Ill. againt the Emperor, Il. 168.
Procures for Scotland a peace vw;it
England, 210. The young Queen
Mary, contrdfed to the Dauphin, and

sent to France for education, i. En-
ters into an alliance with OCtavio Par-
nefe Duke of Parma, 2ar. Protefl
against the counci! of Trent, a2a.
bikes alliance with Maurice Elector
of Stxony, 229. Seconds the opera-
tiona of Maurice, 238. His army
marches and' eizes Metz, 240. At-
tempts to furprize Strafburgh, 248.
Is strongly Solicited to spare it, 249.
Returns, 250. The Emperor prepires
for war againt him, 267. Instigates
the Turks to invade Naple., 278.
Terrouane taken and dermilifhed by
Charles; 286. Hedin taken, ib. Leads
an army into the Low-Countries against
Charles,287. Endeavours to obfrut
the marriage of Mary of England with
Philip of Spain, 306. The progress of
his arms against the Emperor, 307.
Engages Charles, 309. Retires, ib.
Corno di Medici, Duke of Plorence,
makes war against him, 311. Appoidts
Peter Strozzi commander of his army
in Italy, 312. Strozzi defeated, 314.
Siena taken, 316. Pope' Paul IV.
makes overtures to an alliance with
him against the Emperor, 345. Mont-
morency's argumemns agalttt this alli-
ance, ib. Is periuaded by the Guiies
to accept it, 346'. Sends the Cardinal
of Lorrain with'powers to conclude it,
ib. The Pope figds the treaty, 348.
A trace for five years concluded with
the Emperor, 360. Is exhorted by
Cardinal Caralfa, to break the truce,
363. Is absolved from his oath, and
concludes a new treaty with the:Pope,
36f. Sends the Duke of Guise into
Italy, 378. The ConRableMotntmo-
rency defeated and taken prrloner at
St. Quintin, 385. Henry'prepaes for
the defence of Paris, J87. St. Qun-
tin taken by assault, 389. Collets his
troops and negotiates for assistance, ib.
His kind reception of the Duke of
Cuife, 397. Calais taken b?';Gufe,
400. Impowers Montmorency to ne-
gociate a peace wl h Philip, 4 11. to-
nours him highlyboehis return toPrnrce,
412. Writes to Queen Elizabeth.
with proposals of marriage, 421. Hbw
he failed in his Cult, 421. His diugh-
ter married to Philip, and his fiter to
the Duke of Savoy, 427 'Terms of
the treaty orChateau CarnIb'tes, 428.
The marriage'ofhis sifter ahd daughter
celebrated-wlth"great omps, 340. His
death, ib.

Hhl a

HNrry

Henry VII. of England, detains the arch-

duke Philip and his dutchess, when dri-
ven on his coast, three months, at the
instigation of Ferdinand, II. 1i.
Henry VII . of England, fends an ambafa-

dor to Germany to propose his claims to
the Imperial crown, 11. 5g. Is dif-
couraged from his pretentions,and takes
no part with the other competitors, 54.
His personal charaer and political in-
fluence in Europe, 70. Entirely guid-
ed by Cardinal Wolfey, 7i. Receives
a visit from the Emperor Charles V.
74. Goes over to France to vilit
Francis, 75. WreAlles with Francis,
and is thrown by him, -ib Note. Has
another interview with Charles at Gra-
velines, 76. Charles offers to submit
his differences with Francis to his arbi-
tration, ib. Publilhes a treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, against Martin Lu-
ther, 15,. Obtains of the Pope the
title of Defender of the Fatib, -l6.
Takh es

with Charles against Fran-

cis, 127. Sends Wolfey to negociate
an accommodation between the Em-
peror and Francis,. J16. Concludes a
league with Charles against Francis,
137. His avowed reasons for this
treaty, ib. His private motives, 1s8.
Declares war against Francis, 49. Is
visited by Charles, 15o. Makes de-
scents upon the coast of France, ib.
Advances with an army into Pitardy,
5 i. Obliged to retire-by the Duke
de Vendome, ib. Enters into a treaty
with the Emperor and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 193. How he rgifed fupplles
for his wars beyond the grants of his
parliament, 199. Sends the Duke of
Suffolk to invade Picardy, who pene-
trates almost to Paris, but is driven
back, aoo. Engages to affit Charles
in an invasion of Provence, a 5.
Causes of his not 'upporting the Impe-
rialils, 117. Effeets of the battle of
Pavia, and captivity of Francis on him,
131. Particulars of his embassy to
Charles, 133. Concludes a defenffve
alliance with France, 139. Is declared
protector of the league of Cognac
against the Emperor, 167. His mo-
tives for assisting the Pope against the
Emperor, 293. Enters into a league
with Francis, and renounces the Eng-
lifl claim to the crown of France,
194. Declares war against the Em-
peror, 30t. Concludes a truce with

TO THE

the governess of the Low-Countries,
306. Projecs his divorce from Ca-
tharine of Aragon, 318. Motives
which withheld the Pope from grant-
ing it,.319. Acquiesces in the peace
of Cambray, 320. Sends a supply of
money to the Protestant league in
Germany, 336. Procures his mar-
riage to be annulled by Cranmer, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, 345. The di-
vorce reversed by the Pope under pe-
nalty of excommunication, 346. Re-
nounces the Papal supremacy, ib. Re,-
fuses to acknowledge any council called
by the Pope, 361. Opposes James V.
of Scotland marrying Mary. of Guise,
410. His dilgufls with Francis and in-
tercourfe with the Emperor, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, 111. i .
Makes war with Scotland, 1i. Parti-
culars of his treaty with Charles, ib.
Invades France and inveRts Boulogne,
35. Refuses the Emperor's plan of
operations, 39. Is deserted by the Em-
peror, 43. Takqs Boulogne,ib. His
haughty proposals to Francis, 44.
Peace of Campe, 84. Is succeeded
by his son Edward-VI. a9. A review
of his policy, 441.
Hertford, earl of, plunders and burns

Edinburgh, 11. 35. Joins Henry after,.
in his invasions ot France, ib.

Hetfe, the Landgrave of, procures the re-

ftoration of his kinsman, Ulrtc Duke
of Wurtemburg, II. 36b. His views
compared with those of the Elector of
Saxony, Il. 6i. The Emperor's de-
ceitful profesions to him, 69. Quiets
the apprehensions of the Protestant
league with regard to the Emperor, 70.
Is appointed joint commander of the
army of the league with the Ele&tor
of Saxony, 91. Their characters com-
pared, 91. Urges an attack of the
Emperor, but is opposed by the Elec.,
tar, 95. His letter to Maurice Duke
of Saxony, 103. The army of the
league disperse, o16. Is reduced to
accept harsh terms from Charles, 50o.
His humiliating reception by the Em-
peror, 153. Is detained in confine-
ment, 5 g5. His offers of fubmiflion
flighted by the Emperor, 179. Is
carried by the Emperor with him into
the Netherlands, 183. Renews his
endeavours for liberty, 2o3. Charles
releases arbitrarily the Eletor of Bran-
denburg, and Maurice, from their en-

gagemonts

figements to him, 203. Obtains his
?liberty by the treaty of Paffau, 159.
Is arreted by the Queen of Hungary,
but freed by the Emperor, 264. The
effe6s of his confinement on him, Z65.

.eutergru,, his account of Lewis XII.

*hewn to contradic the relations given
by Belay and other French historians
of the education of Charles V. II. 21.
Note.

J'oy Junta. See Junta.
,;Joey League, against the Emperor Charles

V. Formed at Cognac, under the
protection of Henry VIII. of England,
I'. 166.
floruc, a potter's son of Lesbos, com-

mences pirate, with his brother Hay-.
radin, 1I. 364. See Barbaroesa.
Hungary, is divided .by Solyman the

Magnificent, and its King Lewis II.
killed, i. 288. His successes, and the
number of prisoners carried away, 289.
The archduke Ferdinand elected King
of, together with Bohemia, ib. John
Zapol Scaepius wrests it from Ferdi-
nand, 466. Stephen succeeds on the
death of his father John, 467. Is trea-
cheroufly seized by Solyman, 469. See
Isabella, and Martitazzi.

I.
yames V. of Scotland, levies tro.ops to

afift Francis in Provence, but his in-
tention frustrated, II. 419. His ne-
gociations for marriage with Francis's
daughter, ib. Marries Mary of Guile,
420. Dies, and leaves MIary his in-
sant daughter to succeed him, Ill. ia.
See Mry.
euyert, the order of, by whom founded,
1I. 132. CharaCter of that order, :b.
Chara&er of Ignatio Loyola their
founder, 445. The older confirmed
by the Pope, 446. An examination
into the conititution.of the order, .b.
Office and power of their general,
448. The rapid progref6 of the order,
451. Engage in trade, and eltabklh
an empire in South America, 453.
Bad tendency of the order, 454. Ale
responsible for mofl of the pernicious
effecs of Popeiy, since their inftitu-
etion, 455. Advantages resulting from
their inflitution, ib. Civilize the na-
tives of Paraguay, 457. Their precau-
tions for the independency of their
empire there, 458. How the parti-
',ular Ql their government and inltitu-

tion came to be disclosed, 459. Sum.
mary of their character, 461.

Indulgences, in the Rormifh Church, the

doctrine of, explained, II. 79. By
whom first invented, ib. Martin Lu-
ther preaches against them, 83. Writes
against them to Albert Elector of
Mentz, .4. A bull issued in favour
of, 9. The sale of, opposed in Swit-
zerland by Zuinglius, 94.
'Infantado, Dutke of, his haughty resent-

ment of acafual blow on his horse, II.
430. Is protected by the codtable of
Castile, 431.
'Innocent, a young domestic of cardinal

di Monte, obtains his Cardinal's hat,
onhis eleion to the Papacy, II1. 190.

Interim, a sysem of theology -so called,

prepared by order of the Emperor
Charles V. for the use of Germany,
Ill. r72. Is disapproved of, both by
Protestants and Papists, 176.
Invejfitures, usurpations of the Romi(h

clergy in Germany, during the dif-
putes between the Emperors and
Popes, concerning, II. io6.
Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mo-

ther of Charles V. visits Spain with
her hulband Philip Archduke of Auf-
tria, 11. 3. Is flighted by her hulband,
4. Her charater, ib. Is abruptly left
in Spain by her htriband, ib. Sinks into
melancholy on the occasion, and is
delivered of her second son Ferdinand,
5. Herletter of consent to her fa-
ther's regency of Castile intercepted,
and herfelfconfined, 9. Made joint-
regent ofCatlle with Ferdinand and
Philip by the treaty of Salamanca, t.
Sets out for Spain with Philip, are
driven on the coast of England and dc-
tained three months by'Henry VII. 2.
Acknowledged Queen by the Cortes,
14. .Her tenderness to her husband in
his ticknefs, and extraordinary attach-
ment to his body -when dead, ib. Is
incapable of government, 5. Her son
Charles a(fumies the crown, :8. The
Cortes acknowledge her' son King,
with a relervation in her favour, 44.
Her reception of Padilla the chief of
the Spanifi malcontents, 161. The
Holy Junta removed to Tordefillas the
place of her residence, 161. Relapl'es
into her former melancholy ib. The
proceedings of the Holy Junta car-
ried on in her name, ib. Is leiied by
the Conde de Haro, 171. Dies, after
near fifty years confinemelu, Hli. 3, .

H h 3 70/

3tbn Zapol Scaepius, by the aftiRance of

Sultan Solynan, .eftahJlhes himself in
the kingdom of 'Higary, 11. 466.
Leaves the kingdom to his

' on Sephen,

67. See Hu#gary, I/fabr/4, and
Jarlintz^..

fSabella, daughter of John }I. of Catile,

and wife of Ferdnand King of Ara-
gon, her hifory, II. a. Her concern
at the archduke Philip's treatment of
her daughter Joanna, 4. Her death
and character, 6. Appoints Ferdinand
regent of Caltile updes reftriotions, ib.
_.- daughter to Sigismund King of
Poland, married to John King of Hun-
gary, 11. 467 Her character, sb. Is
treacheroufy ciaried with her infant
son into Transylvania by Sultan Soly-
man, 469. The gopyrnmpnt of this
province and the education cf her son
committed to her jointly with Marti-
nuzzi. ill 222. Is jealous of Marti-
nuzzi's influence, and courts theTurks,
223. is prevailed on to resign Tran-
fylvania to Ferdinand, g14. Retires to
Silcfia. az . Recovers poffeTfio of
Transylvania, 289.

of Portugal, married to the

Emperor Charles V. II. z54.
TJalj, consequences of the league be-

tween Pope Leo X. and the Emperor
Charles V. to, 11. 139. The cha-
ra6ters of the Italians, Epaniards and
French, contrafed, tb. State of, at
the accession of Clement VII. to the
Papacy, ioi. Views of the Italian
States with respeCt to the Emperor
and Francis on the expulsion of the
French from Genoa and the Milanese,
2 14. Their apprehensions on the bat-
tle of Pavia and captivity of Francis,
234. The principal States, join in
the Holy league againlt the Emperor,
266. Are disgusted at the tardiness
of Francis, a72. A view of the
Chibeline fa&ion, ib. Sentiments of
the States of, on the peace of Cam-
bray, 317. Is visited by the Emperor
Charies, 30o. Themotivesofhis mo-
deration toward the States of, 321.
A league among the fates of, formed
by Charles, 341. Placentia granted to
Octavio Farnese by Philip 11. of Spain,
11I. 394. The investiture of Siena giv-
en by Philip to Cofmto di Medici, 396.
The consequence of these grants, ib.
Junta, Holy, a vifw of the confederacy

in Spain, so termed, 11. 160. The
authority of Adrian disclaimed by, 161.

*Removed to Tordefillas where Queen
Joanna resided, 162. Their proceed-
ings carried on in the name of Joan-
na, 1i. Receives letters from Charles
.to lay down their arms, with pro-
miser of pardon, 164. Remonstrance
f grievances drawn up by, ib. The
particulars o this remonflrace, 165.

emarks on the spirit of it, 167.
Are intimidated from pefenting It to
Charles, 169. Propose to deprive
Charles of his royalty during the life o
Joanna, ib. Take the field, l;o. Cha-
rater of their army, ib. The Queen
seized by the Conde de Hero, 171.
sow they obtained money to support
their army, 172. Lose time in nego-
giating with the nobles, 173. prop:fe
to make their peace with Charles at
the expence of the nobles, 175. Their
irnefolute conduct, ib. Their army de-
feated by Haro, and Padilla taken
pritoner, 176. padilla executed, 177.
His letters to his wife, and the city
of Toledo, 178. The ruin of the
confederacy, 179.
Jsl/sa II. Pope, pbfervations on the pon-

tificate of, 1. 0oz.
- Il. Pope, his characer, III. 19o.

Bellows his Cardinal's hat infamously,
ib. Is averse to the calling a council,
192. Summons one at Trent, 193.
Asserts his supreme authority peremp-
torily in the bull for it, osl. Repents
confirming OCtavio FPrnefe in Parma,
209. Requires O&avio to relinquifl
his alliance with France, 211. The
manner of his death, 328.

1,.
La Chat, a Flemish gentleman, affocia-

ted by Charles V. with Cardinal Xi-
menes in the regency of Castile, II.
34.

.aialre y, siege of, by the Emperor

Charles V. Ill. 16. Is abandoned by
him, 17.
Lasaoy, mortgages the revenues of Na-

ples, to supply the exigencies of the
Emperor, 11. 220. Francis furrcndt rs
himfelfprifoner to him at the battle
of Pavia, 228. His cautious difpo.
fal of him,- z29. Delivers him up in
pursuance of the treaty of Madril,
and receives the Duke of Orleans and
the Dauphin, as hostages in exchange,
254. Is Cent ambafTador to Francie
to require his fulfilment of the treaty
of, $68. Concludes a treaty with the

Pope,

IPope, t2o. Marches to join the Im-
perialifts at Rome, where the troops
refuie to obey him, 195.
Lauura, don John de, made Viceroy of

Aragon, on the departure of Charles
V. for Germany, II. 66. Composes
the disturbances there, 184.
Lavagpa, John Lewis Fiefco, count of,

his charater, III. 1 5. Meditates rub-
verting the government of Genoa,
ui6. His preparations, 117. His
artful method of afeembling his adhe-
rents, 19. His exhortation to them,
tao. His interview with his wife,
ila. Sallies forth, 1 2. Andrew Do-
ria escapes, 113. Deputies sent to
know his terms, ib. Is drowned, ib.
His brother's vanity ruins their design,
124. See Fiefco.
Lautrer, Odet de Foix, marechal de,

the French governor of Milan, his
character, 11. 139. Alienates the as-
fetions of the Milanese from the
French, ib. Inverts Reggio, but is
repulsed by Guicciardini the historian,
then governor, 140. As excommuni-
.ated by the Pope, ib. The money for
paying his troops, seized by Louil'e of
*Savoy, 14. Is left by his Swiss troops,
141. Is driven out of the Milanese
territories, 143. new body ofSwifs
under him infifl on giving battle to the
Imperialifs, who defeat him, 147.
The Swiss leave hin, 148. Retires
into France with the refidpe of his
troops, ib. Delivers up the Dauphin
and Duke of Orleans, in exchange for
Francis .1 as holtages for the per-
forrnatce of the treaty of Madiid,
2L4 Is appointed generalissimo of
the league again.l the Fmperor, 296.
-lis successes in Italy, 297. Motives
which withheld him from subduing
the Milanese, ib. Obliges the Prince
of Orange to retire to Naples, 304.
Blockades Naples, 305. His army
wafled, and bimfefl killed by the pefti-
lence, 309.
Learnnj, the revival of, favourable to

the reformation of religion, II. 11.
Llipf , a public disputation held there by

Martin I uther, and Eccits, on the
validity of the papal authority, H. 94.
Lta X. Pope of Rome, his character, II.

54. His apprehenuons on the Eleci-
on of an Emperor of Germany, at the
death of Maximilian, ib. His coun-
cil to the German Princes, 55. Crants
Charles V. a tenth of all ecclefiaflical
benetices in Castile, 6. I.ay. Caf-
xile under an intcrdif but takes it ofl;

at the infiance of Charles, ib. His
conduct on the profpe~ of war be-
tween Charles ad Francis, 69. Situ-
ation of the Papacy at his acceflion,
and his views of policy, 79. His in-
attention to Martin Luther's contro-
verfy with the Dominicans, concerning
indulgencies, 87. Isinftigatedagainft
him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Desires the Elector of Saxony not to
prote&f him, ib. Is prevailed on to
.permit Luther's doctrines to be exa-
mined in Germany, 88. Cardinal Caje-
tan appointed to try him, ib. lffues
a bull in favour of indulgences, 9. A
fulpenfion of proceedings against Lu-
ther, and why, 93. Publihfes a bull
of excommunication againRt him, 95.
The political views of his conduót be-
tween Charles and Francis, i 8.
Concludes a treaty with Francis, 19.
Concludes a treaty allb with Charles,
ib. The conditions of the treaty with
Charles, 130. Its consequences to
Italy, 139. Isdifappointedin a scheme
formed by Merone, chancellor of Mi-
Jan, for attacking that dutchy, 140.
Excommunicates Marecbal de Foix
for his attack of Reggio, and declares
against France, ib. Takes a body of
Swiss into pay, 141. The French
driven out of the Milanese, 143. He
.dies, 144. The spirit of the confe-
deracy broken by his death, ib.
L'Efparre, Foix de, commands the

French troops in Navarre for Henry
D'Albert, II. 13a. Reduces that
kingdom, ib. His imprudent progress
into Caltile, 133. Is taken prisoner
by the Spaniards, and the French
driven out of Navarre, ib.

Leonard, father, forms a scheme to. be-

tray Metz to the Imperialils, Il.
311. Introduces loldiers clad like fri-
ars, 32. Is dettted, 313. Is mur-
dered by his monks, 324.
Lervefcue, Don, his actount of the mo-

tives which induced the Emperor
Charles V. to resign his hereditary do-
minions, Ill. 35.. Note.
Lews II.' King of Hungary and Bohe-

min, his character, II. 188. Is in-
%vaded and killed by Solyman the Mag-
nificent, ib.
- XII. King of France, recrives ho-

mage of the Archduke Philip, for the
earldom of Flntlers, II. 3. Con-
cludes a treaty with him, while at
war with Ferdinand ol Aragon. 5.
Bellows his niece Cermline de Fnix
on Feidinand, alnd concludes 3 I I:lCC

HI h .1 with

with him, to. Loses the confidence ol
Philip on that occasion, 21. ftote,
Bellows his eldest daughter, already
betrothed 'to Charles V. on account
of Angouleme, ib.

LZyna, Antonio de, defends Pavia for

the Ertperor against Francis, II. i2l.
His vigorous defence, Itz. Sallies out
at the battle of Pavia, and contributes
to the defeat of Francis, 2z7. Is left
governor of Milan by the Duke of
Bourbon, 278. Defeats the forces
there, 312. Is appointed generalifimon
of the Italian league, 341; Direts
the operations of the invgfion of
France, under the Emperor, 395.
Dies, 403.
Literature, its obligations to the order

of Jesuits, 1I. 456.

Lerendo di Medici. See Medic;.
Loife of Savoy, mother of Francis I.

of France, her character, II. 14r. Her
motives for seizing the money appoint-
ed for payment of marechal Lautrec's
troops, tb. Cause of her aversion to
the hbufe of Bourbon, 191'. Her ad-
vances towards amarriage with Charles
Duke of Bourbon, rejected' by him,
192. Determines to ruin him, ib.
Inffigates a law-suit againlt him, for
his eftites, ib. Goes to dissuade Fran-
cis from his intended invasion of the
Milanese, who will not wait for her,
218. Is appointed regent during his
ablence, 119. Her prudent conduct
on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity
ofher on Prancis, 231. Concludesa
defensive alliance with Henry VIII.
239. Ratifies the treaty of Mad id
for the recovery of her son's liberty,
253. Undertakes, with Margaret of
Savoy, to accommodate the differences
between the Emperor and Francis,
314. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, 315.
LZyo/l, Ignatio, commands the castle of

Pampeluna in Navarre, and is wounded
in its'defence, II. 132. His enthufi-
aflick turn of mind, it. The
founder of the society of Jesuits, ib.
Prevails on the Pope to establish the
order, 446. An examination into the
conflitution of the order, ib Office
and power of the general, 448. The
rapid progress of the order, 45 1. See

Lorrain, Cardinal of, persuades Henry

11. of France, to accept the offered
alliance with Pope Paul IV. and is sent
to Rome to negociate it, 11l. 346.

His imprudent behaviour toward the
dutchess of Valentinois, 411.

Luaienburgh, Duke of, avows the opini.

ons of Luther, II. 206.
Luther, Martin, the happy consequences

of the opinions propagated by him, II.
78. Attacks Indulgences, 82. His
birth and education, ib. Chosen phi-
lofophical professor at the University of
Wittembeig, 83. Inveighs against
the'publilhersofIndulgences, ib. Writes
to Albert Elector of Mentz, againlt
them, 84. Composes theses against
Indulgences, ib. Is supported 6y the
Augultinians and encouraged by Fre-
derick Elector of Saxony, ib. Is fum-
moned to Rome by Pope Leo, 87. Ob-
tains of the Pope leave to have his
doctrines examined in Germany, 88.
Appears before Cardinal Cajetan at
Augiburg,ib. His resolute reply to
the peremptory order of Cajetan, to
retra& his'principles, 89. Withdraws
rorni Augiburg, and appeals from the
Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed concerning him, tb.
Appeals to a'general council, 92. The
death of Maximilian, how'offervice to
him, 93. Questions the Papal autho-
rity in' a public disputation, 94. His
opinions dondemned by the universities
of Cologne and Louvain,' ib. A bull
of excommunication publilhed against
him, 95. 'Pronounces the Pope to be
Antichrist, and"burns the bull, 96.
Refleclions on the condu& of the
court of Ronie toward him, 97. Re-
fle&ions on his condut, 99. Causes
which contributed to favour his oppofi-
tion to the church of Rome, lol. Par-
ticularly to the'art of Printing, 1l5
And the revival of learning, 16. He
is summoned to appear at the diet of
Worms, 122. A' safe conduct granted
him thither, ib. His reception there,
ib. Refuses to retrac his opinionr,
123. Departs, ib. An edi& publilh-
ed oainft him, ib. He is seized and
concealed at Wartburg, 1z4. Progress
of his doctrines, ib. The university
of Paris publifles a decree againls him,
125. Wrote against by Henry VIII.
of Englarid, i. Answers both, 126.
Withdraws from his retreat to check
the inconsiderate zeal of Carlofladius,
205. Undertakes a tranfation of the bi-
ble, ib. HisdoCrines avowed by several
of the German Princes, ao6. His mode-
rate and prudent conduc, 262. Marries
Catharine a Boria, a nun, ib. The

great

great progress of his doatrines among
the Germanick States, 324. En-
courages the Protestants dispirited by
the Emperor's decree against him,
331. His concern at the practices of
the Anabaptilts at Munfler, 356. Is
invited to Leipick, by Henry Duke
ofSaxony, 427. His opinion of Crop-
per's treatise to unite the Protestants
and Catholicks, 463. Dies, 11. 64.
Summary of his character, 65. Ex-
trad from his la(t will, 68. Note.
See Proteftanti. A view of the ex-
traordinary effcts of his revolt from
the church oF Rome, on that court,
and on Europe in general, 445.
Luxemburg, invaded by Robert de la

Marck, lord of Bouillon, II. 134
Invaded and over-run by the Duke of
Orleans, III. 7. Is again invaded by
Francis, 15.

M.

Madrid, treaty of, between the Em-

peror Charles V. and his prisoner
Francis I. King of France, 1I. 250.
Sentiments of the publick with regard
to this treaty, a51.
.Magdeburg, the city of, refutes to admit

the Interim enforced by Charles V.
and prepares for defence, Ill 200.
Maurice Eletor of Saxony appointed
to reduce it, 201. Is put under the
ban of the Empire, 214. The ter-
ritories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. The inhabitants
defeated in a sally, 215. Maurice of
Saxony arrives and bcdeges the city,
2t6 Surrerders, ib. The senate
elecs Mauilice their burgiave, 218.
Mahmed, King of Tunis, hiltory of his

fIns, 1I. 367.
Majorra, an inlurrcaion there, II. 185.

Which is quelled with difficulty, ib.
The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
186.
Maj4/y, the appellation of, assumed by

Chirles V. on his election to the Im-
perial crown, and taken by all the
other monarchs of Europe, 11. 6 .
Malieia, council of, an account of, II.

44.
Mata, the iland of, granted by the

Emperor Charles V. to the knights of
St. John, expelled from Rhodes by
the Turks, II. 1 3.
,/amalurki, extirpated by Sultan Selim,

11. No
lam, malueer, faction in Geneva, so
termnd, some account of, 11. 386.

Manstel, Don John, Ferdinand's amba-r

fador at the Imperial court, pays his
court to the Archduke Philip on
Queen Isabella's death, II. 6. Inter-
cepts Joanna's letter of consent to
Ferdinand's regency of Caltile, 9.
Negociates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, it. Declares for
Maximilian's regency on Philip's
death, i6. Is made Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and concludes an
alliance between Charles V. and Leo
X. 130. The conditions of the treaty,
ib. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to
be eleted Pope, 146.
Martells II. Pope, his charater, 11l.

338. Dies, 339.
Marciano, battle of, between Peter

Strozzi, and the marquis de Marig-
nano, III. 314.
Margaret of Austria, and Dowager of

Savoy, aunt to Charles V. undertakes
with Louise, mother of Francis I. of
France, to accommodate the differ-
ences between thole two monarchs, II.
14. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, 315.
Marignano, marquis of, appointed com-

mander of the Florentine army, acting
against the French, 111. 311. De-
feats the French army under Peter
Strozzi, 314. Lays ficge to Siena,
315. Converts the siege into a block-
ade, 316. Siena surrenders, tb. Re-
ducesPorto Ercole, 318. Histroops
ordered into Piedmont by the Empe-
ror, tb.

Martk, Robert de Ia, Inrd of Bouillon,

declares war againlt the E.mperor
Charles V. II. 134. Ravages Lulx-
emburg with French troops, ib. Is
commtanded to dilband his troops by
Francis, Jb. His territories reduced
by the Emperor, 135.
AfarfeJlles, besieged by the Imperialifls,

11. 1i6. Rescued by Francis, 217.
Interview and treaty there between
the Pope and Francis, 344
]fartinuissi, biflop of Waradin, is ap-

pointed guardian to Stephen, King of
Hungary, II. 467. His chara&er, lb
Solicits the affiflance oF Sultan Soly.
man against Ferdinand, 468. Solyman
seizes the kingdom, 469. Is appoint-
ed to the government of Transylvania
and the education of the young King,
jointly with the Queen, Ill. a22. Ne.
gotiate3 with Ferdinand, 223. Prevails
on the Queen to rcfign Tranfilvania
to Ferdinand. 224. Is anointe,
governor of Transylvania, and masde

i ( a'dinal

A Cardinal, i'5. Is affafinated by
Ferdinand's drder, 127.
Martyr, Peter, his authority cited in

proof of the extortions of the Fkenilh
MMifters of Charles V. ,1. 45.
Mary of Burgundy, contraaed to Lewis

XII. of France, but married to the
Emperor Maximilian, II. 2.
Mary of England, her acceflion, 1!I.

298. Rec.eives proposals from the
Emperor Charles V. of marrying his
son Philip, 299. The Eogliih averle
to this union, jb. The house of com-
mons remonfiratas against the match,
300. The articles of marriage, ,b.
The marriage ratified by parliament,
and compleated, 303. Re-establishes
the Romilh religion, ib. Persecutes
the Reformers, 304. Invites Charles
to England on his resignation and.paf-
sage to Spain, which he declines, 373.
Is engaged by Philip to affit him in
his war against France 381. Levies
money by her Prerogative to carry on
the war, 38a. Her neglec in the
security of Calais, 398. Calais in-
velfed and taken by the Dukeof Guise,
400. Dies, 411.
M,/ary, daughter of James V. of Scot-

land, succeeds to the crown an infant,
III. 12. Is contraacd to the Dauphin
of France, 168. Is educated at the
court of France, 210, 405. The
marriage compleated, lb. Assumes
the title and arms of England on the
death of Mary, 423.

Matthias, John, a baker, becomes a

leader of the Anabaptifls, at Munster,
11. 350. Seizes the city and eftabilhes
a new form of government there, 35 r.
Repulses the bishop of Munster, 353.
Is killed, ib. See Brold and Ana-
baputils.

Maurice, duke of Saxony, his motives

for not acceding to the Proteflant
league ofSmalkalde, Ill, so. Marches
to the aflifance of Ferdinand in Hun-
gary, ib. His difference with his
uncle the eleaor, ib. His conduCt at
the diet of Worms, go. Joins the
Emperor againfi the Proteffants, 66.
His motives, too. His insidious con-
duet toward the Eletor, o10. Seizes
the electorate of Saxony, 104. Saxony
recovered by the E.lc.1r, Hio. His
ipeffectual endeavours to reduce Wit-
temberg for the Emperor, 144. Ob-
tains pofeflion of the Ele6torate, 148.
Is formally inveRled at the diet of
Augturg, 175. Becomes dissatisfied

TO THE

with the Emperor, 194. His moive
to difcontept explained, 195. His
address and caution in his condat,
a16. Entorces the Interim in his ter-
ritories, 197. Makes, nevertheless,
profteiom of his attachment to the
Reformation, 198. Undertakes to
reduce Magdeburg to submit to the
Interim, ,b. Protefrs againf the
council of Trent, 199. Is commis-
sioned by the Emperor to reduce Mag-
deburg, 201. Jains George of Meck-
leaburgh before Magdeburg, 215.
The city capitulates, 216. Begins to
intrigue with count Mansfeldt, 217.
Is elected Burgrave of Magdeburg,
218. DifmifTes his troops, 1a9. His
address inamufing the Emperor, l220.
Makes an alliance with Henry If. of
France, to make war on the Empe-
ror, 229. Makes a formal requisition
of the Landgrave's liberty, 231. Joins
his troops, and publishes a manifesto,
237. Takes poffelion of Aug/burg
and other cities. 238. An ineffectual
negotiation with Charles, 240. De-
feats a body of the Emperor's troops,
242. Takes the caffle of Ehrenburg,
ib. Is retarded by a mutiny in his
troops, 243. Enters Infpruck, and
narrowly mistes taking Charles, 244.
A negotiation between him and Ser-
dinand, z51. Besieges Frankfort on
-the Maine, 257. His inducements to
an accommodation, 258. Signs a
treaty with the Emperor At PafTau,
259. Reflections on his conduCt in this
war, 260. Marches into Hungary to
oppoie the Tuik, a62. Is plac(d at
the head of the league against Albert
of Brandenburgh, t81. Defeats Al-
bert, but is killed jn the battle, 28z.
His charater, 283. Is succeeded by
his brother Augultus, 284.

Maximilian, Emperor of Germany,

claims the regency of Cati.le on his
Con Philip's death, II. 16. Is sip-
ported i9' his claim by Don John
Manuel, $b. Loses it, sl. Obtains
the government of the Low-Countries
by the death of philip, a2. Ap-
points William de Croy, lord of
Chievres, to fuperintenl the educa-
tion of his grandson Charks, ib.
Concludes a peace with France and
Venice, 39. Dies, 48. State of
Europe at this period, ib. His en-
deavours to secure the Imperial crown
to his grandson Charles, 49. How
bbifrul cd, ib.

'Mtrllcnburs,

jiekllftibsrgb, George of invades the

territories of Magdeburg for the Em-
peror, I1. 214. Defeats the Mag-
deburgher who sally out on him,
s15. Isjoined by Maurice of Saxony,
who affnmes the supreme command,
ib.

Medicino, John James. See Marignaeo.
Mtdici, Alexander, relbored to the

dominions of Florence, by the Em-
peror Charles, 11. 313. Is affafli-
nated, 415.

Medici, Cardinal de, eleaed Pope,

and assumes the title of Clement
VII. II. 197. See C/mwet VII.
Medicr,, Catbarine di, is married to

the duke of Orlean, 11 345. Is
conjectured, by the Emperor Charles
V. to have poifoaed the Dauphin,
406.
Mkisdi, Colmo de, made duke of Flo-

rence, II. 417. Is supported by the
Emfe.or, and defeats the partizans
of Lorenzo, 418. Asserts his inde-
pendency against the Emperor, 111.
I75. Offers to reduce Sieria for the
Emperor, 311. Enters into a war
with l'rance, it. See iMaignono.
His address in procuring the invefti-
ture ot Siena fiom Philip II. of Spain,
394. It is granted tp him, 396.

Medtrci, Lorenzo de, affafinates his

kinsman Alexander II. 416. Flies,
417. Attempts to oppose Cosmo,
but is defeated, 418.
i/e4.'ina del Campo, the inhabitants of,
refuse to let Fonreca take the mili-
tary Itores there, bfr the siege of the
insurgents in .eFovia, 11 157. The
town almof burnt by Fonfcca, 158.
The inhibitants repulle him, ib,
Surrenders after the battle of Villalar,
and dissolution of the Holy Junta,
179. Melamlborn, mbies the opinion of
Martin Luther, 11 97. Is employed
to draw up a c,,.i;flion of taith by the
Proteflant Princes at the diet of
Augsburg, 329. Is dejeted by the
Emperor's decree agakilt the Protcl-
tants, but comfiorted by Luther, 331.
Is invited to Paris hy Francis, 381.
His conference with Eckius, 462.
Is prevailed on to favour the Interim
enforced by the Emperor, II. 197.
Melito, Conde de, made viceroy of

Valencia, on the departure of Charlcs
V. fir Germany, 11. 66. Appointed
to command the troops of the notables
ay.inft the Germanada%, 14. De-

feated by them in several ations, ib'
Destroys the association, ib.
M cl z, archbilhop of, artfully declares

before the Emperor, the diet of
Augfturg's acceptance of the Intgrit,
without being authorized by it, I1.
174. Merqtillk a Milanese gentleman em-

ployed as envoy from Francis L to
Francis Sforza, duke of Milan, his
fate, 11. 379.
Metz seized by Montmorency the

French general, III. 240. The duke of
Guile made governor of, 267. Is be-
fieged by the Emperor, 170. The
Emperor defilts, and retires in a dif-
tressed condition, 274. A scheme form-
ed by father Leonard to betray the city
to the Imperialills, 321. The confpi-
racy detected by the Governor, 3$3.
Leonard murdered by his monks, and
his aficiates executed, 324.
Mezteres, in France, besieged by the

Imperialills, 11. 135. Galant de-
fence of, by the chevalier Bayard, ib.
The siege raised, ib.
Mllan, marechal de Foix appointed to

be the French governor ot, 11. 139.
His character, ib. The Milanele
alienated from the French by his op-
preflions, ib. Invaded by the eccle-
fiaftical troops under Prosper Colonna,
141. The French driven out, 143.
Oppressed by the Imperial troops, 188.
Invaded by the French, 195. Who
are driven out by Colonna, 196.
The Imperial troops there mutiny for
pay, but are appeased by Moronc,
02o. Abandoned by the French, tb.
Over-run again by Francis, who seize
the city, 219. The French retire on
news of the battle of Pavia, a28.
The investiture of, granted to Storza,
240. Taken from him and granted to
the duke of Bourbon, 248. Dil'ortler
committed by the Imperial troppl
there, a66. Oppreflive mealures of
Bourbon to fuplly his mutinous troops,
276. The French lorces there de-
feated by Antonio de Leyva, 312.
Is again granted by the Emperor to
Sforza, 322. Death of Sforza, 388.
The pretension0 ot Francis to that
dutchy, 389. Is Isized by the Em-
peror, ib. The marquis del Guatlo
appointed Governor, 404.
Motat., battle of, between Solyman

the Magnificent, and the Hungaiians,
11. 288.

Alonafii;

.Mlaflic orders, enquiry into the fun-

damental priiniples of, II. 447.
Peculiar conRlitution of the order of
Jesuits, rb.
Moncada, Don Hugo di, the Imperial

ambassador at Rome, his -intrigues
with Cardinal Colonna against Pope
Clement 1. 273. Reduces the'Pope
to an accommodation, 174. Is de-
feated and killed by Andrew Doria
in a naval engagement before the
harbourofNaples, 305.
Mflurc, is sent by the count d'Enguien

toFrancis for permiflionto give battle
to the Marquis de Guafto, III. 30.
Obtains his suit by his spirited argu-
ments, 31. Commands in Siena,
when besieged by the Marquis de
Marignano, III. 315. His vigorous
defence, ib. Is reduced by famine,
and capitulates, 3 r6.
MAnte Alcino, numbers of the citizens

of Siena retire thither after the re-
duaion of that city by the Florentines,
and eftablilh a free government there,
II1. 317.

eontectculi, count of, accused and tor-

tured for poisoning the Dauphin,
charges the Emperor with infligating
it, II. 405.

lMontmrorency, Marefchal, his charaner,

'II. 399. Francis adopts his plan for
resisting the Emperor, and commits
the execution to him, ib. His pre-
cautions, ib. His troops despise his
condu&, 401. Obrervations on his
operations, 403. Is disgraced, III.
-6. Conduts the army of Henry'II.
to join Maurice of Saxony, and seizes
Metz, z4o. Dissuades Henry firm
accepting the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. 345. Commands the
French army againfl the Duke of
Savoy, 384. Detaches D'Andelot
to relieve St. Quintin, ib. Exposes
himself imprudently to an asion,
and is defeated, 385. Is taken pri-
soner, 386. Negotiates a peace be-
tween Philip and Henry, 411. Re-
turns to France, and is highly honour-
ed by Henry, 412. 'His afliduity in
forwarding the negotiations, 424.
His expedient for promoting the treaty
of Chateau Cambrefis, 417.

Mlonipelitr, a fiuitlefs conference held

there for the reflitution of the king-
dom of Navarre, II. 47.
iforone, Jerom, chancellor of Milan,

his charaler, II. 139. Retires from
the French rxaaion, in Milan to
I'ancis Sforzi. j1. His intrigues

how rendered abortive, 140. Quiets
the mutiny of the Imperial troops ip
Milan, II. 202. Is disgusted with
the behaviour of Charles, 2-89. In-
trigues agaiRf the Emperor with
Pescara, 241. Is betrayed to the
Emperor by Pescara, 243. Is ar-
refted at.his visit to Pescara, 244.
Is set at liberty by the duke of Bour-
bon, and becomes his confident, 276.
SIfu/vo in France, taken by the Imperi-

aliftR II. 135. Retaken by Francis, tb.
MultSatsfen, battle of, between the Errm

peror Charles V. and the Ele&or of
Saxony, IHI. 141.
Muley Hafcen, king of Tunis, his in-

human treatment of his father and
brothers, II. 367. Is expelled by
,Barbarofta, 369. Engages the Em-
peror Charles V. to restore him, 370.
'Is eRfablihed again by the fuirender
of Tunis, 375. .His treaty with
Charles, -376
Muncer, Thomas, 4 disciple of Luther,

opposes him with fanatical notions, II.
259. Heads the infurredion of the
peasants in Thuringia, 260. His
extravagant schemes, ib. Is defeated
and put to death, 261.
IMuaJer, the first settlement of the

Anabaptists in that city, II. 350.
The city seized by them, -351. They
eftablilh a new form of government
there, ib. Is called Mount Sion, 351.
The bishop of, repulsed by them,
353. -Is blockaded by the bilhop,
356. :The city taken, .358. See
nabapt/ts.
Murder, the prices of.compofition for,

by the Romilh clergy, II. ioS.
IMujapha, the declared heir to Sultan

Solyman the Magnificent, is invered
with the administration of Diarbequir,
III. 292. His father rendered jea-
lous of his popularity, by the arts
*of Roxalana, 293. Is (Irangled by
,his father's order, 296. ~His only
fen murdered, a97.

IN.
Naples, the revenucs of, mortgaged by

Lannoy to supply the Emperor inhis
exigencies, II. 120. Invaded by the
French -under the Duke of Albany,
224. Invaded by Pope Clement
VII. 227. Treaty between the Pope
and Lannoy viceroy of, 280. The
Prince of Orange retreats thither
before Lautrec, 304. Is blockaded
by Lantrec, 305. Sea engagement
in the harbour of, between Andrew

Dolia

Borin and Moncada, ib. Causes
which disappointed the French ope-
rations againR, 306. Doria revolts,
and opens the communication by sea
againi 308. Oppressed by the Spanihi
viceroy Don. Pedro de Toledo, be-
comes difaffeEaed to the Emperor
Charles V. III. 177. Is harraffed by a
Turkish fleet, 178.
VNaJfat count of, invades Bouillon at

the head ot the Imperialists, 11. 135.
Invades France, takes Moufon, and
besieges Mezieres, but is repulsed, :b:

Navarre, the kingdom of, unjustly ac-

quired by Ferdinand of Aragon, II.
19. D'Albert's invasion of, defeated
by Cardinal Ximenes, 35. Its castles
dismantled, except Pampeluna, which
Ximenes strengthens, ib. Invaded
by Francis I. in the name of Henry
D'Albert, 131. Reduced by. L'E-
parre, the French general, 133. The
French driven- out- by the Spaniards,
and L'Efparre taken prisoner, ib.

NVetherlands, the government of, first

assumed by. Charles V. II. 13. The
Flemings averse to Charles's going
to Spain, 39. Invaded by Francis I.
king of France, 135. A truce con-
cluded with, by Henry VIII: of Eng-
land, 306. Invaded by Francis again,
407. A suspension of arms there,
40o. An infurreation at Ghent, 43t.
See Ghent. Is once more invaded by
Francis, III. i5. Resigned by the
Emperorto his son Philip, 354. A
review of the alterations in, during
the sixteenth century, 455.
NIce, a truce for ten years concluded

there betweenthe Emperor and Fran-
cis, 413. Besieged by the French
and.Turks, II. 18.

Nayn, treaty of, between Charles V.

and Francis I. of France, 11. 38.
The terms of, negleacd by Charles,
68.
NVremburgh, the city of, embraces the

reformed religion, II. 206. Diet of,
particulars of Pope Adrian's brief
to, rcfpeting the reformers 10o7.
The reply to, 208. Propoles a ge-
neral council, tb. Prelents a lilt of
grievances to the Pope, zu9. The
reSs, or edict, of, 10o. This diet
of great advantage to the reformers,
ib. Proceedings of a second diec
there, i.a. Recess of lhe dlic, a13.
An acautxmnodation agreed , thllcre,
between the Emperor Charles V. and
the l'roteltants, 337.

0.
Oran, and othez places in Barbiry, aa-

nexed to the crown of Cafile, by
Ximenes, 11. 18.
Orange, Philibert de Chalons, prince

of, general of the Imperial. army on-
the death of the duke of Bourbon,
takes the cafle of St. Angelo, and
Pope Clement VII. prisoner, 11. 187.
Retires to Naples on the approach of
Lautrec, 304., Takes his successor
the marquis de Saluces, prisoner at
Averfa, 309.
Orleans, duke of, delivered up to the

Emperor Charles V. with the Dau-
phin, as holtages for the performance
of the treaty of Madrid, II. 254.
Is married to Catharine di Medici,
345. Becomes Dauphin by the death
of his brother, 405. See DauFhin.

Duke of, brother to the for-

mer, commands the army appointed
by Francis- I. for the invasion of Lus-
emburg, 111. 7. Is prompted by
envy to abandon his conquelts, and
join his brother the Dauphin- ia Rou-
fillon, 8. Dies, 53.

P.

Pacheco, Donna Maria, wife to Don

John de Padillo, her artful scheme
to raise money to supply the army of
the Holy Junta, 11. 171. Her hus-
band taken priboner and executed,
177. His letter to her,. 178. Raises
forces to revenge his death, 18o. Is
reduced and retires to Portugal, r81.
Padlla, Don John de, his family and

character, 11. 55. Heads the infur-
reaion at Toledo, ib. Routs the
troops under Ronquillo, 57. Calls
a-convention of the malecontents at
Avila, 16o. Forms the confederacy
called the Holy Junta, 161. Dif-
claims Adrian's authority, ib. Gets
1pollefiion of Queen Joanna, :b. Re-
moves-the Holy Junta to Tordefillas,
the place of her residence, 161. Sent
with troops to Valladolid, and de-
prives Adrian of all power of govern.
ment, 163. Is fupeilcded in the
command of the army of the Junta,
by lon Pedro de Giron, 170o Is ap.
pointed commander at the resignation
of (iron, 171. His army fupplieo
with money by an expedient of hi.
wile, 173. Besieges Torrelobatou,
175 Takes andplundersit, ib. Con-
cludes a truce with the nobles, tb.
Is wounded and taken prisonei in an
aCtion wLth the conde de Hario, 177.
Is put to denh, ib. His letter to his
wife, 178. Uis letter to the city of
Tuledu, si.

l'ulatiriute

Patinater, the reformation established

there by the Eletor Frederick, II.

6.
Paatu, comntt iinbaffador from the

diet at Francfort, brings Charles V.
the offer of the Imperial crown,
which he accepts, II. 62.
Pawptla, castle of, inr Navarre, its

fortifications strengthened by Cardinal
Ximenes II. 35. Taken by L'Efparres
the French general for Henry D'AI-
bert, 133. Retaken by the French,
,b.
Papw~y, how liable to be affeaed by the

disposal of the Imperial crown, II.
54. Paraguay, a sovereignty eftablilhed

there, by the order of Jesuits, II.
43. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, 457. Precaution oufed by
the Jesuits to preserve the iadepen-
dency of their empire there, 4 t8.

Pearu, a decree published by the uni-

verfity of,. against Martin Luther the
Reformer, II. 125. A decree of the
parliament of, published against the
Emperor Charles V. 406.
Parma, the dutchy of, confirmed to

Ocavio Farnese, by Pope Julius IlI.
Il. o09 Is attacked by the Imperialilts,
and fuccefsfnlly protefed by the
Freach, 2it.
Paffau, a treaty concluded there between

the Emperor Charles V. and Maurice
of Saxony, III. 259. Reflections on
this peace, and the conducf of Mau-
rice, 260.
Pavia, besieged by Francis I. of France,

II. 2a1. Vigorously defended by An-
tonio de Leyva, 222. Battle of,
between Francie and the duke of
Bourbon, z26. The Imperial troops
in that city mutiny, 135.
Paol Ill. Pope, eleted, II. 347. His

characer, rb. Proposes a general
council to be held at Mantua, 361.
Negotiates personally between the
Emperor and Francis, 412. Issues a
bull for a council at Mantua, 421.
Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza,
423. A partial reformation of abuses
by, it. Summons the council of
Trent, Ill. 22. Prorogue it, 23.
Summons it again, 46. Grants the
dutchies of Parma and Placentia to
his illegitimate foa, 54. Deprives
and excommunicates the elecoral
bi(hop of Cologne, 71. Presses the
Emperor to declare against the Pro-
teftats, 72. Concludes an alliance
with him againfl the Protetants, 78.
Indiscreetly publishes this treaty, 80.
His troops join the Emperor, 93.

Recalls them, t2. Remoes the
council from Trent to Bologa, 164.
Refues the Emperor's request to
carry the council back to Trent, ib.
His refentmen againt the Emperor
for the rnurder of his son Cardinal
Farnese, x67. Is petitioned by the
diet of Angiburg for the return of
the council to Trent, 169. Eludes
the complying with this request, 170.
His sentiments of the Iiterim pub-
lifhed by Charles, 177. Dismisses
the council of Bologna, i82. An-
nexes Parma and Placentia to the
Holy See, 187. Dies, 186. The
manner of hi death inquired into, ib.
Paul IV. Pope, eleted, III. 33. His

charater and history, 340. Founds
the order of Theatines, ib. Is the
principal occasion of eflablifhing the
inquisition in the Papal territories,
341. Lays alide his auflerity on his
election, 34z. His partiality to his
nephews, rb. Is alienated from the
Emperor by his nephews, 344.
Makes overtures to an alliance with
France, 345. Is enraged by the re-
cess of the diet of Augsburg, 347.
Signs a treaty with France, 348. Is
included in the truce for five years,
concluded between the Emperor and
Henry, 360. His insidious artifices
to defeat this truce, 362. Ahlolves
Henry from his oath, and concludes
a new treaty with him, 366. His
violent proceedings against Philip,
now King of Spain, 376. The Cam-
pagna Romana seized by the Duke
d'Alva, 368. Concludes a truce
with Alva, 369. Contrast between
his condu& and that of Charles, 375.
Renews his hostilities against Philip,
377. Is unprovided for military ope-
rations, 378. Is reduced to make
peace with Philip, by the recall of
the Duke of Guile after the defeat of
St. Quintin, 391. Receives an am-
baflador from the Emperor Ferdinand
to notify his eletion, but refufel to
fee him or to acknowledge the Em-
peror, 402. Dies, 430.

Parlii, a French officer, Cent ambaftadoi

from Francis 1. to Sultan Solyman,
II11. 14. His successful' negotiations
at the Porte, ib.
Pembreor, earl of, sent by Queen Marv

of England with a body of men t(
join the Spaninl army in the Low-
Countries, 382.
Perpinan, the capital of Rouflillon.

besieged by the Dauphin of Francc,
11. 7. The iege rifed s
8.

Ptra ar a,r

Ptfcara, marquis de, takes Milan by

afault, U. 143. Drives Bonnivet
back to France, ao3. His generous
carc of the chevalier Bayard, hb.
Commands in the invalion of Pro-
vence, zt6. Besieges Marseilles, ib.
His army retires towards Italy, on
the appearance of the French troops,
217. Resigns Milan to the French,
219. Prevails on his Spanilh troops
not to murmur at present for their
pay, zzo. Contributes to the defeat
of Fiancis at the battle of Pavia, 217.
Is disgusted at Francis being taken to
Spain, without his concurrence, 240.
His resentment inflamed by Morone,
241. Betrays Morone's designs to
the Emperor, 243. Arrests Morone,
244. Dies, 248.

Pilip, Archduke of Austria, and fa-

ther of Charles V. visits Spain, with
his wife Joanna, 11. 3. Does ho-
mage by the way to Lewis XII. of
France for the earldom of Slanders,
lb. His title to the crown acknow-
ledged by the Cortes, ib. Is difgulted
with the formality of the Spanilh
court, ib. Ferdinand becomes jea-
lous of his power, ib. Slights his
wife, 4. His abrupt departure from
Spain, ib. Pases through France,
and enters into a treaty with Lewis,
5. His sentiments on Ferdinand''
obtaining the regency of Callile, S.
Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resigns his regency of Caf-
tile, lb. The regency of Caflile
velted jointly in him, Ferdinand and
Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
i1. Sets out for Spain, and is driven
en the coast of England, where he
is detained three months by Henry
VII. 12. Arrives at Corunna, ib.
The Calilian noblity declare openly
for him, ib. Ferdinand resigns the
regency of Callile to him, 13, In-
terview between them, ,b. Ac-
knowledged King of CaRile by the
Cortes, 14. Dies, lb. Joanna's
extraordinary conduct in regard to his
body, rt. See 7w ma.

Pblip, lPrince, Ion to the Emperor

Charles V. his right of fuccefilon
recognized by the Cortes of Aragun
and Valencia, 111 9. Is acknow-
ledged by the States of the Nether-
lands, 184. His deportmenit dil-
gufis the Fleanings, il8. His cha-
lacer, 207. Is married to Maiy
Queen of England, 300oo, 303. The
E'nglill pailiament jealous of lim,
3o0. Iis lutlher ieffias his hec-

reditary dominions to him, 34,
Is called by his father out of England,
354. The ceremony of invelting him,
ib. His father's address to him, 356.
Commifllons cardinal Granville to ad-
dress the assembly in his name4 357.
Iary Queen-dowager ot Hungary re-
signs her regency, lb. The dominions
of Spain iefigned to him, 358. His,
unpolitenefs to the French Ambassador
Coligni, 361. Note. The Pope's
violent proceedings against him, 366.
His scruples concerning commencing
hostilities against the Pope, 367. His
ungrateful negle& in paying his fa-
ther's penfiun, 3,74. The Pope renews
hostilities againfi him, 377. Assem-
bles an army in the Low-Countries
against France, 380. Goes over to
England to engage that kingdom in
the war, 381. Visits the camp at St.
Qyintin, after the victory, 387. Op-
poles the scheme of penetrating to
Paris, and orders the iRgse of St.
Quintin to be prosecuted, 388. St.
Quintin taken by aflault, 389. The
small advantages he reaped by these
successes, 390. Builds the Escurial
in memory of the battle of St. Quintin,
391. Concludes a peace with the
Pope, 392. Restores Placentia to
Oltavio Farnese, 394. Grants the
investiture of Siena to Cosmo di Me-
dici, 396. Enters into negotiations
for peace with his prisoner Mountmo-
rency, 4 1. Death of Qyeen Mary,
42r. Addrelaes her successor Eliza-
beth for marriage, ;,. Elizabeth's
motives for rejetibng him, 423. Her
evasive answer to him, 424. Sup-
plants his Ton Don Carlos and marries
Henry's daughter Elizabeth, 4a7.
Articles of the treaty of Chateau
Cambrefis, 418.

Phillibert, Emmanuel Duke of Savoy,

See Savey.

PI./llifno, nephew to Andrew Doris,

defeats Moacada, in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naples, II. 3.c.

PIiadea, marqlai do, invades Tranfy-

vania for Ferdinand, Ill. 23. Mif-
represents Cardinal Martinuaei to
Ferdinand, and obtains a commiflon
to ataflinate him, z10. fl forced to
abandon Trnfylvaia, 289.
Pirardj, invaded by Henry Vlt. II.

151. Hasry forced, by, the Duke de
Vendome to retihu, 6. Invaded
again under the Duke of Suffolk,
2oo. Who penetrates altnoft to Paris,
but is driven back. ib. IneffeEtual
invafiua by the Imperialills, 404.

]'i^tHrt1ts

Pltatenia, the dutthy of, granted toge-

ther with that of Parma by Pope Paul
III. to his natural fXn, Cardinal Far-
nefe, III. 54. Firnefe assassinated
there, t66. Is taken pbfleflion of by
the Imperial trbops, id. ReRored to
Octavio Farnese, by Philip II. of Spain,
394.

Po1c, Cardinal, arrivesiin England with a

legantine commission, III. 304. En-
deavours to mediate a peace between
the Emperor and the King of France,
without success, 325. Is recalled from
the court of England, by Pope Pabl
IV. 377.
Printing, its effects on the progress of

the Reformation, II. 1i5.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdi-

nand King of Bohemia, II. 161.
Proteflants, the derivation of the name,

II. 317. Of whom they originally con-
fired, ib. A revere decree publilhed
againfl them by the Emperor, 331.
They enter into a league, 332. See
Smalkalde. Renew their league, and
apply to Francis King of France, and
Henry VIII. of 'England, for protec-
tion, 334. Are secretly encouraged by
Francis, ib. Receive a supply of mo-
ney from Henry, 336. Terms of the
pacification agreed to between them
and the Emperor at Nuremburg, 337.
Assist the Emperor against the Turks,
338. Their negotiations with the Pope,
relative to a general council, 340. Re-
new the league of Smalkalde for ten
years, 362. The motives for refusing
to aflift the King of France against the
Emperor, 382. Refuse to acknowledge
the council summoned by the Pope at
Mantua, 422. A conference between
their principal divines and a deputation
of Catholicks, at Ratilbon, 462. This
conference how rendered fruitless, 464.
Obtain a private grant from Charles in
their favour, 465. Drive the Duke of
Brunswick from his dominions, I11. 24.
All rigorous edicts againrf them sus-
pended by a recess of the diet of Spires,
27. Their remonstrances to Ferdinand
at the diet of Worms, 48. Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess of
Spires, 49. Disclaim all connection
·with the council of Trent, 50. Are
Rrengthened by the acceflion of Frede-
rick Elector Palatine, 56. Are alarm-
ed at the proceedings of the Emperor,
59, 77. The Emperor leagues with
the Pope aginft them, 78. Pre-

pare to refilt the Emperor, 82. LeWy
an army, 86. The operations of the
army diftra6ted by the joint com-
manders, %2. The army dispersed, 1o6.
The Elecor of SLxony reduced, 142.
The landgrave deceived by treaty and
confined, 154. The Emperor's ruel
treatment of them, 158. The Interim,
a syRem of theology recommended by
the Ertlperor to the diet at Augsburg,
i74. Are promised protection by the
Emperor at the council of Trent, 202.
The Emperor proceeds rigorously a-
gains them, 213. Their deputies ob-
tain a fafe-conduct from the Emperor,
but are refused by the council, z21.
Maurice of Saxony raises an army in
their canfe, 237. See Maurice. Trea-
ty of PalTau, 259. The ProteRant
Princes again unite to strengthen the
Protefant interest, 331. Recess of the
diet of Auglburg on the subjet of reli-
gion, 332. Why originally averse to
the principles oftoleration, 336.
Prcvence, is laid wafle by the marefchal

Montmorency on the approach of the
Emperor Charles V. II. 399 Is en-
tered by the Emperor, 400. The dif-
aftrous retreat of the lmperor from,
403.

Prussia, when conquered by the Teuto-

nick order, II. 263 Is erected into
a dutchy, and finally into a kingdom,
and enjoyed by the house of Branden-
burgh, 264.

R.
Ratibor, a conference between a depu-

tation of Protestant and Catholick di-
vines, before the Emperor and diet
there, II. 462 This conference how
rendered fruitless, 464. A diet opened
there by the Emperor, III. 74. The
Catholic members of, alfert the autho-
rity of the council of Trent, 75. The
Protestants present a memorial against
it, 76. The Protestant deputies re-
tire, 77.

Reformation, in religion, the rife of, ex-

plained, 11. 78. The diet at Worms
called by Charles V. to check the pro-
grefs of it, tb. Account of Martin
Luther, the Reformer, 8z. Begin-
ning of it in Switzerland by Zuinglius,
94. State of, in Germany, at the
arrival of Charles V. 97. Reflection
on the conduct of the court of Rome
toward Luther, ib. And on I.u-
ther's condua, 99. Inquiry into

the

into the causes which contributed to
the progress of, lol. Observations on
the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. 102. The immoral lives of
the Romish clergy, 103. The progress
of, favoured by the invention of print-
ing, 1 5. And the revival of learn-
ing, 16. The great progress of, in
Germany, 206. Advantages derived
to, from the diet at Nuremburgh, zJo.
Its tendency in favour of civil liberty,
258. The dissentions between the
Emperor and the Pope, favourable to,
290. The great spread of, among the
German Princes, 324. The consef-
sion of Augfiurg drawn up by Melanc-
thon, 329. Causes which led to that
of England, 345. The excesses it
gave rife to, 348. See Pcotefiartr,
Mfaurice, and Smalkalde. Is establish-
*d in Saxony, 4z7. The great alte-
ration occasioned by, in the court of
Rome, III. 445. Contributed to im-
prove both the morals and learning of
the Romilh church, 449.
Jeggio, inverted by the French, who are

repulsed by the governor Guicciardini
the historian, II. 140.
Remonft, ance of grievances drawn up by

the Holy Junta, the particulars of,
II. 165. Remarks an, 167.
.Rter/'e, a deed so called, signed by the

arch-duke Ferdinand on being elected
King of Bohemia, 1I. 289.
Rbeggo plundered and burnt by Barba-

roffa, III. 18.
Rhodts, the island of, besieged by Soly-

man the Magnificent, II. 152. Taken
by him, 1i3. The island of Malta
granted to the knights of, by the Em-
peror Charles V. ,b.
Richlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De

Retz's history of Fiefco's confpiiacy,
III. 1 N. ote.
Rincon, the French amhaffador at the

Porte, the motives of his return to
France, III. 2. Is murdered in his
journey back to Constantinople, by or-
der of the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, 3.

Rome, refletions on the condu& of the

court of, refpeaing the proceedings
againfl Martin Luther, 11. 98. The
exorbitant wealth of the church of,
previous to the Reformation, io6.
Venality of 113. How it drained
other countries of their wealth, ib.
The city seized by Cardinal Colonna,
and Pope Clement VII. bn'figed in the

yVet., l.

cafle of St. Angelo, 274. The city
taken by the Imperialilts, antd Bour-
bon killed, 285. Is plundered, 286.
The great revolution in the court of,
during the sixteenth century, III. 444.
How asseted by the revolt of Luther,
445. The spirit of its government
changed by, 447.
Ronqudill, sent by Cardinal Adrian with

troops to suppress the infurretion in
Segovia, II. 157. Is touted by them,
oi,.
R&vere, Francesco Maria de, restored to

his dutchy of Uibino, by Pope Adrian,
II. 188.
Rqxalana, a Rufian captive, becomes the

favourite mistress ot Sultan Solymaui
the Magnificent, 111. 289. Her only
daughter married to Ruftan the Grand
Vizier, 290. Procures herself to be
declared a free woman by the Sultan,
291. Is formally married to him, ih.
Renders Solymanjealous ofthe virtues
of his Ion Muftapha, 292. Muflapla
firangled, 296.
Ru/fan, Grand Vifier to Solyman the

Magnificent, is married to his daughter
by Roxalana, III. 29o. Enters into
Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyrran'5
son Multapha, ib. Is font with an
army to destroy him, 294. Drawv
Solyman to the army by talle repoit,
295.
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdin.nil

of Aragon, and his fon-in-law 1Piiip,
II. I,.
Sal,-rp, Prince of, heads the (iifalc'' .i

Neapolitan-, againit the opprl-c(i.<ll, ,
the viceroy Don Pedrode Toltdo, 111
278. Solicits aid from Henry II. ,.
France, who infligates the Tuiks t.
invade Naples, ib.
Salutes, marquis de, lurcccds I.autrec in

the command of the French aimnv he-
fore Naples, II. 309. Rctirec to
Averla, where he is taken priloner I',
the Prince of Orange, ib. Betrays h:
charge in Piedmont, 397.
Sancerre, count de, der.nds St. :ifiecr

againtl the Emp err rChsrles, Ill..,.
Is deceived into a si rrender by the C i
dinal Granvelle, 36.
Samivage, a Fleming, inlal chanccll(r ,i

Cafile by Charles, otn Ihe rieath ,.
Ximene,, 11. 44. His extertilnts, ,.'.
SJaiona, is lortified, anl its halibolr clr:]

ed by the French to favour its rivallitll
with Ceeoa, II. 37.

I i Sa.~,

Sav oy, a view of the fiate of, during the

sixteenth century, III. 454

- .-- Charles Duke of, marries Bea-

trix of Portugal, filler to the Emperor
Charles V. II. 384. The cause of
Francis's displeasure againll him, ib.
His territories overrun by the French
troops, 385. Geneva recovers its li-
berty, 386. His situation by the truce
at Nice. between the Emperor and
Francis, 414. Is besiegcd at Nice,
by the French and Turks, 11. 18.

Emmanuel Phillibert Duke of,

appointed by I'hilip of Spain to com-
inand his airny in the Low-Countries,
382. Invens St. Quintin, ib. De-
feats D'Andelot in an endeavour to
join the garrison, 384. But does
not hinder him from entering the
town, 385. Defeats the Conflable
Montmorency, a;d takes him pri-
soner, ib. Is graciously visited in the
camp by Philip, 387. Takes St.
Quintin by alfault, 389. AfliftsMont-
morency in negotiating peace between
Philip and Henry, 41a. Marries Hen-
ry's filler Elizabeth, 427, 430.
Saxony, Eletor of, appointed joint com-

mander or the army of the Protestant
league, with the landgrave ot Hesse,
111. 91. Their charaCters compared,
92. Opposes the Landgrave's inten-
tion of giving battle to the Emperor,
95. His Electorate seized by Maurice,
104. The army of the league dif-
perse, o16. Recovers Saxony, 11o.
Is amused by Maurice with a negotia-
tion, Ill. Railes an army to defend
himfelt againit the Emperor, 136.
Is irresolute in his mealurcs, 137.
Charle palk's the Elbe, 138. Is at-
ta.itd by the Imperialilts, 141. Is
taken piloner and harshly received by
the Emperor, 141. Is condemned to
death by a court martial, 145. His
refluution on the occasion, 146. Is
induced by regard to his family to fur-
render his eleauloatc, 148. Refuses
the Emperor's dtfite of his approving
the Interim, 178. The rigour of his
colnfinemcnt increaced, ib. Is carried
by the Enmperor with hiin into the Ne-
therlanlds, 183. I, cleafed by the Em-
pcror oil Maui i c taking arms againlt
him, but 11iouolj to continue with the
Emperor, 245. Obtains hi!; liberty
nlter the trcaty ofl'allau, 265.

G-- orge Duke ol, an enemy to

the Reformation, II. 426. His death
an advantI.'ll to the Ritluination, ib'.

The Protellant religion eftabliied b-
Henry Duke of, 427. Henry is ruc
ceeded by his son Maurice, III. 20'
His motives for not acceding to the
league of Smalkalde, ib. Marches
to the assistance of Ferdinand in Hun-
gary, ib. Joins the Emperor againt
the Protestants, 86, too. See Mau-
rice.
Schertel, Sebastian, a commander in the

army of the Protestant league, his
vigorous commencement of holtilities,
III. go. Is injudiciouny recalled, 91.
Is expelled from Augiburg on the dif-
perfion of the Proteflant army, o18.
Scotland, James V. of, married to Mary

of Guise, dutchefs-dowager of Longue-
ville, 11. 420. Death of James and
acceflion of his infant daughter Mary,
III. 1z. Maly contracted to the
Dauphin of France, 168. The mar-
riage celebrated, 405. Mary assumes
the title and arms of England on the
death of Mary of England, 4Z3. In-
cluded in the treaty of Chateau Cam-
brcfis, 426. Alteration in the conduit
of England toward, 443.
Seis in religion, reflections on the origin

of, II. 348.
Segcwia, an insurrection there, on account

of their representative Tordefillas vot-
ing for the donative to Charles V. II.
155. He is killed by the populace,
156. The insurgents there defeat
Ronquillo, sent to suppress them by
Cardinal Adrian, 157. Surrenders as-
ter the battle of Villalar, 179.
Selim II. Sultan, extirpates the Mama-

lukes, and adds Egypt and Syria to
his empire, II. 5o. Confidered as for-
midable to the European powers, ib.
Sforza obtains of Charles V. the invelti-

ture of Milan, II. 240. Forfeits the
dutchy, by his intrigues tith Morone,
244. Joins in a league against Charles
for the recovery of Milan, 266. Is
forced to surrender Milan to the Im-
perialilts, 271. Obtains again of the
Emperor the invefliture of Milan, 322.
Enters into a private treaty with
Francis, 379. Merveille Francis's en-
voy executed for murder, ib. Dies,
388.
Sirnn, the inhabitants of, implore the

affiflance of the Emperor Charles V.
to delend them against their nobles,
Ill. 276. The Imperial troops endea-
vour to enslave them, ib. Regain
porfeffion of their city, 277. Rcpulle

if i

an, attack of the Germans, 288. Is
besieged by the marquis de Marignano,
315. The commander Monluc re-
pulses the afaults vigorously, tb. The
town reduced by famine, 316. Num-
bers of the citizens retire, and eftab-
lilh a free government at Monte Al-
cino, 317. The remaining citizens
oppressed, ib. Arid flock to Monte
Alcino, 318. Is granted by the Em-
peror to his Ton Philip, ib. The in-
veftiture given by Philip to Cosmo
di Medici, 396.
Si.verhaufet, battleof, between Maurice

of Saxony, and Albert of Branden-
burgh, III 2az.
Sion, Cardinal of, his scheme for weaken-

ing the French army in the Milanele,
II. 143. Leaves the Imperial army
to attend the conclave on the death of
Leo X. 144.
Smalkalde, the Proteflants enter into a

league there, for their mutual support,
II. 332. The league renewed at a
second meeting there, 334. The
league of renewed for ten years, 362.
A manifesto, refuting to acknowledge
a counsel called by the Pope, 422.
The king of Denmark joins the league,
424. The Princes of, protest against
the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and the recess of the diet at Nurem-
burgh, III. 24. Publish a manitelto
Bgainft the proceedings of the council
of Trent, 58. Are alarmed at the
proceedings of the Emperor, 59. A
want of unity among the members,
60. The views of the Elector si
Saxony, and the Landgrave, expl aineJ,
ib. A ppear at the diet of Rati bon by
deputies, 74. Their deputies protit
aeainft the council of Trent, 76.
Their deputies, alarmed at thef l'mpe-
ror's proceedings and declarationl,
leave the diet, 77. The E'mperor
Icagueq with the Pope againll them,
78. Prepare to resist thn Eperorl , 8L.
Are dil"ppointed in their appl)liation
to the Venetians and iSwil, S3. \q
allb with Hl-enry VIII. and lrani.i:, 8.I.
Alemblea ilarge aimy, 86. Ale p:t
under the ban of the Elmpiie. *8. I)'-
clar' war against the Empeior. o(.
Hollilities begun by Schertel, ,.
Thlry rercall him, 91. The l ''I.or nl
Slxony ant(ll.:mnldravcoi I lcll; aP|l.|( it-
(ol joiflt comi :u,]' i'. o,' lltir .'i.,;', /'.
'I'he char.a'>r c ; o tlhe tv,.i) torllriil.}il-
ers comarled, 97. Tlhir oip(ratlons
(dilra&ed 1'v this joint command, b'.

Cannonade the Emperor's camp, 99.
Make overtures of peace to the 'm-
peror, o16. Their army difper'e, ib.
The Elector of Saxony reduced, 142.
The Landgrave deceived and confined,
154. Their warlike flores seized by
the Emperor, 158. See MTaurute.

Solyman the Magnificent, afcendi the

Ottoman throne, II. 77. Invades
Hungary and takes Belgrade, 157.
Takes the island of Rhodes, ib. IDe-
feats the Hungarians at \;ohacz, 288.
His fucccffes, and the number ot pri-
foners he carried away 289. le-
fleges Vienna, 3a2. Enters Hungary
again with a valt army, but is forced
to retire by the Emperor Charler,
338. Takes BarbaroTfa the pirate
under his piotetion, 366. Concludes
an alliance with Francis King of
France, 410 Prepares to inr.ide
Naples, ,b Protets Stephen King of
Hungary, and deleats Ferdinand, 468.
Seizes Hungary for himself, 469.
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfil-
ment of his treaty with Franc;s, 111.
17. Concludes a truce wih the Em-
peror, 73. Loles Trar.ylvania, 225.
Ravages the coafis of Italy, 255, 278.
Carries a mighty army into Hungary,
256. Re-eftablifles Isabella and her
son in Tranfyhlania, 289. His vio-
lent attachment to his concubine
Roxalana, tb. Is prevailed on to de-
clare her a free woman, 291. For-
mally marries her, ih. Is rendered
jealous ol the viitues oihis on Multa-
pha by the arts ot Roxalana, 293.
Orders him to be ltl'nn led, 296. Or-
dersthc murder o: Mutlapha's son, 297.
Spai, the fliate of, ai the dtath of FIr-

dinand of Atlaio,, II. 23. ('haii(S
Kin; ot; alpirei to the Imperial cro\ ni
on the death of Maximilian, 4'!.
Is elcelcd 1 mperor, 59. Rt.fleltiins
or the Spaniards on that event, 61.
Cli.ii ls l (l;niit vii eroys, and del(^ l '.
/si Certmaini, 60. il'tirre,'.lion ihcii,
I; ;. A vI.v o'thll leiiudal f;llrm n :,
I9 . An .Icllcint ol tlhe cont!erle:lr ) ,
tc med thr Hioly 1tun;i, 160. a n';.;
wliich p; evc'n(i an t1 union of ihe male-
cnntentr ; in the 1r l yllet ive priovinc ;,
1 8r. Tht iniol rrt iftn f Charllcs (t-

t.'i them r n tu i. :ti, i l: , r86 In.

If in (c l i! ha.iilty Ilirit (i,'

. tl

a,', f '", 4

; o 1 ; inv.u'lcl ti I Ill

I.tulhin. Il 7

T 1h. domninumiri. Il,
rtfined by (.'Iltric to his son I-rlIh|,,

I i z 3';

358. The arrival of Charles, and his
reception there, 373. The place of
his retreat described, 374. The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles,
434. The foreign acquisitions added
to, 435. See Aragon, Cafrle, Galicia,
I !.nita, C'.rtes, Germanada, and Ho-
.y 7unta.

St/,res, diet of, its proceedings relative

to the Reformation, II. 9go. Ano-
ther diet called there by the Emperor,
3zq. Another diet at, III. 25. Re-
ccfs of, in favour of the Protestants, 7.
Spi-tlriual cenfurcs of the Romilh church,

the dreadful effeas of, 11. 1og.
S:. DifJe e, in Champ.gne, invested by the

Emnperer, 111. 34. Is obtained by the
artirice of cardinal Granvelle, 36.
St. Jufl7s, monastery of, in Plazentia, is

chosen by the Emperor Charles V. for
his retreat after his refig!,ation, III.
374. His situation delcribed, 375.
His apartments, ib.
St. :nlzin, invested by the Spanish

troops, and defended by admiral Co-
ligni, III. 383. D'Andelot defeated
in an endeavour to join the garrison,
384. But enters the town, 385.
Montmorency defeated by the duke of
Savoy, :b. The town taken by assault,
389.
8!ro:.zi, Peter, some account of, III.

31 . Is intrusted with the command
of the French army in Italy, 313. Is
defeated by the marquis de Marignano,
314.
Suabra, an infurretion of the peasants

againlt the nobles there, I1. a56.
They publish a memorial of their
gril:valicc, 257. The insurgents dil-
perfed, z58. The Proteltant icligion
fupprclfed there by the Emperor
Chal les V. Ill. 113.

Suffilk, duke of, invasdecs Picardy, pene-

tiates almolt to Paiis, but is driven
b:lck, 11. zoo.

Srrj, earl of, cleated higl admiral to

the E.mperor Challes V. II. i o.
Obliged to retire out of Picady by tile
*luke de Vendomc, 151.
8werlen, a l'ummary view of the revo-

lutions in, during the sixteenth cen-
tury, III. 456.
SU ilat.ela/it, the cantons of, elpi,r;e the

pletenltonis of Charlhs V. to the Im-
perial clown, II. . Commence-
rnent o; the elforination theie by
Zuinglius, 94. The Iregulatilon untler
which they hire out their trool)p, 14. .
The precipitate hattle, inlilidtl on by
their troops under l.autrec, loll, 147.

Syria, how and by whom added to the

Ottoman Empire, II. 50.

T.
Termes, marechal de, governor of Ca-

lais, takes Dunkirk by storm, 1II.
406. Engages the count of Egmont,
and is defeated by the accidental ar-
rival of an Englilh squadron on the
coast, 407. Is taken prisoner, ib.
Terrcuane, taken and demolished by the

Emperor Charles V. III. 286.
Tetrel, a Dominican friar, his shameful

conduci in the sale of Indulgences in
Germany, II. 80. His form of ab-
solution, and recommendation of the
virtues of Indulgences in Germany, ib.
Note. His debauched coutfe of life, 81.
Publinles theses againlt Luther, 85.
Teutonli order, a character of, 11. 263.

Conquer the province of Prussia, ib.
Their grand master Albert made duke
of Prussia, 264.
Theatines, the order of, by whom found-

ed, III. 340.
Tblonqvlle, in Luxembourg, taken by the

duke of Guise, III. 406.
Thuringia, an infurretion of the pea-

sants there, against the nobility, II.
158. The fanatical notions inspired
into them by Thomas Muncer, 260.
Their disorderly army defeated, z61.
Toledo, infur.e-lion in, at the departure

of Charles V. for Germany, 11. 66,
155. The cathedral of, stripped of
its riches to support the army of the
Holy Junta, 173. Padillo's letter to, at
his execution, 178. Note. Isinftigated
to continue in arms by Padillo's wife,
180. Isreduced, 181.
Tolileo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo

di Medici lent by his uncle to nego-
tiate with l'hilip II. of Spain for the
invefliture of Siena, 111. 395.

Tslel-, Don I'edro de, viceroy of Naples,

oppresses the Neapolitans, HI. 278
Ani occasions the Turks to lavage the
coalls of Naples, ib.
Tl/rtatrin, reflections on the progrcfe of,

in Germany, Ill. 333. Why mutu-
ally allowed among the ancient Hea..
thrns, 334. How the primitive
Chrillians became averse to, ib.

TCnom, rr, Paul, a Francilcan monk, arch-

bifle'1)( of (;olocLa, is made general of
the Hungarian army against Solyman
the Magnificent, and is defeated by
him, II. 288.

Trdj'llaa, the residence of Quieen Joar.
na, the collfedcrity of iralrejt inti.

c l!cl

taled the Holy Junta, removed thi-
ther, IL 16X. The Queen taken
there by the conde de Haro, 7 1.

Tordejillas, one of the representatives of

Segovia, killed by the populace for vo-
ting the donative to Charles V. at the
Cortes alembled in Galicia, II. 155.
Transylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand

King of the Romans, by Queen Ifa-
bella, III. 225.

Tremoui/le, La, drives the Englilh under

the duke of Suffolk out of Picardy, 11.
200.
Trent, the council of, rummoned, III. 22.

Prorogued, 23. Again summoned, 46.
Is opened, 56. Declares the apocry-
phal scriptures canonical, 7o. ERa-
blifhes the authority of the church tra-
ditions, 71. The council, on rumours
of an infection in the city, is tranfated
to Bologna, 164. Henry II. of France
protests against the council, 212. The
council breaks up on the approach of
Maurice of Saxony, 245. Historical
remarks on this council, 246. Cha-
racters of its historians, 247.
Trent, cardinal of, sent by the Emperor

Charles V. to conclude an alliance with
the Pope, II. 76. The nature of this
treaty, 78.
Tunis, the means of its coming under the

power of Barbarofla, traced, II. 367.
The Emperor and other Christian
powers unite to expel BarbarofTa, and
reflore Muley Hafcen, 370. Is taken
by the Emperor, 375. Muley Hafcen
restored, and his treaty with Charles,
376.
Tuscany, a review of the Rate of, during

the sixteenth century, III. 453.

V.

Valencia, an infurreaion in, II. 62. The

people there greatly oppressed by the
nobles, 63. The nobles refuse to as-
femble the Cortes except the King is
picfcnt, ib. Charles authorises the
people to continue in arms, il. They
expel the nobles, 64. Aflbciatc under
hce Germanada, and appoint their own
magiltrates, ib. 1)on Diegode Men-
dora, Conde de Melito, appointed re-
gent on the departure of Charles tor
Germany, 66. The Ccrmanada refule
to lay down their arms, 18z. Defeat
the nobles in several aftions, 184.
Are at length routed by the conic de
Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles
l-ward thc infurgeiit, on his arnival,
last.

alentinoit, dutchess of. See Diana es
Poitiers.
Valladolid, thefirftpublic entry ofCharlea

V. to that city, II. 43. The inhabi-
tants rife, burn Fonseca's house, and
fortify the town, II. 158. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, anddiffolu-
tion of the Holy Junta, 179.

Vaucelles, treaty of, between Charles

V. and Henry II. of France, 111. 359.
Vendome, duke of, his plan of operations

in opposing the progress of the invasion
of Picardy by Henry VIII. II. s51.
Obliges him to retire, ib.
Venice, the republic of, incline in favour

of the pretensions of Francis I. of
France, to the Imperial crown, II. 53.
Their views and apprehensions on the
approaching rupture between the Em-
peror Charles V. and Francis, 69.
Leagues with the Emperor against
Francis, 189. A final accommodation
between, and the Emperor, 31z. Re-
fuses to enter into the league of the
Italian Rates, formed by the Emperor,
341. A review of the Rate of that
republic during the sixteenth century,
III. 452.
rerrina, the confident of the count of
Lavagno, encourages him in his scheme
of overturning the government of Ge-
noa, III. 116. Is proteted by Francis
on the ruin of that conspiracy, 131.

Fielleville, the French governor of Metz,

deteets father Leonard's conspiracy to
betray the city to the Imperialists, III.
32z. Executes the conspirators, 324.

Vienna, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the

Magnificent, II. 322.

Villalar, battle of, between Padilla, and

the conde de Haro, II. 176.
illena, marquis de, his spirited reply to
the request of the Emperor to lodge
Bourbon in his palace, II. 247.
Ul,, the government of that city violently

altered, and its reformed ministers car-
ried away in chains, by the Emperor
Charles V. Ill. 181.
United Provinces, of the Netherlands, a

brief view of their revolt againf the
dominion of Spain, 111. 455.
Urbno, rt flored by Pope Adrian to Fran-

cefco Maria de Rovere, II. 188.

W.
IJallop, Sir joln, joins the IFmperor

Chat l's V. at the siege of lIanldrcy,
%ith t

a odly fl Elnglilh troops, III. 17.

lFar, the method of carrying on in Eu-
ri'ipi, how improved at this period fronm

the

the pnaice of earlier ages, II. 199.
General refletions on the vicissitudes
of, III. 430.
Wartburg, Martin Luther concealed

there by the Eletor of Saxony, II. 124.
W'ent.wrtk, lord, governor of Calais, re-

monftrates in vain with the English
privy council to provide for its security,
III. 399. Is attacked by the Duke of
Guise, and forced to capitulate, 400.
Wittemberg, inveRted by the Emperor

Charles V. and defended by Sybilla of
Cleves, wife to the EleCtor of Saxony,
III. 143.
V0ole/y, cardinal, his rife, chara&er, and

influence over Henry VIII. of England,
II. 72. Receives a pension from Fran-
cis I. of France, 73. And from the
Emperor Charles V. lb. Detached
from the French interest by the latter,
74. Inclines Henry to join the Em-
peror against Francis, 117. Sent by
Henry to Calais, to negotiate an accom-
modation between the Emperor and
Francis, 136. Has an interview with
Charles at Bruges, and concludes a
league with him on the part of Henry,
againfR France, 137. Meditates re-
venge against Charles on his second
disappointment of the Papacy by the
election of Clement VII. 198. Obtains
of Clement a legantine commiflion in
England for life, 198. Negotiates a
league with Francis against the Em-
peror, 294.
orms, a diet called there by Charles V.
to check the progress of the Reformers,
II. 77. Proceedings of, ilx. Martin
Luther cited before it, z12. Refuses
to retract his opinions, 123. An edict
publilhed against him, ib. Diet at,
opened, III. 47.

WtVrtemberg, Ulric duke of, why ex-

pelled his dominions, I. 359. Recovers
his dominions by the afliflance of Fran-
cis King of France, and receives the
Protestant religion, 360.
M'yat, Sir Thomas, raises an infurre6fion
in Kent against Queen Mary of E!ng-
land, on account ot the Spanish match,
111. 302. Is subdued and punished,
ib.

Ximente, archbihop of Toledo, adheres
to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute

,rW

X, &c.
with the archduke Philip concerning
the regency of Castile, 11. 9. Espouses
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Caf-
tile on Philip'sdeath, 17. Conquers O-
ran, and other places in Barbary, for the
crown ofCaftile, 18. Appointed re-
gent of Cafile, by Ferdinand's will,
until the arrival of Charles V. in Spain,
at. His rife and character, ib. Admits
the claim to the regency of cardinal
Adrian, sent with that commiflion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with
him, 17. Takes the infant Don Ser-
dinand to Madrid under his own eye,
ib. Procures Charles, who assumed
the regal title, to be acknowledged by
the Castilian nobility, 29. Schemes
to extend the regal prerogative, ib.
Depresses the nobility, 30. Frees the
King from the feudal limitations, and
establishes a regal army to check the
barons, 3. Suppreffesa mutiny headed
by the grandees, ib. Resumes the
grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 32.
His prudent application of the revenue,
ib. His bold assertion of his authority
to the discontented nobles, 33. Other
associates in the regency appointed at
the instigation of the Flemish cour-
tiers, 34. Retains the superior ma-
nagement, ib. Defeats John D'Albret's
invasion of Navarre, 35. Difmantlee
allthe castles there, except Pampeluna.
which he strengthens, ib. The troops
sent by him against BarbarofTa defeated,
and his equanimity on that occasion,
36. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemish court, he persuades Charles to
visit Spain, 37. [ alls sick on his jour-
ney to meet Charles at his arrival, 41.
His letter of council to Charles, :b.
Requefis an interview, ib. The in-
gratitude of Charles to him, 42. His
death, ib. His character, tb. Revt-
rence paid to his memory by the Spa
niards, 43.

Z.
Zamora, bishop of, raises a regiment ..

priefis to deiend Tordefillas, for tl;(
Holy Junta, which is forced by tli<
conde de Haro, II. 171
Zulngblui, attacks the sale of Indulgencts

at Zurich in Switzerland, II. 94.

I S.
JS
