VOL-. I.

·1
~~~~. 'A~~~~~~~~~~~~ p.'.? ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . Il,'

TH E
H I S T 0 R Y

o F
AME RICA.

V 0 L. I.

THE
H I ST OR Y

O F
AMERIC A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY TOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

D U B L I N:

Winted for Mclsrs. WVUITESTONE, W. WATSON, CORCORAN, R. CROSsB

SLEATER, SIIEPPARD, ClIAMBERLAINE, POTTS, J. HOEY, FLIN,
FIrIZSIMONS, EXSIIAW, E. LYNCI, S. WVATON, W. COLLES,

WILLIAMS, W. WIIsON, PORTER, WALKER, M. HAY,

MIoNCRIPFFE, ARMITAOE, HALLIEAD, FAULKNERK

T.STIWART, BURNET, VALLANCE, SPOTSWOOD,

GILnERT, R. STEWART, MILLS, BEATTY,

JNKItN, P. \V LPON, E.CROaS, WOOAN,
MACEI.RATII, HIGLEY, HI.LARY,

WHIITE, GRUEBER, M'KENLY,
andMACE.. M'DCCLXYVII.

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had
come under to the Public with refped to
the Hifiorv of America, it was my inten-
tion not to have published any part of it
until the whole was completed. The pre-
sent fiate of the British Colonies has induc-
ed me to alter that resolution. While they
are engaged in civil war with Great Britain,
inquiries and speculations concerning their
ancient forms of policy and laws, which
exist no longer, cannot be interefling. The
attention and expectation of mankind are
now turned towards their future condition.
In whatever manner this unhappy contest
may terminate, a new order of things must
arise in North America, and its affairs will
assume another asped. I wait, with the
bolicitude of a good citizen, until the ser-
ment subside, and regular government be
re-eflablifhcd, and then I lhall return to
this part of nmy work, in which I had
made some progress. That, together with the

hiflorv

history of Portuguese America, and of the
settlements made by the several nations of
Europe in the Weft India islands will com-
plete my plan.

THE two volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the
New World, and of the progress of the
Spanish arms and colonies there. This is
not only the most splendid portion of the
American flory, but so much detached, that
it forms a perfect whole by itself, remark-
able for the unity of the subjed. As the
principles and tnaxims of the Spaniards in
planting colonies, which have been adopt-
ed in rome measure by every nation in
Europe, are unfolded in this part of my
work; it will serve as a proper introduc-
tion to the history of their establishment
in America, and convey such information
concerning this important article of policy,
as may be deemed no less interefling than
curious.

IN describing the atchievements and in-

flitutions of the Spaniards in the New
World, I have departed in many inflances
from the accounts of preceding historians,
and have often related fadts which fcem to
have been unknown to them. It is a duty
I owe the Public, to. mention the sources
from which I have derived such intelli-

gence,

gence, as juflifies me either in placing tranf-
agtions in a new light, or in forming any
new opinion with refped to their causes
and effedts. This duty I perform with greater
fatisfadion, as it will afford an opportunity
of expressing my gratitude to those benefac-
tors, who have honoured me with their
countenance and.aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to ex-

ped the most important information, with
regard to this part of my work, I confidered
it as a very fortunate circumfiance for me,
when Lord Grantham, to whom I had
the honour of being personally known, and
with whose liberality of lentiment, and dif-
position to oblige, I was well acquainted,
was appointed ambassador to the court of
Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met with
such a reception as satisfied me, that his en-
deavours would be employed in the molt
proper manner, in order to obtain the grati-
fication of my wifes; and I am periedlv
sensible, that what progress I have made in
my inquiries among the Spaniards, ought to
be ascribed chiefly to their knowing how
much his Lordlhip interefled himself in their
success.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord

Grantham, than his attention in engaging
Mr. Waddilove, the chaplain of his lm-

baffy,

bafry, to take the condua of my affairs in
Spain, the obligations I lie under would be
very great. During five years, that gentle-
man has carried on researches for my be-
hoof, with such acivity, perseverance, and
knowledge of the subjed, to which his at-
tention was turned, as have filled me with
no less astonishment, than fatisfadion. He
procured for me the greater part of the
Spanish books, which I have consulted;
and as many of them were printed early in
the sixteenth century, and are become
extremely rare, the collecting of these was
such an occupation, as, alone, required much
time and afliduity. To his friendly atten-
tion I am indebted for copies of several va-
luable manuscripts, containing fads and de-
tails which I might have searched for in
vain, in works that have been made public.
Encouraged by the inviting good-will with
which Mr. Waddilove conferred his favours,
I tranfinitted to him a set of queries, with
rccQcS both to the cufioms and policy of the
inative Americans, and the nature of several
inllitutions in the Spanish settlements, fram-,
cd inl such a manner, that a Spaniard might
anfivcr them, without disclosing any thing
that was iml ropcr to be communicated to a
t)ircigner. IHe tranfiated thfee into Spanili
;ind obtained fiom various pcrfons who had
rcitided in lmolt o the Spanish colonies, such
replies as
a have afforded me much inlsrusion.

No r'-

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advan-

tages with which my inquiries were carried
,on in Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to
add, that the success with which they have
been attended, mufl be ascribed to the bene-
ficence of individuals, not to any communi-
cation by public authority. By a singular
arrangement of Philip II. the records of the
Spanish monarchy, are deposited in the Ar-
chivo of Simancas, near Valladolid, at the
difiance of a hundred and twenty miles from
the feat of government, and the supreme
courts of justice. The papers relative to
America, and chiefly to that early period of
its history, towards which my attention was
directed, are so numerous, that they alone,
according to one account, fill the largest
apartment in the Archivo; and according to
arother, they compose eight hundred and
feventy-three large bundles. Conscious of
possessing, in lome degree, the industry which
belongs to an hilforian, the profped of such
a treasure excited my most ardent curiosity.
But the profped of it, only, is all that I have
enjoyed. Spain, with an excess of caution,
has uniformly thrown a veil over her tranf-
adions in America. From firangers they are
concealed with peculiar solicitude. Even to
her own fuljedts the Archivo of Simancas
is not opened without a particular order from
the crown; and after obtaining that, papers
cannot be copied, without paying fees of

VoI. I. a office

office so exorbitant, that the expence exceeds
what it would be proper to beflow, when
the gratification of literary curiosity is the
only objec. It is to he hoped, that the Spa-
niards will at last discover this fyflem of con-
cealment to be no less impolitic than illiberal.
From what I have experienced in the course
of my inquiries, I am satisfied, that upon a
more minute scrutiny into their early opera-
tions in the New World, however reprehen-
fible the actions of individuals may appear,
the conduCt of the nation will be placed in a
more favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different

sentiments prevail. Having searched, with-
out success, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to
Charles V. written soon after he landed in the
Mexican empire, which has not hitherto
been published; it occurred to me, that as
the emperor was setting out for Germany, at
the time when the messengers from Cortes
arrived in Europe, the letter with which they
were intrufled might poflibly be preserved in
the Imperial Library of Vienna. I commu-
nicated this idea to Sir Robert Murray Keith,
with whom I have long had the honour to
live in fliicndlhip, and 1 had soon the plea-
firc to Ic.:rn, that, upon his application, her
ImperiA:l lMajefty had been graciously pleated
to iliice an order, that not only a copy of thaC

letter

letter (if it were found), but of any other
papers in the library, which could throw light
upon the History of America,' should be
transmitted to me. The letter from Cortes
is not in the Imperial Library, but an au-
thentic copy, attetfed by a notary, of that
written by the magistrates of the colony
planted by him at Vera Cruz, which I have
mentioned, Vol. ii. p. 32, having been
found; it was transcribed and sent to me.
This, no less curious, and as little known
as the letter which was the objec of my in-
quiries, did not come to my hand till that
part of the history to which it relates was
printed; but I have given some account of
what is moil worthy of notice in it, at the
end of Notes and Illufirations, vol. ii. To-
gether with it, I received a copy of a letter
from Cortes, containing a long account of
his expedition to Honduras, with refpea to
which, I did not think it necessary to enter
into any particular detail; and likewise
those curious Mexican paintings, which I
have described, vol. ii. p. 284, &c.

\MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were car-

iied on with equal facility and success. In
examining into the nearest communication
between our continent and that of America,
it became of confequencc to obtain authen-
tic information concerning the discoveries of

a 2 the

the Ruffians, in their navigation from Kam-
chatka towards the coast of America. Ac-
curate relations of their firfi voyage, in 17 1,
have been published by Muller and Gmelin.
Several foreign authors have entertained an
opinion, that the court of Russia studiously
conceals the progress which has been made
by more recent navigators, and fuffersthe
Public to be amused with false accounts of
their route. Such conduct appeared to me
unsuitable to those liberal sentiments, and
that patronage of science, for which the pre-
sent sovereign of Russia is eminent; nor
could I discern any political reason, that
might render it improper to apply for infor-
mation concerning the late attempts of the
Rufi ans to open a communication between
Asia and America. My ingenious country-
man, Dr. Rogerfon, first physician to the
Empress, presented my request to her Impe-
rial Majesty, who not only disclaimed any
idea of concealment, but inflantly ordered
thc journal of Captain Krenitzin, who con-
duded the only voyage of discovery made by
public authority since the year 1741, to be
translated, and his original chart to be co-
pied for my use. By consulting them I have
been enabled to give a more accurate view of
the progress andl extent of the Ruffian disco-
veries, than has hitherto bccn communi-
cated to the Public.

FROM

FROM other quarters I have received in,

formation of great utility and importance.
M. Chevalier de le Pinto, the minifier-from
Portugal to the court of Great Britain, who
commanded for several years at Matagrofla,
a settlement of the Portuguese in the inte-
rior part of Brasil, where the Indians are
numerous, and their original manners lit-
tle altered by intercourse with Europeans,
was pleated to fend me very full answers
to some queries concerning the charadter
and institutions of the natives of America,
which his polite reception of an application
made to him in my name, encouraged me
to propose. These satisfied me, that he had
contemplated with discerning attention the
curious objeds which his situation present-
ed to his view, and I have often followed
him as one of my befi inftrudCed guides.

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation

of the History of the Reign of Charles V.
I owe the favourable reception of that work
on the continent, procured me answers to
the fame queries from M. de Bougainville,
who had opportunities of observing the In-
dians both of North and South America,
and from M. Godin le Jeune, who resided
fifteen years among Indians in OIito, and
twenty years in Cayenne. The littcr are
more valuable from having been examined
by M. de la Condamine, who, a few weeks

before

before his death, made some short additions
to them, which may be confidered as the
lait effort of that attention to science which
occupied a long life.

Mr inquiries were not confined to one

region in America. Governor Hutchinson
took the trouble of recommending the con-
fideration of my queries to Mr. Hawley and
Mr. Brainerd, two proteflant missionaries,
employed among the Indians of the Five
Nations, who favoured me with answers,
which .discover a considerable knowledge of
the people whose customs they describe.
Yrom William Smith, Efq; the ingenious
hifirian of 'New York, I received some use-
ful information. When I enter upon the
History of our Colonies in North America,
I shall have occasion to acknowledge how
much 1 ha'v been indebted to many other
gentlemen of that country.

FROAM the valunale Colledion of Voyages

madeby Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with
whose attention to the History of Naviga-
tion 8nd Discovery the 'Public is well ac-
quaiIntd, cI hlave received .ome very rare
b, ioks, ];>ticul]'riy two largc volumes of
vircnorials, partly rnanuiifript, and partly
iii )rillt. whiclh wer presented to6 :he court
oi SL'pai durilng the reigns of Phliip 11.

and

and Philip IV. From these I have learned
many curious particulars with rerped to
the interior slate of the Spanish colonies,
and the various schemes formed for their
improvement. As this Colledion of Me-
morials formerly belonged to the Colbert
Library, I have quoted them by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have

consulted with that attention, which the
refped due fiom an Author to the Public
required ; and by minute references to them,
I have endeavoured to authenticate what-
ever I relate. The longer 1 reflect on the
nature of historical composition, the more
I am convinced that this scrupulous accu-
racy is necessary. The hiflorian who re-
cords the events of his own time, is credited
in proportion to the opinion which the Pub-
lic -entertains with refpea to his means of
information and his veracity. He who deli-
neates the tranfadions of a remote period,
has no title to claim afient, unlclI he pro-
duces cvidence in proof of his alTertions.
Without this, he may write :n amuqinun
tale, but cannot be said to have compored
an authentic hiflory. In those 1ilntiments
I have been confirmed by the opinion of an
author *, whom his indluiry, cru lition, and

* ,X,1 , C;i , l l.

discernment, have deservedly placed in a
high rank among the most eminent hiflo-
rians of the age. Emboldened by a hint
from him, I have published a catalogue of
the Spanish books which I have consulted.
This practice was frequent in the lafi cen-
tury and considered as an evidence of lau-
dable indufiry in an author; in the present,
it may, perhaps, be deemed the effect of
ostentation; but as many of there books
are unknown in Great Britain, I could not
otherwise have referred to them as autho-
rities, without encumbering the page with
an insertion of their full titles. To any
person who may chute to follow me in this
path of inquiry, the catalogue must be ve-
ry useful.

MY readers will observe, that in menti-

oning fums of money, I have uniformly
followed the Spanish method of comput-
ing by peJos. In America, the peso fuertc,
or duro, is the only one known, and that
is always meant when any fum imported
from America is mentioned. The peso fu-
erte, as well as other coins, has varied in
its numerary value, but I have been advised,
without attending to such minute variations,
to confider it as equal to four shillings and fix
pence of our money. It is to be remembered,
Jlowcvcr, tlat in the sixteenth century, the

effcidive

effedive value of a peso, i. e. the quantity of
labour which is represented, or of goods
which it would purchase, was five or fix times
as much as at present.

(C () N-

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.
PROGRESS of navigation among the ancients-

/iew of their djfcoveries as preparatory to those of
the moderns-Imperfecion of ancient navigation and
geography-Dotcrine of the Zones-Farther difcove-
ries checked by the irruption of barbarous nations-
Geographical knowledge Jtil preserved in the EafI,
and among the Arabians - Revival of commerce
and navi'gation in Europe-favoured by the Croi-
fades-extended by travellers into the Eafl-proiot-
ed by the invention of the mariner's compafs-Firjl
regular plan of discovery formed by Portugal-State
o' that kinzdom,-&'Shemes of Prince IHenry-Early
attempts fjeble-Prqorefs along the we/tern coa/t of
A/fica-IHopes of dizcovering a wnew route to the
East Indies-Attempts to accoiiplqjh tais-ProfpeVs
of fJcctfrs.

B 0 O K II.
Birth and educaltion of COllt/lmbs-,aclquires nawval tit l

in) tihe j'ricwe u of kPial-,' el';mes hfiles cf rcach-

ing the EaJt Indies by holding a weflerly coutfe-his
fyjfem founded on the ideas of the ancients, and know-
ledge of their navzgation-and on the discoveries of
the Portuguefe-His negociations with diflerent courts
-Obflacles which he had to fuirmount in Spain-
Foyage of djfcovery-diffculties-fuccefs-return to
Spain-AftoniJhment of mankind on this discovery of
a New World-Papal grant of it-Second voyage
-Colony fettled-Farther difcoveries-WJar 'with the
Indians-FirfJ tax imposed on themn-Third voyage
-He. dizcovers the continent-State of the Spanifi
colony--Errors in fir)? fyflem of colonizing-Voyage of
the Portuguese to the EafJ Indies by Cape of
Good Hope-Eejfis of this-Difcoveries made by
private adventurers in the New World-Name of
Amnerica given to it-Machinations againfl Columbus
-Disgraced andJent in chains to Europe-Fourth
voyage of Columbus-His dij/overies--dxifiterss-
-death.

BOOK III.
State of the colony in Hifpaniola--New war with the

Indians-Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal regulati-
ons conce.rning the condition of the Indiants-Diminu--
tion of that people-Difcoveries and settlements-
Fihf colony planted on the continent-Conqulef of
Cubal-Dficovery of Florida-of the South Sena-
Great expectations rafred by this-Claufes of dlfap-
pointment with refpestt to t/'fc Jfor Jome timeo-Con-
troverfy concerning tuhe treatment oJ the lnlddis-
Contrary deciiotns-Zeal of' the ccclcfiaflics, particu-
larly of Las Cafas-Sin, rllar proceedings of Xi-
inenes-Negroes imported into America-Las GCIafs's
idea of a new colony'-permnited to attempt it-llfiC-
ce/fistl-Dijroveries tzwards the wef/t-s3lcatan-
C;iipei,'lly-New Spin-Preparaltions for invad-

BOOK

B O O K IV.
.zlew of America when si f dfJcovered, and of the man-

ners and policy of its moiJ uncivilized inhabitants-
Fqft extent of 4America-Grandeur of the objects it
presents to view-Its mountains-rivers-lakes-
Its form favourable to commnerce--Temiperature-pre-
dominzence of cold-Caizfes of this-u-ncultivated-
mnwholefome--its ainimals-foil-Inquiry how Amne-
rica was peopled-various theories-what appears
nmof probable-Condition and charafter of the Ame-
ricans-All the Mexicans and Peruvians excepted,- in
the slate of fJvages-Inquiry confined to the uncivi-
lized tribes-Difficulty of obtaining information-va-
rious cauIfes of this-Mlthod observed in the inquiiy-
I. Tie bodily conjiitution of the Amnericans conidered
-IL. JThe qualities of their minds-111. Their do-
meftic fate-IV. their political slate and inifitutions
-lV. Their fyflem of war and public security--71.
7ihe arts with which they were acquainted-I'I.
Their rellious ideas and ijlitztiotns-VlII. Suchfin-
gular and detached cl/loms as are not reducible to alfy
of the bfrmer heads-IX General review and eRi-
ntlfie of their v!itues and deJf'is.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

BOOK V.
Hifjory of thl conlqiie/l of New Spalin by Cores.

BOOK

B O OK VI.
Hflory of conquest of Peru, by Pizarro-and of the

dljenJions and civil wars of the Spaniards in that
country-Origin-progrefs-and effets of theie.

BOOK VII.
View of institutions and manners of Mexicans and

Peruvians-Civilized fates in comparison of other
Americans-Recent origin of the Mexicans-FaZs
'which prove their progress in civilization-7iew of
their policy in its various branches-of their arts-
Fat7s which indicate a small progress in civilization-
What opinion should be formed on comparing thoJe con-
tradicory fatcs-Genius of their religion-Peruvian
mnonarchy more ancient-Its policy founded on religion
-Singular efitts of this-peculiar fJate of property
among the Peruvians-Their public works and arts--
roads-bridges -buildings - unwarlike fpirit--Vliew
of other dominions of Spain in America-Cinaloa and
Sonora-California-- ucatan and Honduras-Chhili
-7ucuman-Kingdomi of Tierra Firme-New I'ing-
dom? of Granada.

B 0 0 I VIII.
Ilew of the interior government, commerce, &c. of thl

Spani:b colonies-Depopulation of' America firfl efict1
of their Jelllements-wlt the conjcrience of any fyJfem
of polriy-nor to be imputed to religl,1on-Natmber of
Indians Jtill remainng - Fu1nd mental maxims on

!'

which the Spanijbfyflem of colonization is founded-
Condition of different orders of men in their colonies-
Chapetones-Creoles-Negroes-Indians -Eccleefiafi-
calflate and policy-Character of Jecular and regular
clergy-Smnall progress of Chrflianity among the na-
tives-Mines chief objefi of their attention-Mode of
working thefe-their produce-EffeL2s of encouraging
this species of indfltry-Other commodities of Spanilb
America-FirfI effes of this new commerce on Spain
--W/hy the Spznijb colonies have not been as beneficial
to the parent-flate as those of other n.tions-Errors
in her fyflem of regulating this commerce-confined to
one port-carried on by annual fleets-Contraband
trade-Decline of Spain both in population and wealth
-Remedies propofed--i.ew of the wie regulations
of the Bourbon Princes-A new and more liberal sys-
tem iltroduced-Beneficial effeits of this-Probable
confequences-Trade between Mexico and the Phi-
lippizes-Revenue of Spain from America-whence it
aries-to what it amounts,

Til E

# BOOK I.

HISTORY

o F
AMERICA.

BOOK I

T HEprogrefs of men in discovering and peo- B3 O K
pling the various parts of the earth, has been ex- I1
tremely flow. Several ages elapied before they re- The earth
moved far from those mild and fertile regions where ilowly pco-
they were originally placed by their Creator. The pied'
occasion of their first general dispersion is knownl;
but we are unacquainted with the course of their mi-
grations, or the time when they took poflellion of
the different countrics which they lnow inhabit.
Neither hiffory nor tradition furnifli lich iniollrma-
tion concerning tliofc remote events, as enables us to
trace, with any cc:tainty, the opeiatiolls oftlic hu-
man race in the infancy of iociety.

Wil may conclude, however, that all the eaily F;r i -gra-

migrations of mankind were made by land. Thle tIollt
ocean, which every where surrounds the habitable
eaith, as well a thll various arms of the sea
which separate one region from another, though

Vo L.I. BI deslined

B O 0 K detired to facilitate the communication between

I. diftniit countries, seem at firfi, to be formed to

cl' check the progress of man, and to mark the bounds
of that portion of the globe to which nature had
confined him. It was long, we may believe, be-
fore men attempted-to pals this formidable barrier,
and became so skilful and adventurous as to com-
mit themselves to the mercy of the winds and
waves, or to quit their native shore in quest of re-
mote and unknown regions.

Fi-l at- N. v I G A T I N and ship-building are arts so nice
tempts to-
wardi navi- and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
gatikB. as well as experience of many fuccefive ages to bring

them to any degree of perfeetion. From the raft
or canoe, which firfi servcd to carry a savage over
the river that obflruetied him in the chace, to the con-
ftruCion of a vefel capable of conveying a nume-
rous crew with safety to a distant coast, the progress
in improvement is immense. Many efforts would
be made, many experiments would be tried, and
much labour and invention would be employed, be-
fore men could accomplish this arduous and im-
portant undertaking. The rude and imperfec
slate in which navigation is still found among all na-
tions which are not considerably civilized, corre-
fponds with this account of its progre-s, and demon-
ftratcs that, in early times, the art was not so far
improved as to enable men to undertake diflant
voyagts, or to attempt remote difcovci-ics.

Introduali AIs CO(n, lhowcvcr, as the art ofl x i atiion became
mercco,. k1own, a new liecics of correlpondencc among men

took place. It s fromn thiis ;;r, tiht we lmui date the
commenceomcint of iich aln intercourse between nati-
ons as defrvcs the ;Fppcllation of ccl.nnerce. Men
are, iadeed, l;
' advanced in improvement before

commerce
*s

commerce becomes an objeEt of great importance B O O K
to them. They must even have made some confi- 1.
derable progress towards civilization, before they -
acquire the idea of property, and ascertain it so per-
fectly, as to be acquainted with the most simple of
all contracts, that of exchanging by barter one rude
commodity for another. But as soon as this impor-
tant right is eftabliihed, and every individual feels
that he has an exclusive title to posiess or to alienate
whatever he has acquired by his own labour and
dexterity, the wants and ingenuity of his nature
{iggeft to him a new method of increasing his ac-
quifitions and enjoyments, by disposing of what is
iiperfluous in his own Itores, in order to procure
what is neceflary or desirable in those of other men.
Thus a commercial intercourse begins, and is carri-
ed on among the members of the lame community.
By degrees, they discover that neighbouring tribes
poflefs what they want, and enjoy comforts of
which they wish to partake. In the fame mode,
and upon the fame principles, that domeRtic traffic
is carried on within the society, an external com-
merce is eflablifhed with other tribes or nations.
Their mutual interest and mutual wants render this
intercourse desirable, and imperceptibly introduce
the maxims and laws which facilitate its progress
and render it secure. But no very extensive com-
merce can take place between contiguous provinces,
whose foil and climate being nearly the fame, yield
limilar productions. Remote countries cannot
convey their commodities by land, to those pla-
ces, where on account of their rarity they are
desired, and become valuable. It is to navigation
that men are indebted for the power of tranliporting
their superfluous flock of one part of the earth, to
supply the wdants of another. The luxuries and
blellings of a particular climate are no longer con-
lined to itlflf alone, but the enjoyment of them is
communicated to the most difiant regions.

B 2 I

B O O K IN proportion as tle knowledge of the advan-

I. tages derived fr-om navigation and commerce conti-
G-yv-' nued to fijread,the intercourse armong nations extend-

ed. The ambition of conquefi, or the neceflity of pro-
curing a new settlement, we!e no longer the sole mo-
tives of xifiling difrant lands. The desire of gain
became a new incentive to activity, routed adventu-
reis and sent them forth upon long voyages in search
of countriks, whose produits or wants might increase
that circulation, which nourishes and gives vigour to
commerce. Trade proved a great iource of disco-
very, it opened unknown seas, it penetrated into
new regions, and contributed more than any other
c.ause, to bring men acquainted with the situation,
the nature, and commodities of the different parts
of the globe. But even after a regular commerce
was e{tablifhed in the world, after nations were
considerably civilized, and the sciences and arts were
cultivated with ardour and fllccefs, navigation con-
tinued to be 'o imperfect, that it can hardly be said
to have advanced beyond the infancy of its im-
provement in the ancient world.

Imperfrai- AMONG all the nations of antiquity the ftruc-
oavn "'- ture of their vcliels was extremely rude, and their
amnunz thc rncthod cf \.-ork-ing them no lels defective. They

wicci. \e unacquainted with some of the great principles
and operations in navigation, which are now con-
fidered as the1 firfl clem:nts on which that science is
foulnded. lThough that property of the magnet,
by which it a:r.las iron, was well known to the an-
cients; its molt important and anmazing virtue of
pointing to the poles had entirely e'caped their ob-
servation. Deiiitute of this faithful guide, which
now conducEs the pilot with fb much ccrtainty in
the unbounded ocean, during the dai kncs of night,
and when the heavens are covered with clouds, the
ancicnts had no othci mnethod of regulating their

course.

course than by observing the lln and itais. Their g o o K
navigation was of conlequence unccrtain and timid. I.
They durst seldom quit light of land, but crept '--
along the coast, expoled to all the dangeis, and re-
taided by all the obfiructions, unavoidable in hold-
ing such an aukward course. An incrediblelength
of time was requisite for performing voyages, vhlich
are now finiflhed in a fhlort fiace. Even inl the
mildest climates, and in seas the least tenipeftous, it
was only during the liummer monthis thatc te anci-
ents ventured out of their iha;bours. The remain-
der of the year was lolt in inadtiity. It would
have been deemed moit inconsiderate rafhnels to
have braved the fury of the winds and waves
during the winter. *

WHILE both the science and pradice of navi-

gation continued to be ib defective, it was an un-
dertaking of no small difficulty and danger to viiit
any remote region of the earth. Under every dif-
advantage, however, the ative fpi'it of commelce
exerted itself. The Egyptians, soon after tlhe eif- N.ig.tion
tablifnment of their monarchy, are said to have andi so,-

merce of the

opened a trade between the Arabian Gulph or Red Egyptinm.
Sea, and the western coast of the great Indian con-
tinent. The commodities which they imported
fromi the calt, were carried by land from the Ara-
bian Gulph to the banks of the Nile, and conveyed
down that river to tile Mcditenlanan. Mit if the
Egyptians in eailly limes applied thcim:cilvs to conm-
merce, their attcntionl to it was of lhort duration.
Th'le fertile foil and mild climate of Egypt produc-
ed the neccklaries and cc,:It;Is of lile with sitch
])rofilfion1, a eeei s reo idere it)delt
of other countrics, that it became aln cilabllhled
m-axim amaong that peopll2, wholc ilcas and in-

* Vrgetiu dc Re Ilnli;. lib. iv.

flitutions

B O O K flitutions differed in almofR every point from those

1. of other nations, to renounce all intercourse with
'^'^ foreigners. In con'equence of this, they never

went out of their own country; they held all sea-
faring peifons in detcefation, as impious and pro-
fane; anr fortis3 ing their own harbours, they deni-
ed strangers admittance in to them 'n ; and it was in
the decline of their power, that they again opened
their ports, and resumed any communication with
foreigners.

orthe Phc. THE character and situation of the Phenicians
ncians wwere as favourable to the spirit of commerce and

discovery as those of the Egyptians were adverse to
it. They had no diflinguifhing peculiarity in their
manners and inflitutions; they were not addicted
to any singular and unsocial form of fuperflition;
they could mingle with other nations without icruple
or relutance. The territory which they possessed
was neither large nor fertile. Commerce was the
only source from which they could derive opulence
or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on by
the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more ex-
tensive and enterprizing than that of any slate in
the ancient world. The genius of the Phenicians,
as well as the objeE of their policy and the fj)irit of
their laws, were entirely commercial. They were
a peopll of merchanls who aimed at the empire of
the Tea, and actually pofThflLd it. Their flips not
only frequenled all the ports in the MIediterranean,
but they were the firfl who veitured beyond the
ancient bounllldaies of navigation, and pafling the
Streights of (Cad'ts v'iitcd hle veflern coails of
Spain and Afiic;-. In lml. ny oftlhe pIlaces to which
they rcfortcd, th.y i:ntl .d1 colonics, and cnmm;nu-
nicated to the irud iillabiitants fbmc knowledge of

* nd. Scul. li i. p. . Ed. WL ffclnli Anill. i7S6.
Strabo,lib. xvii. p. 1 142 z .d. Aiislt. 1707.

their

their arts and improvements. While they extend- B o o K
ed their discoveries towards the north and the eft, I.
they did not neglect to penetrate into the more '
opulent and fertile regions of the ibuth and east.
Having rendered themselves maiters of several com-
modious harbours towards the bottom of tlhe A abi--
an Gulpl, they, after the example of the Egypti-
ans, eftabliflied a regular intercourse with Arabia
and the continent of India on the one hand, and with
the eafrern coait of Afiica on the other. Fiom
tlefe countries they imported many valuable com-
nlodities, unknown to the reft of the world, ard,
during a long period, engroired that lucrative
branch of commerce without a rival *.

THE vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired of tIe

by monopolizing the trade carried on in the Red J"ew'
Sea, incited their neighbours the Jews, under the
prosperous reigns of David and Solomon, to aim
at being admitted to some share of it. This they
obtained, partly by their conquest of Idumea,
which firetches along the Red Sea, and partly by
their alliance with Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon
fitted out fleets, which, under the direltion of Phc-
nician pilots, failed from the Red Sea to Tarshish
and Ophir, which it is probable were ports in India
and Africa that their conductors were accutomned
to frequent, and returned with flch valuable car-
goes as iuddenly diful-ed wealth and fpl ndour
through the kingdom of Iirael 1. rBt the singular
inflitutions of the Jews, thle oblrvancn of v iiich
was enjoined by theil divine legislator, with an in-
tention of preierving them a icparati pcpi;lc, ulin-

* See NOT I. 1 nt the lnd lrf Il, \',,lume.
1 Mcinoitc l1u kI PIys l'(O;,ir p ) ?.I )Anv! e ci. dc./il. ti
1'Acadcii. dcs :!lcripl. &c. ti u x. xt ;.

C) ~ sv

B OO K seced by idolatry, formed a national charaeter

I. incapable of that open and liberal intercourse with
Lc^^ fitrangers which commerce requires. Accordingly

this unsocial genius of the people, together with the
disasters which befell the kingdom of Ifiael, pre-
vented the commercial spirit which their monarchs
--laboured to introduce, and to cherish, from spread-
ing among them. The Jews cannot be numbered
among the nations which contributed to improve
navigation, or to extend discovery.

Of the Car. BUT though the infirudions and example of
thaginian:. the Phenicians were unable to mould the manners

and temper of the Jews, in opposition to the ten-
dency of their laws, they tranfinitted the commer-
cial spirit with facility, and in full vigour, to their
own defeendants the Carthaginians. The com-
monwealth of Carthage applied to trade and to na-
val affairs, with no less ardour, ingenuity and fuc-
cess, than its parent Itate. Carthage early rivalled,
and soon furpafied Tyre, in opulence and power,
but seems not to have aimed at obtaining any share
in the commerce with India. The Phenicians had
engrossed this, and had fich a command of the
Red Sea as fccured to them the exclusive poffeflion
of that lucrative branch of trade. The commer-
cial a&civity of the Carthaginians was exerted in
anuther direLtion. Without contending for the
't .;dc of tle eatl with their mother-country, they cx-
iended their navigation chiefly towards the well and
north. Following the course which the Phenicians
had opened, they palSed the Straights of Gades, and
lpulhing their diliovciies ular beyond theirs, not on-
ly visited all the coafis of Spain, but those of Gaul,
and tpenetrated at :lat into Biitain. At tlh falme
timc that lhl:y acqu!iled know ledge of new countries
il lthis iart of the. glob,c they gradually carried
tlcir i cfarclches towards the ibuth. They made con-

fiderable

fiderable progress by land, into the interior provinces B O O K
of Africa, traded with some of them, and fubjested i
others to their empire. They failed along the
western coast of that great continent, almost to the
tropic of Cancer, and planted several colonies, in
order to civilize the natives, and accustom them to
commerce. They discovered the Fortunate If-
lands, now known by the name of the Canaries,
the utmost boundary of ancient navigation in the
western ocean *.

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their trade
from one country to another. Commerce was
followed by its usual effedts among both thete peo-
ple. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the idoas and
desires of men, and incited them to bold enter-
prises. Voyages were undertaken, the sole obje&
of which was to discover new countries, and ex-
plore unknown seas. Such, during the prosperous
age of the Carthaginian republic, were the famous
navigations of Hanno and Himilco. Both their
fleets were equipped by authority of the senate,
and at public expence. Hanno was directed to
fleer towards the louth, along the coafl (of Aflica,
and seems to hav e advalncd much nearer the equi-
noatial line than any folml2r navigator'[l . Himilco
had it in charge to procctee towai cis the lnorth, and
to examine tlhe wellcrn coall of tle Euronean con-
tinent :l. Of thle mltc nature was the extraordi-
nary navigation of thl Pihn.iciins round Afical.
A Phenician fleet, we arc told, fitted o(ut by Ne-
cllo king of Egyp.l, took its departure about lix

* PIlinii N ,t. Hlift. lib. vi. c. 37,edi;. i n D,, op, I . ..,o, s6:).
T I'lnii N ,r. I.il. lil,.v.' c, ,. I:llliol ni i Pc: iluj ap (G oU-
g':uph. linorcs, tilit. HIudrlCii, vol. i. p i.

t Plinii Nat. lit l.

l i.ii. .c. 67. l7''ltis. , vi.. Iris api'd ltochllt.

;eogr. flcr. lib. i. c. r 60. 5

o ) .
óii. 1vo
. ii. , LI.ti. 1 707.

]iundrcd

B O O K hundred and four years before the Christian

I. asra, from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the fou-
- ,"-' them promontory of Africa, and, after a voyage of

three years, returned by the Streights of Gades to the
mouth of the Nile*. Eudoxus of Cyzicus is laid to
have held the fame course, and to have accomplished
the fame arduous undertaking t.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may jufily be reckoned the
greatest effort of navigation in the ancient world;
and if we attend to the imperfect Rate of the art at
that time, it is difficult to determine, whether we
ihould mofi admire the courage and sagacity with
which the design was formed, or the conduc and
good fortune with which it was executed. But un-
fortunately, all the original and authentic accounts
of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whether
undertaken by public authority, or in prosecution
of their private trade, have perished, The infor-
mation which we receive concerning them from the
Greek and Roman authors, is not only obscure and
inaccurate, but, if we except a short narrative of
Hanno's expedition, is of suspicious authority .
Whatever acquaintance with the remote regions of
the car h the Phenicians or Carthaginians may have
acquired, was concealed from the reft of mankind
with a mercantilc jealousy. Every thing relative
to the course of their navigation was not only a
mystery of trade, but a secret of itate. Extraordinary
facts are recorded concerning their Iblicitude to pre-
vent other nations fiom penetrating into what they
wiflcid Ihould remain undivulged§. Many of their
difcovceii:s fi:cm, accordingly, to have been tcarccly
lknown b:yond lllc preccinlts of their o\vn fRatcs. The

* lorollot. lib. iv . c . 42. I'inii Nat. fIia. lib. z.

c. 7. i. Sc NOT)'E 11. § S;lab. Gcogr.
!i,. P. p. p , . lib. xvii. p. i 4.

navi
gtinb

navigation round Africa, in particular, is recorded B O O K
by the Greek and Roman writers, rather as a firange 1
amusing tale, which they either did not compre- ^
hend, or did not believe, than as a real tranfaition,
which enlarged their knowledge and influenced
their opinion -*. As neither the progrels of the
Phenician and Carthaginian discoveries, nor the
extent of their navigation, were communicated to
the reft of mankind, all memorials of their extraor-
dinary flill in naval affairs seem, in a great mea-
sure, to have perilhed, when the maritime power
of the former was annihilated by Alexander's con-
quefi of Tyre, and the empire of the latter was
overturned by the Roman arms,

LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous ac- Of the

counts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages Greeks,
to the curiosity and conjecures of antiquaries, his-
tory must reit satisfied with relating the progress
of navigation and dificovery among the Greeks and
Romans, which, though less splendid, is better as-
certained. It is evident that the Phenicians, who
infiruated the Greeks in other useful sciences and
arts, did not communicate to them that extensive
knowledge of navigation, which they themselves
possesscd; nor did the Romans imbibe tllhat com-
mercial spirit and ardour r r lifcoverv whichl dli-
tinguill-ed the Carthaginians. Though Greece be
alrnof encoinpafled by the fIa, which formed
many fi)acios bays and coilmlclio'as harbours,
though it be flirrounded by a ali. numlber of fertile
illands, yet, notwvithfiandiniii fiuch ;a favourible situ-
ation, wvlicl Icmcidi to invite that iienious peo-
pie to apply tlicinlilves to navigationl it was lono,
before tlis art attained any d'gr;Ce (,'f perfection
mllongl thlllc. Tlir ectrly \;ag..s, til- objdct lo
x\'!li;:l! w\\'; l)i;cy rathellr tihu Colln ll lli 'ce, were ic.

' ,; N O !'' !i11.

e'i c,'n fidel able,

BO O K inconsiderable, that the expedition of the Argo.

·. nauts from the coast of Thessaly to the Euxine

f ea, appeared such an amazing effort of klill and
courage, as entitled the condutors of it to be
ranked among the demigods, and exalted the vef-
fel in which they failed to a place among the hea-
venly constellations. Even at a later period, when
the Greeks engaged in their famous c;nerprize
against Troy, their knowledge in naval a=ffairs
seems not to have been much improved. Accord-
ing to the account of Homer, the only poet to
whom hifiory ventures to appeal, and who, by his
scrupulous accuracy in describing the manners and
arts of early ages, merits this distinction, the fci-
ence of navigation, at that time, had hardly ad-
vanced beyond its rudest Rate. The Greeks in the
heroic age were unacquainted with the use of iron,
the molt serviceable of all the metals, without
which no considerable progress, was ever made in
the mechanical arts. Their vessels were of inconfi-
derable burthen, and moitly without decks. These
had only one mast, which they ereted or took
down at pleasure. They were firangc's to the use
of anchors. All their operations in failing vwere
cluminy and unskilful. They turned their cbferva-
tion towards flars, wVhich were improper for
regulating their course, and their mode of obterv-
ing them was inaccurate and falladcious. When
they had finihcd a voyage, they drew their paltry
barks afllore, as iavagcs do their canoes, and they
remained on dry land until the fcafon of returning
to lea approached. It is not then in the early or
heroic ages of Greece, that we can exptct to ob-
serve the science of navigation and the spirit of
discovery making any confildrable progrefi. Dur-
ing that period of disorder and ignorance, a thou-
sand cauilis concuired in refiraininig curiofily and
cntcrlprizc within very narrow bounds.

BrT L'

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a B O O K

slate of greater civilization and refinement. Go- 1.
vernment, in its most liberal and perfect form, be- ---
gan to be efiablifhed in the communities of Greece;
equal laws and regular police were gradually intro-
duced; the sciences and arts that are uleful or or-
namental in life were carried to a high pitch of
improvement, and several of the Grecian common-
wealths applied to commerce with such ardour and
success, that they were confidered, in the ancient
world, as maritime powers of the firfi rank.
Even then, however, the naval victories of the
Greeks must be ascribed rather to the native spirit
of the people, and to that couiage which the en-
joyment of liberty inipires, than to any extraordi-
nary progrels in the science of navigation. In the
Persian war, those exploits which the eloquence of
the Greek hiitorians have rendered so famous, were
performed by fleets, composed chiefly of vessels
that were open, and without decks*; the crews
of which rufied forward with impetuous valour,
but little art, to board those of the enemy. In the
war of Peloponnefus, their ihips seem still to have
been of inconsiderable burthen and of small force.
The extent of their trade was in proportion to this
low condition of their marine. The maritime
fiates of Greece hardly carried on any commerce
beyond the limits of the Mediterranean sea. Their
chief intercourse was with the colonies of their
countrymen, planted in the leficr Asia, in Italy and
Sicily. They fometimcs visitcd the ports of Egypt,
of Gaul, and of Thrace, or palling through lli
HellcfTont, they traded with the countries lituated
around the Euxine fla. Amani.ing inllanccs occur
of their ignorance, even of ilhoi: countries, which
lay within the narrow precincls to wiich their na-

* 'lihucy d. lib . i. 14.

vigali on

B O O K vigation was confined. When the Greeks had as-

1i fembled their combined fleet againfi Xerxes at Egi-

na, they thought it unadvifable to fail to Samos,
because they believed the difiance between that
island and Egin'. to be as great as the difiance be-
tween Egina and the Pillars of Hercules *. They
were either utterly unacquainted with all the parts
of the globe beyond the Mediterranean sea, or
what knowledge they had of them was founded on
conjeAure, or derived from the informations of a
few persons, whom curiosity and the love of science
had prompted to travel by land into the Upper Asia,
or by sea into Egypt, the ancient feats of wisdom
and arts. After all that the Greeks learned from
them, they appear to have been ignorant of the
most important fa&s, on which an accurate and
scientific knowledge of the globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into the

east, considerably enlarged the sphere of navigation
and of geographical knowledge among the Greeks.
That extraordinary man, notwithitanding the vio-
lent paflions which incited him, at some times, to
the wildest actions, and the most extravagant en-
terprifes, poflefled talents which fitted him not only
to conquer, but to govern the world. He was ca-
pable of framing those bold and original schemes
of policy, which give a new form to human affairs.
The revolution in commerce, brought about by
the force of his genius, is hardly inferior to that
revolution in empire, occasioned by the success of
his arms. It is probable, that the opposition and
cflbrts of the republic of Tyre, which checked
him so long in the career of his vilcorics, gave
Alexander an opportunity of obfcrving the vait rc-

* I-crcdot. lib. viii. c. 3z.

fbourccs

sources of a maritime power, and conveyed to him B 0 0 K
Iome idea of the immense wealth which the Tyrians
derived from their commerce, especially that with
the East Indies. As soon as he had accomplished the
defrruction of that ltate, and reduced Egypt to sub-
jedion, he formed the plan of rendering the empire
which he proposed to eltablifh, the centre of com-
merce as well as the feat of dominion. With this view
he founded a great city, which he honoured with his
own name, near one of the mouths of the river
Nile, that by the Mediterranean sea, and the
neighbourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it might com-
mand the trade both of the eafi and wefl '. This
situation was chosen with such discernment, that
Alexandria soon became the chief commercial city
in the world. Not only during the subsistence of
the Grecian empire in Egypt and in the eall, but
amidst all the iucceflive revolutions in those coun-
tries, from the time of the Ptolemies to the disco-
very of the navigation by the Cape of Good Hope,
commerce, particularly that of the East Indies, con-
tinued to flow in the channel which the sagacity and
foresight of Alexander had marked out for it.

Hi s ambition was not satisfied with having open-

ed to the Greeks a communication with India by
Tea; he aspired to the fovereeignty of thofli regions
which furnilhed the reft of mankind witl so many
precious commodities, and conducted his army thi-
ther by land. Enterprising, however, as he was,
he may be said rather to have ditcovcred, than to
have conquered that country. I-cH did not, in his
progrels towards the eafi, advance bcyond the
banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus, which is
now the western boundary of the valt continent of

* Strab. Geogr. lib, xviP. p. 1r 43. 1149.

India.

B O O K India. Amidst the wild exploits which diftinguifi

I. this part of his hiflory, he purfuedmeafures that

-'^' mark the superiority of his genius, as well as the

extent of his views. He had penetrated as far into
India as to confirm his opinion of its commercial im-
portance, and to perceive that immense wealth
might be derived from intereourfe with a country,
where the arts of elegance having been more early
cultivated, were arrived at greater perfection than
in any other part of the earth *. Full of this idea,
he resolved to examine the courif of navigation
from the mouth of the Indus to the bottom of the Per-
fian Gulph; and if it should be found practicable,
to eflablifh a regular communication between them.
In order to effet this, he proposed to remove the
cataracts, with which, the jealouiy of the Persians,
and their aversion to correspondence with foreign-
ers, had obflruded the entrance into the Euphra-
tes I ; to carry the commodities of the eall up that
river, and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the
interior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while, by
the way of the Arabian Gulph, and the river Nile,
they might be conveyed to Alexandria, and difiri-
buted to the reft of the world. Nearchus, an officer
of eminent abilities, was entrufied with the com-
mand of the fleet fitted out for this expedition. He
performed this voyage, which was deemed an en-
terprife so arduous and impoitant, that Alexander
reckoned it one of the most extraordinary events
which diiinguiflicd his reign. Inconsiderable as it
may now allpear, it was, at that time, an under-
naking of no little merit and difficulty. In the pro-
fecutiol of it, firiking inflanccs occur of the finall
progrcl's which the Greeks had made in naval
knowledge i. I-aving never failed beyond the

bounds

* Stral). Geogt. lii. xv. p. 1036. Q. Curtius,llb. xviii. c. 9.
-- Strab. Geogi. lib. xvi. p. 1075. Sece N1OTE IV.

bounds of the Mediterranean, where the ebb and B O O K
flow of the sea are hardly perceptible, when they I-
first observed this phenomenon at the mouth of v'"
the Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy, by which
the gods testified the displeasure of Heaven against
their enterprise *. During their whole course, they
seem never to have loft fight of land, but followed
the bearings of the coast so servilely, that they could
not much avail themselves of those periodical winds,
which facilitate navigation in the Indian ocean. Ac-
cordingly, they spent no less than ten months t
in performing this voyage, which, from the mouth
of the Indus to that of the Persian gulph, does not
exeed twenty degrees. It is probable, that amidst
the violent convulsions, and frequent revolutions in
the east, occasioned by the conteis among the fuc-
ceffors of Alexander, the navigation to India, by
the course which Nearchus had opened, was difcon-
tinued. The Indian trade carried on at Alexandria,
not only subsisted, but was so much improved un-
der the Grecian monarchs of Egypt, that it proved
a great source of the wealth which diltinguifhed that
kingdom.

THE progress which the Romans made in navi- of the Ro-

gation and discovery, was frill more inconsiderable m"""
than that of the Greeks. The genius of the Roman
people, their military education, and the spirit 9f
their laws, concurred in estranging them from com-
merce and naval affairs. It was the neceflity of op-
posing a formidable rival, not the desire of extending
trade, which firfi prompted them to aim at maritime
power. Though they loon perceived that, in order
to acquire the universal dominion after which they
aspired, it was nccefary to render themselves rmaf-
ters of the sea, they still confidered the naval service

* See NOTE V. 1' Plin. Hilt. Nat. lib. vi . c. 23.
Vo . 1. C as

B Q 0 K as a futordinate flation, and reserved for it such ci-

1. ti2ens as were not of a rank to be admitted into the
'- - legions;, . In the history of the Roman republic,

hardly one event occurs, that marks attention to na-
vigation any farther than as it was instrumental to-
wards conquefl. When the Roman valour and dif-
cipline had. subdued all the maritime flates known
in the ancient world; when Carthage, Greece, and
Egypt, had submitted to their power, the Romans
did not imbibe the commercial spirit of the con-
quered nations. Among that people of soldiers, to
have applied to trade would have been deemed a
degradation of a Roman citizen. They abandoned
the mechanical arts, commerce, and navigation, to
slaves, to fieemen, to provincials, and to citizen#-
of the lowest class. Even after the subversion of
liberty, when the severity and haughtiness of an-
cient manners began to abate, commerce did not
rife into.high efltimatioR. among the Romans. The
trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other conquered-
countries, continued, to be carried on in their an-
cient channels, after they were reduced into the
form of Roman provinces. As Rome was the ca-
pital of the world, and the feat of government, all
the wealth and valuable productions of the provin-
ces flowed naturally thither. The Romans, satisfied
with this, seem to have suffered commerce to remain
almost entirely in the hands of the natives of the
refpedtive countries. The extent, however, of the
Roman power, which reached over almost the
whole known world, the vigilant infpedion of the
Roman magifirates, and the spirit of the Roman
government, no less intelligent than active, gave
filch additional security to commercc, as. animated
it with new vigour. Theunion among nations was
never lb entire, nor the intercourse tb perfect, as
within the bounds of this vafi empire. Commerce

'* I'oly b. v.

under

Under their dominion, was not obflruted by the B O O K
jealousy of rival flates, interrupted by frequent hoP 1.
tilities, or limited by partial reftritions. One '
superintending power moved and regulated the in-
duftry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits of their
joint efforts.

NA V GATION felt this influence, and improved

under it. As soon as the Romans acquired a taste
for the luxuries of the east, the trade with In-
dia through Egypt was pushed with new vi-
gour, and carried on to greater extent. By fre-
quenting the Indian continent, navigators became
acquainted with the periodical course of the winds,
which, in the ocean that fiparates Africa from
India, blow with little variation during one half of
'the year from the east, and during the other half
fix with equal steadiness in the weft, Encouraged
by observing this, they abandoned their ancient flow
and dangerous course along the coast, and as fooa
as the western monfion set in,' took their departure
from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian gulf, and
firetched boldly across the ocean *. The uniform
direction of the wind, supplying the place of the
compass, and rendering the guidance of the liars
les necessary, conduted them to the port of Mu-
sris, on the western shore of the Indian continent.
There they took on board their cargo, and return-
ing with the eastern monsoon, finished their voyage
to the Arabian gulf within the year. This part of
India, now known by the name of the Malabar
coast, seems to have been the utmost limit of an-
cient navigation in that of the quarter globe. What
imperfec knowledge the ancients had of the im-
mcnfe countries which stretch beyond this towards
the east, they received from a few adventurers, who
had visited them by land. Their excursions were
not extensive, and it is probable, that while the
Roman intercourse with India fiibfifed, no traveller

* Plin. Hit. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

C 2 ever

BOO K ever penetrated further than to the banks of the

. Ganges *. The fleets from Egypt which traded at

M Mufiris were loaded, it is true, with the spices and
other rich commodities of the continent and islands
of the farther India ; but these were brought to that
port, which became the staple of this commerce,
by the Indians themselves, in caIyes made of one
tree 1. The Egyptian and Roman merchants, fatisfi-
ed with acquiring there commodities in this manner,
did not think it necessary to explore unknown seas,
and venture upon a dangerous navigation, in quest
of the countries which produced them. But though
the discoveries of the Romans in India were so li-
mited, their commerce there was such as will appear
considerable, even to the present age, in which the
Indian trade has been extended far beyond the prac-
tice or conception of any preceding period. We
are informed by one author of credit I1, that the
commerce with India drained the Roman empire
every year of more than four hundred thousand
pounds; and by another, that one hundred and
twenty flips failed annually from the Arabian gulf
to that country :.

Diicvcries THE difcoverv of tliis new method of failing to
of the an-
ciCent by India is the nofi considerable improvement in navi-
land. gation made during the continuance of the Roman

power. But in ancient times, the knowledge of
countries was acquired more by land than by sea § ;
and the Romans, from their peculiar disinclination
to naval affairs, rnay be said to have negletcd to-
tally the latter, though a more easy and expeditious
method of discovery. The progress, however, of
their vitorious armies contlibuted greatly to extend
di'covery by land, and even opened the navigation
of ncw and unknown seas. Previous to the Roman

* Srrab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. o1ao. 1ozo. See NOTE VI.
t Plin. Nat. lii. Ii . vi. c. 26. II Iid.
I Strab. Ger. lib. ii. 179). See NOTEI VII.

conq.iefis,

conquefis, the civilized nations of antiquity had no B o 0 K
communication with those countries in Europe, I.
which now form its most opulent and powerful -
kingdoms. The interior parts of Slain and of Gaul
were little known. Britain, separated from the reft
of the world, had never bzen visited, except by its
neighbours the Gauls, and by a few Carthaginian
merchants. The name cf Germany had scarcely
been heard of. Into all there countries the arms of
the Romans penetrated. They entirely subdued
Spain and Gaul; they conquered the greatest
and moit fertile part of Britain; they advanced
into Germany, as far as the banks of the river
Elbe. In Africa, they acquired a considerable
knowledge of the provinces, which stretch along
the Mediterranean sea, from Egypt westward to
the Itraits of Gades. In Asia, they not only sub-
je&ed to their power most of the provinces which
composed the Persian and Macedonian empires, but,
after their victories over Miihridates and Tigranes,
they seem to have uilrveyed the countries ccnti-
guous to the Euxine and Caspian seas, more accu-
rately than they had been formerly, and to have
carried on a more extensive trade than that of the
Greeks with the opulent and commercial nations,
then feated around the Euxine sea.

FROM this fucc'int survey of discovery and navi- Irlper:cc.

gation, which I have traced fiom the earlici dawn cf gtrotphca
hiflorical knowledge to the full etlablithment of the knowledge
Roman dominion, their progress appears to be ,,t~.e
wonderfully flow. It seems neither adequate to what
we might have expected fiom the adtivity and en-
terprife of the human mind, nor to what might
have been performed by the power of the great
empires that fucceflively governed the world. If we
rejedt accounts that are fabulous and obtcure ; if we
adhlre fleadily to the light and information of au-

thentic

B O O K thentic history, without substituting in its place the

I. conjectures of fancy, or the dreams of etymolo-
..-- gifts, we must conclude, that the knowledge which

the ancients had acquired of the habitable globe was
extremely confined. In Europe, the extensive pro-
virnes in the eastern part of Germany were hardly
known to them. They were almost totally unac-
quainted with the valt countries which are now
subjeA to the .kings of Denmark, Sweden, Pruf-
fia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire. The more
barren regions, that stretch within the arctic circle,
were quite unexplored. In Africa, their researches
did not extend far beyond the provinces which bor-
der on the Mediterranean, and those situated on
the western shore of the Arabian gulf. In Asia,
they were unacquainted, as I formerly observed,
with all the fertile and opulent countries beyond the
Ganges, which furnish the most valuable commo-
dities that, in modern times, have been the great
.objet of the European commerce with India; nor
do they seem to have ever penetrated into those im-
mcnfe regions occupied by the wandering tribes,
which they called by the general name of Sarma-
tians or Scythians, and now possessed by Tartars of
various denominations, and by the Asiatic fubjecs
of Russia.

rma',.Ok- Bu T there is one opinion that universally prevail-

sble proof
of tie. ed among the ancients, which conveys a more

striking idea of the finall progress they had made
in the'knowledge of the habitable globe, than can
be derived from any detail of their discoveries.
They supposed the earth to be divided into five re-
gions, which they diflinguifhed by the name of
zones. two of there, which were nearest the
poles, they termned frigid zones, and believed that
the extreme cold which reigned perpetually there,
rendered them uninhabitable, 4notller, Reated un-

der

der the line, and extending on either fide towards B o .K
the tropics, they called the torrid zone, and ima- I.
gined it to be so burnt up with unremitting heat, '"
as to be equally destitute of inhabitants. On the
two other zones, which occupied the remainder of
the earth, they befiowed the appellation of tempe-
rate, and taught that there, being the only regions
in which life could subsist, were allotted to man for
his habitation. This wild opinion was not a con-
ceit of the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fiction
of the poets, but a system adopted by the most en-
lightened philosophers, the most accurate historians
and geographers in Greece and Rome. According
to this theory, a vast portion of the habitable earth
was pronounced to be unfit for sustaining the human
species. Those fertile and populous regions within
the torrid zone, which are now known not only to
yield thzir own inhabitants the necessaries and com-
forts of life, with most luxuriant profusion, but to
communicate their superfluous stores to the reft of
the world, were supposed to be the mansion of per-
petual sterility and desolation. As all the parts of
the globe. which the ancients had discovered, lay
within the northern temperate zone, their opinion
that the other temperate zone was filled with inhabi-
tants, was founded on reasoning and conjecuhre, not
on discovery. They even believed that, by the
intolerable heat of the torrid zone, such an infupe-
rable barrier was placed between the two temperate
regions of the earth, as would prevent for ever any
intercourse between their refpetive inhabitants.
Thus this extravagant theory not only proves that
the ancients were unacquainted with the true state of
the globe, but it tended to render their ignorance
of it perpetual, by repretenting all attempts to-
wards opening a communication with the remote
regions of the earth, as utterly impracticable *.

* See NOTE VIII.

BU 1',

BO O K Bu r, however imperfect or inaccurate the geo-

., graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Ro-

mans had acquired may appear, in refpea of the
, present improved state of that science, their pro-
grefs in discovery will seem considerable, and the
extent to which they carried navigation and com-
merce must be reckoned great, when compared
with the ignorance of early times. As long as the
Roman empire retained such vigour as to preserve
its authority over the conquered nations, and to
keep them united, it was an object of public po-
lice, as well as of private cuiiofity, to examine and
describe the countries which composed this great
body. Even when the other sciences began to de-
cline, geography, enriched with new observations,
and receiving some acceflion from the experience of
every age, and the reports of every traveller, con-
tinued to improve. It attained'to the highest point
of perfection and accuracy to which it ever arrived
in the ancient world, by the industry and genius of

sren. Ptolemy the philosopher. He flourished in the fe-
geography cond century of the Ch.iftian era, and published a
by Ptolemy. description of the terrefitial globe, more ample and

exac than that of any of his predecessors.

lon of the BUT, oon after, violent convulsions began to
Roman em- shake the Roman state; the fatal ambition or
ireo bbar caprice of Confantine, by changing the feat of
lions. government divided and weakencd its force ; the

barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as its
instruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the
Roman power, began to aflcmble and to mufler
their armies on its fiontier ; the empire totteied to
its fall. During this decline and old age of the
RPcmarn fHate, it was impoilible that the sciences
should go on improving. The eiol ts of genius were,
at that period, as languid and feeble as those of go-

vernment,

vernment. From the time of Ptolemy, no confi- B OO K
derable addition seems to have been made to geo- I
graphical knowledge, nor did any important revo- -
lution happen in trade, excepting that Conftanti-
nople, by its advantageous situation and the enccu-
ragement of the eastern emperors, became a com-
mercial city of the first note.

AT length, the clouds which had been so long E ofas of

gathering round the Roman empire, burst into a t:'eil coi-
Itorm. The barbarous nations rushed in with ir- c-,,,,,iiaI
refiflible impetuosity, and, in the general wreck, illlercoulc.
occasioned by the inundation which overwhelmed
Europe, the arts, sciences, inventions and discoveries
of the Romans, periihed and disappeared*. All
the various tribes, which conquered and fettled in
the different provinces of the Roman empire, were
uncivilized, firangers to letters, destitute of arts,
unacquainted with regular government, fubordina-
tion, or laws. The manners and institutions of
some of them were so rude and barbarous, as to be
hardly compatible with a state of social union.
Europe, when occupied by such inhabitants, may be
said to have returned to a second infancy, and had
to begin anew its career in improvement, science,
and civility. The first effe&t of the settlement of
those barbarous invaders was to dissolve the union
by which the Roman power had cemented man-
kind together. They parcelled out Europe into
many small and independent fiates, differing from
each other in language and cuitoms. No inter-
course subsisted between the members of those di-
vided and hortile communities. Accustomed to a
simple mode of life, and averse to indufiry, they
had few wants to fipply, and no fulpeifluities to difl
pole of. The names of J/irtner and of enemy be-
Came once more words of the fame import. Cuf-

Hill. of Challes V. vol i. 1 . iS. 72.

toms

B O O K toms every-where prevailed, and even laws were

efablifhtd which rendered it disagreeable and dan-
gerous to visit any foreign 'country*. Cities, in
which alone an extensive commerce can be carried
on, were few, inconsiderable, and destitute of
ihofe immunities which produce security or excite
enterprise. The sciences, on which geography
and navigation are founded, were not cultivated.
The accounts of ancient improvements and disco-
veries, contained in the Greek and Roman authors,
were negleced or mifunderitood. \The know-
ledge of remote regions was loft, their situation,
their commodities, and almost their names, were
unknown.

Commerci- ONE circumstance prevented commercial inter-
al know- course with distant nations from ceasing altogether.
pledge in Constantinople, though often threatened by the
the Eafern fierce invaders, who spread desolation over the reft
empire, of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their de-

firuCtive rage. In that city, the knowledge of an-
cient arts and discoveries was preserved; a taste
for splendour and elegance subsisted ; the produc-
tions and luxuries of foreign countries were in re-
quest; commerce continued to flourilh there, when
it was extinct in every other part of Europe. The
citizens of Constantinople did not confine their
trade to the islands of the Archipelago, or to the
adjacent coasts of Asia; they took a wider range,
and following the course which the ancients had
marked out, imported the commodities of the Ealt
Indies from Alexandria. When Egypt was torn
from the Roman empire by the Arabians, the in-
dufiry of the Greeks discovered a new channel, by
which the productions of India might be conveyed
to Conflantinople. They were carred up the

* Hil. of Charles V. voli. p. 77. 327.

Indup,

Indus, a, far as that great river is navigable; thence B 0 o K
they were transported by land to the banks of the I.
river Oxus, and proceeded down its fiream to the -v--
Caspian sea. There they entered the Volga, and
failing up it, were carried by land to the Tanais,
which conduted them into the Euxine sea, where
veflels from Confiantinople waited their arrival *.
This extraordinary and tedious mode of convey-
ance merits attention, not only as a proof of the
violent paflion which the inhabitants of Conflan-
tinople had conceived for the luxuries of the earl,
and as a specimen of the ardour and ingenuity with
which they carried cn commerce, but because it
demonfirates, that, during the ignorance which
reigned in the reft of Europe, an extensive know-
ledge of remote countries was still preserved in the
capital of the Greek empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and know- and among

ledge broke in upon the eait, The Alabians, hav- the Arabi-
ingcontracted some relish for the sciences of the
people whose empire they had contributed to over-
turn, translated the books of several of the Greek
philosophers into their own language. One of the
first was that valuable work of Ptolemy, which I
have already mentioned. The fludy of geogra-
phy became, of consequence, an early object of
attention to the Arabians. But that acute and in-
genious people cultivated chiefly the speculative
and scientific parts of geography. In order to as-
certain the figure and dimensions of the terrefirial
globe, they applied the principles of geometry,
they had recourse to afironomical obfervaticns, they
employed experiments and operations, which Eu-
rope, in more enlightened times, has been proud
to adopt and to imitate. At that period, however,
tlle fame of the improvements made by the Arabi-

Ranmufio, vol. i. p. 372. F.

ans

B o O K ans did not reach Europe. The knowledge of

I. their discoveries was reserved for ages capable of
L'v ~-' comprehending and of perfecting them.

Revival of By degrees, the calamities and desolation
cn amevie- brought upon the western provinces of the Roman
tion in Eu- empire by its barbarous conquerors, were forgot-
lope' ten, and in some measure repaired. The rude

tribes which fettled there, acquiring insensibly some
idea of regular government, and some relifli for
the functions and comforts of civil life, Europe
began to awake from its torpid and unaftive slate.
The first symptoms of revival were discerned in
Italy. The northern tribes which took poffeflion of
this country, made progress in improvement with
greater rapidity than the people fettled in other
parts of Europe. Various causes, which it is not
the object of this work to enumerate or explain,
concurred in refioring liberty and independence to
the cities of Italy *. The acquisition of these routed
indutiry, and gave motion and vigour to all the ac-
tive powers of the human mind. Foreign com-
merce revived, navigation was attended to and im-
proved. Constantinople became the chief mart to
which the Italians resorted. There they not only
met with a favourable reception, but obtained such
mercantile privileges as enabled them to carry on
trade with great advantage. They were supplied
both with the precious commodities of the east,
and with many curious manufactures, the product
of the ancient arts and ingenuity that fill subsist-
ed among the Greeks. Asthe labour and expence
of conveying the productions of India to Conflanti-
nople by that long and indirect course which I. have
described, rendered them extremely rare, and of
an exorbitant price, the indufiry of the Italians

* Hid. of Charles V. vol. i, p. 33.

discovered

difsovered other methods of procuring them in B 0 0 K
greater abundance, and at an easier rate. They 1
fbmetirnes purchased them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and
other ports on the coast of Syria, to which they
were brought by a route not unknown to the an-
cients. They were conveyed fron India by sea, up
the Persian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and
Tigris, as far as Bagdat, were carried by land
across the Defart to Palmyra, and from thence to
the towns on the Mediterranean. But from the
length of the journey, and the dangers to which the
caravans were exposed, this proved always a tedi-
ous,. and often a precarious mode of conveyance.
At length the Soldans of Egypt, having renewed
the commerce with India in its ancient channel, by
the Arabian Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwith-
standing the violent antipathy to each other with
which Christians and the followers of Mahomet
were then poffeifed, repaired to Alexandria, and en-
during, from the love of gain, the insolence and
exations of the Mahometans, established a lucra-
tive trade in that port. From that period, the
commercial spirit of Italy became active and en-
terprifing. Venice, Genoa, Pisa, role from in-
considerable towns, to be populous and wealthy
cities. Their naval power increased; their vessels
frequented all the ports in the Mediterranean; they
ventured sometimes beyond the Streights; visited
the maritime towns of Spain, France, the Low
Countries, and England, and, by distributing their
commodities over Europe? began to communicate
to its various nations some knowledge of the valu-
able productions of the east, as lwell as rome ideas
of manufactures and arts, with which they had hi-
therto been unacquainted.

WH il E the cities of Italy were thus advancing Their pro-

in their career of improvement, an event happened, glt't1votr-
the most extraordinary perhaps in the hillory of Clulide,,

mankind,

B. 0 oK mankind, whichb i.nfead of retarding the cornnri-

cial. progress of the Italians, rendered it more rapid,
'' The martial fpir t of the Europeans, heightened-and'

inflamed by religious zeal, prompted them to deliver
the Holy Land from the dominion of infidels. Vast
armies, composed of all the nations of Europe,
marched towards Asia, upon this wild enterprise.
The Genoese, the Pifans, and Venetians furnished
the trantiiorts which carried them thither. They
fipplied. them with provisions and military stores.
Betide the immense fums which they received on
this account, they obtained commercial' privileges
and establishments, of great confequenee in the
settlements which the Crusaders made in Palestine:
and. in other provinces of Asia. From those foum'-
ces, prodigious wealth flowed into the cities which
I have mentioned. A proportional ircreafe of
power accompanied this, and by the end of the
Holy War, Venice, in particular, became a great
maritime slate, poiffeifng an extensive commerce,
and ample. territories *. Italy was not the only
country in which the Crusades contributed to re-
vive and diffuife such a fpilit as prepared Europe
for future discoveries. By their expeditions into
Asia, the other European nations became well ac-
quainted with remote regions, which formerly they
knew only by name, or by the reports of ignorant
and credulous pilgrims. They had an opportunity
of observing the manners, the arts, and the ac-
commodations of people more polilhed than them-
selves. This intercourse between tle east and well
fubfitfedalmoft two centuries. The adventurers, who
returned from Asia, communicated to their coun-
trymen the ideas which they had acquired, and the
habits of life they had contracted by visiting more
zefined nations. The Europeans began to be

lfai de i'H-lioire du Commerce de Venife, p, 52. &c.

fenfiblc

sensible of wants with which they were formerly B O o K
unacquainted; new desires were excited; and such I.
a taste for the commodities and arts of other coun- -
tries gradually spread among them, that they not
only encouraged the. retort of foreigners to their
harbours, but began to perceive the advantage and
neeeffity of applying to commerce themselves *

THIS communication, which was opened be-by thedirc,,
tween Europe and the western provinces of Asia, verie'of

traveller,

encouraged ieveral persons to advance far beyond by lad.
the countries in which the Crusaders carried on their
operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild
fanaticism, which seems at that period to have
mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less
than in all the counfels"of nations, first incited men
to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken from
profpets of commercial advantage, or from mo-
tives of mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tu-
dela, in the kingdom of Navarre, poflefed with a
superstitious veneration for the law of Moses, and
solicitous to visit his countrymen in the east, whom
he hoped to find in such a ihate of power and opu-
lence, as might redound to the honour of his fed, set
out from Spain in the year I 160, and travelling by
land to Conltantinople, proceeded through the
countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian
seas, as far as Chinese Tartary. From thence he
took his route towards the south, and after traverf-
ing various provinces of the farther India, he em-
barked on the Indian ocean, visited several of its
illands, and returned at the end.of thirteen years, by
the way of Egypt to Europe, with much informati-
on concerning a large diftri& of the globe, al-
together unknown at that time to the welt-

Hi-1. es ChIlcs V, vol, i. p. a , &c.

fnt

B O O K err world*. The zeal of the head of the Chrifti-

r. an church co-operated with the superstition of Ben-
*t' jamin the Jew, in discovering the interior and re-

mote provinces of Asia, All Christendom having
been alarmed with accounts of the rapid progrels
of the Tartar arms under Zengis Khan, Innocent
IV. who entertained molt exalted ideas concerning
the plenitude of his power, and the fubmiflion die
.246. to his injunctions, sent father John de Piano Carpi-

ni, at the head of a million of Franciscan monks,
and father Afcolino, at the head of another of Do-
minicans, to exhort Kayuk Khan, the grandson of
Zengis, who was then at the head of the Tartar em-
pire, to embrace the Chriflian faith, and to desist
from desolating the earth by his arms. The
haughty descendant of the greatest conqueror Asia
had ever beheld, astonished at this strange mandate
from an Italian Pries, whose name and power were
alike unknown to him, received it with the con-
tempt which it merited, though he dismissed the
mendicants wvho delivered it with impunity. But
as they had penetrated into the country by different
routes, and followed for some time the Tartar
camps, which were always in motion, they had an
opportunity of visiting a great part of Asia. Carpi-
ni, who proceeded by the way of Poland and Rullia,
travelled through its northern provinces as far as
the extremities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to
have landed somewhere in Syria, advanced through
its southern provinces, into the interior parts of
Persia t.
i'*3- NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed

farther towards extending the knowledge which the
Europeans had begun to acquire of those distant re-

Bergeron Recucil (lea Voyages, &c. tomn . . p. .
t Hakluyt. i. zi. Bergeron, torn. i.

giotis.

gions. Some designing impostor, who took ad- B o 0 K
vantage of the slender acquaintance of the Chris- I.
tians with the slate and character of the Asiatic '
nations, having informed him that a powerful
Chan 4)f the Tartars had embraced the Chiflian
faith,.the monarch liflened to the tale with pious
credulity, and instantly resolvcd to fend ambaf-
fadors to this illustrious convert, with a view of
inciting him to attack their common enemy the
Saracens on one quarter, while he fell upon themr
on the other. As monks were the only persons in
thatage who pofeiTed such a degree of knowledge
as quaiified them for a service of this kind, he em-
ployed in it father Andrew, a Jacobine, who was
followed by father William de Rubruquis, a Fran-
cifcan. With respect to the progress of the former,
there is no memorial extant. The journal of the
latter has been published. He was admitted into
the pretence of Mangu, the third khan in succession
from Zengis, and made a circuit through the inte-
rior parts of Asia, more extensive than that of any
European who had hitherto explored them *.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ventured
into remote countries from the prospet of commer-
cial advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity.
The firt and most eminent of there was Marco
Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Having en- ,269*
gaged early in trade, according to the cuflom of
his country, his aspiring mind withed for a sphere
of activity more extensive than was afforded to it
by the eftablilhed traffic carried on in those ports of
Europe and Asia, which the Venetians frequented.
Thlis prompted him to travel into unknown coun-
tries, in expetation of opening with them a com-
mercial inteicourfE, more suited to the sanguine
ideas and hopes of a young adventurer. As his

* Hakl. i. 71. Rccueil de Voy;ges par Bergcron, tom. i.
VoL, r. D father

B o o K father had already carried some European commo-

I. dities to the court of the great Chan of the Tartars,
v---- and had disposed of them to advantage, he resort-

ed thither. Under the protetion of Kublay Chan,
the most powerful of all the successors of Zengis,
he continued his mercantile peregrinations i; Asia
upwards of twenty- fix years; and during that time
advanced towards the east, far beyond the utmost
boundaries to which any European traveller had ever
proceeded. Inilead of following the courieof Car-
pini and Rubruquis, along the vail unpeopled plains
of Tartary, he paied through the chief trading ci-
ties in the more cultivated parts of Asia, and pene-
trated to Cambalu, or Peking, the capital of the
great kingdom of Cathay, or China, fuibjeA at
that time to the successors of Zengis. He made
more than one voyage on the Indian ocean, he trad-
ed in many of the islands, from which Europe had
long received.fpiceries and other commodities, which
it held in high estimation, though unacquainted
with the particular countries to which it was indebted
for those precious productions; and he obtained in-
formation concerning several countries, which he did
not visit in person, particularly the iiland Zipangri,
probably the fame now known by the name of Ja-
pan *! On his return, he astonished his contem -
poraries with his descriptions of vast regions, whose
names had never been heard of in Europe, and
with such pompous accounts of their fertility, their
populousness, their opulence, the variety of their
manufadures, and the extent of their trade, as
rose far above the conception of an uninformed
age.
1312. ABOUT half a 'century after Marco Polo, Sir

John Mandeville, an Englilhman, encouraged by

* Viaggi di Marco Polo. Ramus, ii. Bergcron, tom; ii.

his

his example, visited most of the countries in the B O O K
east which he had described, and like him, pub- I.
lified an account of them on his return ". The v-v
narrations of those early travellers abound with
many wild incoherent tales, concerning giants, en-
chanters, and monsters: but they were not, from
that circumfiance, less acceptable to an ignorant
age, which delighted in what was marvellous.
The wonders which they told, mostly on hearsay,
filled the multitude with admiration. The fats
which they related from their own observation, at-
traded the attention of the more discerning. The
former, which may be confidered as the popular
traditions and fables of the countries through which
they had passed, were gradually disregarded as
Europe advanced in knowledge. The latter, how-
ever incredible some of them may have appeared
in their own time, have been confirmed by the
observations of modern travellers. By means of
both, however, the curiosity of mankind was ex-
cited with refpet to the remote parts of the earth,
their ideas were enlarged, and they were not only
insensibly disposed to attempt new discoveries, but
received such information as directed them to that
particular course in which they were afterwards car-
ried on.

WHILE this spirit was gradually forming in Eu- a,t by h
rope, a fortunate discovery xwas made, which con- in vntionof

the ilal -

tributed more than all the efforts and ingenuity of ncrs con-
preceding ages, to improve and to extend naviga- pal'-
tion. That wonderf:ul property of the magnet,
by which it communicates filch virtue to a slender
rod of iron or needle, as to point towards the poles
of the earth, was observed. The up- which might
be made of this in directing navigation was imme-
diately perceived, and that nmoi valuable, but now
familiar infirumcnt, the marters compass, was form-

* Voyages and Triivel0, by Sir John Mandeville.

D z ed.

B O 0 K ed. V\'llern, by means of it, navigators found that

I. at all feaons, and in every place, they could disco-
" -'i ver the north and south with so much ease and ac-

curacy, it became no longer necessary to depend
merely on the light of the flars and the observation
of the sea coast. They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the shore,
ventured boldly into the ocean, and relying on this
new guide, could tleer in the darkest night, and un-
der the mot cloudy sky, with a security and preci-
sion hitherto unknown. The comppas may be said
to have opened to man the dominion of the sea,
and to have put him in full pofellion of the earth, by
enabling him to every visit part of it. Flavio Gioia,
a citi:en of Amalfi, a town of considerable trade in
tlhe kingdom of Naples, was the author of this great
discovery, about the year one thousand three hun-
dred and tnwo. It hath been often the fate of those
illtufiious benefactors of mankind, who have en-
riched science and improved the arts by their inven-
tions, t6 derive more reputation than benefit from
the happy efforts of their genius. But the lot of
Gioia has been fiill more cruel; through the inat-
tention or ignorance of contemporary hiflorians, he
has been defrauded even of the fame to which he
had such a jtft title. We receive from them no in-
formation with refpe& to his profef!ion, his charac-
ter, the precise time when he made this important
disco ery, and the accidents or enquiries wlichI led
to it: the knowledge of this event, though pro-
duaice cf greater effdls than any recorded in the
annals ,f the human race, is tran(liitted to us with-
out any of those circumflances, which can gratify
ihe curiosity that it naturally awakens *. Though
the ule of the compasls nliglt enable the Italians
to perform tle fhlort voyages to which thl-y were

* (Colinna & Tionl'l ellus de Acus nauti;lc Inventore. lI-
lit. A..(!. B ,non. tonm. ii part iii. p. 372.

accufiomcd,

accustomed, with greater' ecurity and expedition, 0 0o K
its inflience was not so sudden or extenfiv, as im-
rediately to render navigation adventurous, and to
excite a fIirlt of discovery. Many caufcs combin-
ed in preventing this ben-ncial invention from pro-
dacing its full effeCt inftnantanoufly. Men relin-
quill anci2nt habits slowly, and with reluctance.
They are averfc to new experiments, and venture
upon them with timidity. The commercial jealcu-
fy of the Italians, it is probable, laboured to con-
ceal the happy discovery of their countryman from
other nations. The art of fleering by tlhe com-
pass, with such skill and accuracy. as to inspire a
full confidence in its dirertion, was acquired gradu-
ally. Sailors, long accufiomed not to quit fight of
land, durst not launch out at once aid commit
themselves to unknown seas. Accordingly, near
halfa century elapscd, from the time of Gioia's
dilcovery, before navigators ventured into any seas
which they had not been accustomed to fiequent.

THE r fifi appearance of a bolder spirit may be SoEe ,p-

dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to the Ca- a bolerr si-
nary or Fortunate Iilands. By what accident they ',i'" "navi-
werc led to the discovery of those finall ilies, 6l.
which lie near live hundred miles froom the Spaniil-
coafc, and above a hutndred and fifty mnlles fiomn the
coafi of Aflica, contemporary writers have not
explined. But about the ridlle of the fourteenth
centurly, the people of all the di;.ffeent kingdoms
into which Spain was then divided, were accuilom-
cd to make piratical cxcuifions thither, in order to
plulder the inhli;-bitants, or to carry them ofr as
flavcs. Clelment VI. in vi rtle of Ilhc iight claimed
by the holy lee to diftlol of all coulltrics polffied
by ifdelcls, circled thof, illcs into a lingdom, in
h!1e year one ill ro.itih three hu ed and forty-four,
alid coniferrcd it on I, i:; d.- Ia Ccrda, descended

from

B O O K from the royal family of Caffile. But that unfor-

i. tunate prince, deflitute of power to assert his nomi-
'r-J nal title, having never visited the Canaries, John

de Eethencourt, a Norman baron, obtained a
grant of them from Henry III. of Caitile *. Be-
thencourt, with the valour and good fortune which
diflinguiflled the adventurers of his country, at-
tempted and effieted the conquest, and the posses-
sion of the Canaries remained for some time in his
family, as a fief held of the crown of Castile. Pre-
vious to this expedition of Bethencourt, his coun-
trymen are said to have visited the coast of Africa,
i;S. and to have proceeded far to the south of the Cana-

ry ifiands. But their voyages thither seem not to
have been undertaken in consequence of any pub-
lic or rcgular plan for extending navigation and at-
tempting new discoveries. They were either ex-
curfions flggefted by that roving piratical spirit,
which defccnded to the Normans from their ancef-
tors, or the commercial enterpriCes of private mer-
chants, which attrated f) little notice, that hardly
any mermorial of them is to be found in contem-
]porary authois. In a general survey of the pro-
greiR of dilcovcry, it is futficient to have mentioned
nhis vcnt ; and lea ingl it among those of dubious
cxifii.ccc, or of iimal ilnipollance, we may con-
clude, tliat thoughc rnucli aldditional information
conceinin the remiote lic.luni of ihe cafl had been
teceivcd by travellers wv1I), viifted thcm by lind,
navigation, at the beginniiin of the fifteenth ccntlu-
ry, had not advanced beyond the iate to w ltichl it ld
attained belire the downfal of the tioman clmpiire.

lirA'',l:',f,; , A lcnth the pe'iodX arlivedl, when Providence
tlirLovely, dLcrcled that men wvcre to .a!.; the limits witlin

w.hichi they liad been o long con(fined, and opn-
to thimcl:lvcs a more anmple fic!l wvhceinl to clii-
play their talents, their cnterl)rilc, and coulr.gi.

* Viern y Clnvijo Notic. de l Ia l or. de Canaria, 1. z6,
ec. Glas H-ist. c. 1.

TI'le

The firit considerable efforts towards this were not 13 O K
made by any of the more powerful states of Eu- .
rope, or by those who had applied to navigation -
with the greatest alliduity and success. The glory
of leading the way in this new career was reierv-
ed for Portugal, one of the smallest and most in con-
fiderable of the European kingdoms. As the at- formed by
tempts of the Portuguese to acquire the knowledge the Portu-
of those parts of the globe with which mankind
were then unacquainted, not only improved and ex-
tended the art of navigation, but roured fuchl a fpi-
rit of curiofityand enterprise, as led to the disco-
very of the new world of which I propose to write
the hiitory, it is necefrary to take a view of the rife,
the progreis and success of their various naval ope-
rations. It was in this school that the discoverer cf
America was trained; and unless we trace tlh
steps by which his instructors and guides advanced,
it will be impossible to comprehend the cii cumfian-
ces which suggested the idea, or facilitated the ex-
ecution of his great design.

VARIOUS circumfiances prompted the Portu- nil'cUl-

fla .icCs

guefe to exert their activity in this new direaion, ,,wiclh led
and enabled them to accomplish undertakings ap- to Ltli."
parently superior to the natural force of the-ir mo-
narchy. The kings of Portugal having d(,ivcn the
Moors out of their dominions, had acquil ccd p.v-
er, as well as glory, by the success of hir ailms
against the infidels. By their vidtoiics over t',ilm,
they had extended the royal authority beyond the
narrow limits within which it was originally ciI'cul.-
fcribed in Portugal, as well as in otlier ifudl king-
doms. They had the commrand of tle national
force, could route it to act with united vigou:-, and,
after the expulsion of tle Me'os, could employ it
without d-ead of intcrrpllion fiom any domcil'.c
enemy. By tle perl>etu!l hoflilitics carried on ior

fcvera.l

B O O K several centuries againfi the Mahometans, the mar-

I_ , tial and adventurous spirit that distinguished all the

European nations during the middle ages, was im-
proved and heightened among the Portuguese. A
fierce civil war, towards the clooe of the fourteenth
century, occasioned by a disputed fucceflion, aug-
mented the military ardour of the nation, and
formed or called forth men of such active and dar-
ing genius, as are fit for bold undertakings. The
fituttion of the kingdom, bounded on every fide by
the dominions of a more powerful neighbour, did
not afford free scope to the activity of the Por-
tuguefe by land, as the firength of their monar-
chy was no match for that of Castile. But Por-
tugal was a maritime slate, in which there were
many commodious harbours; the people had be-
gun to make some progress in the knowledge and
practice of navigation; and the sea was open to
them, presenting the only field of enterprise in
which ti:e) could diflinguiih thcmfelves.

pirt at- SUCHr was the fate of Portugal, and such the
tempt. disposition of the people, when John I. fuinamed

the Ba.alrd, obtained fccu're pcfclfion of the crown
by the peace ccncludcd with Ciafile in the year one
thouifand four hundred and cleven. He was a
prince of great meiit, who, by superior courage
and abilities, had opened his way to a throne which
of right did not belong to hlim. He inilantly per-
ceived that it would be impossible to preserve pub-
lic order, or domefiic tranquillity, without finding
some employment for the refills spirit of his filb-
j.'c's. With this view, he aficmnled a nume-.rous
fl.:t at Lifhon, corpoicd of all the ships that he
could fit out in his oun kingdom, and of many
hired f. cr forcigncis. This giiat al mament was
. defiined to attack the Moois f ;tllcd on the coall of

1arbary. While it was equipping, a few vef-
fc!s were appoiltedl to fail along1 the kieflcrn

fiorc

liore of Africa bounded by the Atlantic ocean,; O O K
and to discover the unknown countries situated I.
there. From this inconsiderable attempt, we may '- _
date the commencement of that spirit of difcove-
ry which opened the barriers that had so long shut
out mankind from the knowledge of one half of
the terrestrial globe.

AT the time when John sent forth these ihips on

this new voyage, the art of navigation was fill
very imperfect. Though Africa lay so near to
Portugal, and the fertility of the countries already
known on that continent invited men to make far-
ther discoveries, the Portuguese had never ventur-
ed to fail beyond Cape Non. That promontory,
as its name imports, was hitherto confidered as a
boundary which could not be paifed. But the na-
tions of Europe had now acquired as much know-
ledge, as emboldened them to difiegard the preju-
dices and to corret the errors of their ancestors.
The long reign of ignorance, the constant enemy
of every curious inquiry, and of every new under-
taking, was approaching to its period. The light
of science began to dawn. The works of the ac-
cient Greeks and Romans began to be read with
admiration and profit. The fcienccs cultivated by
the Arabians were introdu;ced into Europe by the
Moors fettled in Spain and Portugal, and by the
Jews, who were very numerous il both theli
kingdoms. G.ometry, aflron(my, and geogra-
phy, the sciences on which the a:;t of navligation is
founded, becamle the obj-d's of studious uicntiorl.
The memory of the difccvc;:ics made by the an-
cients was revived, and thle progrcfs ,f their nalvi-
gation and co:nmc;cc began to be t,'accd. Sonie
of the causes which, duii.ig this ccntui y and the
last, have obfrrudlcdi the cultivation ol f:icire ill
Portugal, did not cxift, or did nu ol)c!ate i;i the

ihlmc

B O O K fame manner, in the fifteenth century *; and the

I- Portuguese, at that period, seem to have kept

pace with other nations on this fide of the Alps in
literary pursuits.
its ruccers. As the genius of the age favured the execution

of that new undertaking, to which the peculiar
fiate of their country invited the Portuguese, it
proved successful. The vessels sent on the difcove-
ry doubled that formidable Cape, which had ter-
minated the progress of former navigators, and
proceeded a hundred and sixty miles beyond it, to
Cape Bojador. As its rocky cliffs, which stretch-
ed a considerable way into the Atlantic, appeared
more dreadful than the promontpry which they
had passed, the Portuguese commanders durst not
attempt to fail round it, but returned to Lisbon,
more satisfied with having advanced so far, than
ashamed at having ventured no farther.

Prnce INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it in-
Heiry the creased the paflion for discovery, which began to
dl eclor of
thePoru- arite in Portugal. The extraordinary success of
guee disco- the king's expedition againrt the Moors of Barba-

ry, added flrength to the spirit of enterprise in the
1415. nation and pushed it on to new undertakings. In

order to render these ficcefsful, it was neceflary that
they should be conduaed by a person who possessed
abilities capable of discerning what was attainable,
who enjoyed leisure to form a regular system for
profeculing discovery, and who was animated with
ardour that would persevere in spite of obitacles
and repulses. Happily for Portugal, fie found all
ihole qualities in Henry duke of Viseo, the fourth
(on of king John by Philippa of Lancaflcr, filfter of
Henry IV. king of England. That prince, in his
early youth, having accompanied his father in his

Sce NOTE IX.

expedition

expedition to Barbary, diflinguifhed himself by Bg 0 K
many deeds of valour. To the martial spirit, i.
which was the charaterifiic of every man of no- ;---
ble birth at that time, he added all the accomplish-
ments of a more enlightened and poliihed age.
He cultivated the arts and fcienccs, which were
then unknown and despised by persons of his rank.
He applied with peculiar fondness to the study of
geography; and by the inftrudtion of able maf-
ters, as well as by the accounts of travellers, he
early acquired such knowledge of the habitable
globe, as discovered the great probability of find-
ing new and opule it countries, by failing along the
coast of Africa. Such an object was formed to
awaken the enthusiasm and ardour of a youthful
mind, and he engaged with the utmofi zeal to pa-
tronize a deign that might prove as beneficial,
as it appeared to be splendid and honourable. In
order that he might pursue this great scheme with-
out interruption, he retired from court immediately
after his return from Africa, and fixed his refi-
dence at Sagres, near Cape St. Vincent, where the
prospect of the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts
continually towards his favourite proje&t, and en-
couraged him to execute it. In this retreat he was
attended by some of the most learned men in his
country, who aided hiln in his rel'ciachs. He ap-
plied for information to the Mooi s of Barbary, who
were accufiomed to travel by land into the interior
provinces of Africa, in quefl of ivory, gold-duil,
and other rich commoditics. He consulted the
Jews fetiled in Portugal. By promiics, rewards,
and marks of rcfidpet, he allured into Ilis cfrvice
ftvcral perlons, foicigne!s as well as Polttuguli',
who were eminent for their skill in navigation. In
taking liofe prcpllmalory Relps, the great al)ilitiCs of
the prince \ere Iccconld by his private virtues.
H-is integit y, his iaf ibility, his rfpcc: t for religion,
hli zeal lbr t1he1 honour of his country, engIaged

perlons

B o oK perlons of all ranks to applaud his design, and to

1. favour the execution of it. His schemes were
-^-^ allowed by his countrymen to proceed neither from

ambition, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow
from the warm benevolence of a heart eager to
proincte thl happiness of mankind, and which
jufily intitled him to aflurne a motto for his device,
that described the quality by which he wished to
be diflinguihed, the taleti f' d3ing good.
Dircovery of His firit effort, as is usual at the conmmcnce-

touo saito. ment of any new undertaking was extremely in-

considerable. He fitted out a lingle flhip, and giv-
ing the command of it to John Gonzalez Zarco
and T'iiLan Vaz, two gentlemen of his household,
who voluntarily offered to conduct the enterprise,
he infirutled them to use their utmoit efforts to
double Cape Bojador, and thence to fleer towards
the south. They, according to the mode of navi-
gation which still prevailed, held their couife along
the fiore: and by following that direction, they
mulf have encountered almost insuperable difficulties
in attempting to pass Cape Bojador. But fortune
came in aid to their want of ikill, and prevented
the voyage fi'om being altogether fiuitltes. A fuid-
dcn fqu;ll of wind arofl, drove them out to sea,
11nd whe\V they expected every moment to perilh,
alnl:l'd them en an unknown island, which from
their hal)py clclape they named lorto Santo. In the
infancSy of navit:ation, lhe dilcove;y of this tinall
illand alppared a m;tter of hich moment, lhat
they inlianlly rettunlredo Pltugar l ith th lle good
tidings, and were r'-:c''ivd by I-lcnrv \willh l'. :;i'-
Il)hle and l!nmour (It'.: to lfortun;l:te l venturc;s .
This fbiint d'!.\n of i!ccci's filled a mind ardent
in the )pufisit of a fi.louiite olbj)ct witlih ltch
lalnguinl hopes as were iticic'nt cnrcuralpemelnt
14)9. to proceed. Ncxt year, I lenry eiill ont three hilps

under the lb.m: colmalndleI, to \volio he i(ill-
cd Bartholonlmew Pcrlcllrcl, il ordc r t po
lin.' iot-

t:::l:,'n1

fetion of the island which they had difcoverecd. B O K
When they began to fettle in Porto Santo, they I.
observed towards the south a fixed {pot in the holi- ---
zon, like a small black cloud. By degrees, they
were led to conje&ture that it might be land, and Of Madcii-.
fleering towards it, they arrived at a considerable
iland, uninhabited, and covered with wood, which
on that account tley called iMaldeira *. As it was
HIenry's chief object to render his diicovelies ulefll
to his country, he immediately equipped a fleet to 142o.
carry a colony of Portugueie to thele islands. By
his provident care, they were furnished not only
with the feeds, plants, and domeflic animals com-
mon in Europe; but as he foel'aw that the warmth
of the climate and fertility of the foil would prove
favourable to the rearing of other productions, he
procured flips of the vine from the island of Cy-
prus, the rich wines of which were then in great
rcqueft, and plants of the sugar-cane from Sicily,
into which it had been lately introduced, Thele
throve so prosperously in this new country, that the
benefit of cultivating them was immediataly per-
ceived, and the fuigar and wine of Madeira quickly
became considerable articles in the commerce of
Portugal t.

As soon as the advantages derived from t'his sirs. ^o:

settlement to the weft of the European continent be- Cdor U
gan to be felt, the spirit of dlifcovery appeared
lels chimcrical, and became more advcnturotis. Bv
their voyages to Madeiha, thle Portuguete wcre '*;-
dually accullomed to a bolder navigatio: , andi in-
itcad of creeping servilely along the coait, venturci
into the open tea. In confelqucice of taking tlis
course, Gilianez, who commanded one of prince

* -lilloricnl Relalion of the fiift D;tovtery of Ml. ecir',

translated froni thc I'orrlugulefeof lFir n. Alcnafranio. p. i , &
*i' IUd, Guicc/IIitiii DJci(-it. de Iac li B liii, p. I go, I;1 ,

B 0 O K Henry's ships, doubled Cape Bojador, the boun-

I. dary of the Portugnefe navigation upwards oftwen-

' -r ty years, and which had hitherto been deemed un-
,433. passable. This successful voyage, which the igno-

rance of the age placed on a level with the molt
famous exploits recorded in history, opened a new
sphere to navigation, as it discovered the vast conti-
nent of Africa, fiill washed by the Atlantic ocean,

^Ad,,ce and firetching towards the south. Part of this was
within ihe soon explored; the Poltuguefe advanced within the
tropicst tropics, and in the space of a few years they disco-

vered the river Senegal, and all the coast extending
from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Alonin(he HIT i ERTO the Portuguese had been guided in
at what they , .
<lifcOvered their difoveries, or encouraged to attempt them,
there. by the light and information which they received

from the works of the ancient mathematicians and
geographers. But, when they began to enter the
torrid zone, the notion which prevailed among the
ancients, that the exceflive heat, which reigned
perpetually there, was so fatal to life as to render it
uninhabitable, deterred them, for some time, from
proceeding. Their own observations, wlen they
firfi ventured into this unknown and formidable re-
gion, tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity
concerning the violent operation of the direEt ra) s
of the fun. As far as the river Senegal, the Portu-
guefe had found the ccaft of Africa inhabited by
people resembling the Moors of Ebabary. When
they advanced to the south of that liver, the human
form ieemed to put on a new appearance. They
beheld men with Ikins black as ebony, with Ihoit
curled hair, flat noess, thick lips, and all the pecu-
liar features vhich are now known to diilin-
guifh the race cfnegrots. This surprising altera-
tion they naturally attributed to the influence ol

hlcal

heat, and if they should advance nearer to the line, B O O K
they began to dread that its effects would be fiill I.
more fatal. Those dangers were exaggerated, and '"'
many other objeEtions against attempting farther
discoveries were proposed by some of the grandees,
who, from ignorance, from envy, or from that cold
timid prudence which rejects whatever has the air of
novelty or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all
prince Henry's schemes. They represented, that
it was altogether chimerical to expect any advan-
tage from countries situated in that region which
the wisdom and experience of antiquity had pro-
nounced to be unfit for the habitation of men ; that
their forefathers, satisfied with cultivating the ter-
ritory which Providence had allotted them, did not
waste the strength of the kingdom by fruitless pro-
jects, in quefl of new settlements; that Portugal
was already exhausted by the expence of attempts
to discover lands which either did not exiit, or which
nature destined to remain unknown; and was
drained of men, who might have been employed
in undertakings attended with more certain fucceis,
and productive of greater benefit. But neither their
appeal to the authority of the ancients, nor their
reasonings concerning the interest of Portugal, made
any impreflion upon the determined philosophic
mind of prince Henry. The discoveries which he
had already made convinced him that the ancients
had little more than a conjecural knowledge of the
torrid zone. He was no less satisfied that the politi-
cal arguments of his opponents with resp)ect to the
interest of Portugal were malevolent and ill-found-
ed. In those sentiments he was firenuouily sip-
ported by his brother Pedro, who governed tlre
kingdom as guardian of their nephew Alphonfb
V. who had succeeded to the throne during his mii- '43.3
Rority ; and instead of slackening his efforts,

l-Icnry

B O O K Helry continued to pursue his discoveries with fieffi

I. ardour.

Papal grant EUT, in order to silence all the murmurs of op-
to Portuw i position, he endeavoul ed to obtain the fantion of thle
of vwhac
countries it higheR authority in favour of his operations. With
shovel. di- this view, he applied to the Pope, and represented,

in pompous terms, the pious and :nwearied zeal,
with which he had excited himself during twcn-
ty years, in discovering unknown countries, the
wretched inhabitants of which vwere utter strangers
to true religion, wandering in heathen darkness,
or led aflray by the de!ufions of Mahomet. He
besought the holy father, to whom, as the vicar
of Chrifi, all the kingdoms of the earth were sub-
je&t, to confer on the crown of Portugal a right to
all the countries possessed by Infidels, which should
be discovered by the indufiry of its subjects, and
subdued by the force of its arms. He intreated
him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the highefi
penalties, not to molest the Portnguefe while en-
gaged in this laudable enterprile, and to prohi-
bit them from fettling in any of tile ccuntrics
which they flIould discover. He prolmied that, in
all their expeditions, it should be the chief objeCt of
the Portuguese to lpread the knowledge of the Chris-
tian religion, to eftablilh the authority of the holy
fee, and to increase the flock. of the universal pai-
tor. As it was by improving with dexterity every fa-
vourable conjuncure for acquiring new powers, th-a
the court of Rome hadad dually extcnded its ulilrpa-
tions, Eugene IV. the pontiff to whom this applica-
tion was made, eagerly fcibed the opportunity 1tat
now presented itielf. He iniantly perceived tl.a.,
by complying with p ince I-eInry's rcqueft, he migL h
cxercile a prerogative no les flatteiing in itn

O'wI1

own nature, than likely to prove beneficial in its B OO K
| consequences. A Bull was accordingly ifrued, in I.

which, after applauding in the firongeft terms the '- '
past efforts of the Portuguese, and exhorting them
to proceed in that laudable career on which they
had entered, he granted them an exclusive right to
all the countries which they should discover, from
Cape Non to the continent of India.

Ex TRAVAG ANT as this donation, comprehend-

ing such a large portion of the habitable globe,
would now appear even in Catholic countries, no
person in the fifteenth century doubted that the
pope, in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had
a right to confer it. Prince Henry was loon fen-
fible of the advantages which he derived from this
tranfation. His schemes were authorised and
fantified by the bull approving of them. The
spirit of discovery was connected with zeal for re-
ligion, which, in that age, was a principle of such
activity and vigour, as to influence the conduct of
nations. All Chrifiians princes were deterred from
intruding into those countries which the Portuguese
had discovered, or from interrupting the progress
of their navigation and conquests *.

THE fame of the Portuguese voyages soon Fane and.

spread over Europe. Men, long accustomed to progrels o'
circumscribe the activity and knowledge of the hu- gueie dico.
man mind within the limits to which they had ver"ic.
been hitherto confined, were astonished to belold
the sphere of navigation so suddenly enlarged, and
a profped opened of visiting regions of the globe,
the exifience of which was unknown in former
limes. The learned and fpecullalivc reafined and
formed theories concerning those uncxpcced disco-
veries. The vulgar inquired and wondered ; and

* Sc NOTE X.
VOL. 1. E enter-

B O O K ent'2rprifing adventurers clouded from every part of

I. Europe, soliciting prince Henry to employ them in
I-v--. this honourable service. Many Venetians and

Genoese, in particular, who were, at that time,
superior to all other nations in the science of naval
affairs, entered aboard the Portuguese ships, and
acquired a more perfect and extensive knowledge
of their profeflion in that new school of navigation.
In emulation of these foreigners, the Portuguese
exerted their own talents. The nation seconded
the designs of the prince. Private merchants form-
ed companies, with a view to search for unknown
1446. countries. The Cape de Verd islands, which lie

off the promontory of that name, were discover-
49 ed, and soon after, the isles called Azores. As the

former of these are above three hundred miles from
the African coai, and the latter nine hundred miles
from any continent, it is evident, by their ventur-
ing so boldly into the open seas, that the Portu-
guefe had, by this time, improved greatly in the
art of navigation.

e.ath of WHVI LE the paflion for engaging in new under-
"nyc. takings was thus warm and a&ive, it received an un-
1,63. fortunate check by the death of prince Henry,

whose superior knowledge had hitherto directed all
the operations of the diicoverers, and whose patr)-
nage had encouraged and protected them. It is
true, that during his life, the Portuguese, in their
utmoit progress towards the dL;uth, did not advance
within five degrces of the equinodial line; and,
after their continued exertions for half a century,
hardly fifteen hundled nil.'s of the coati of Afiica
were discovered. To an age acquainted with tlih
eflbrts of navigation in its slate of maturity and ini-

r ,',42'' provement, thole cr ays of its e:uly ycarsnmul l Ie'-
to 1463.

ccllarily appear fctblc and urlflkili'L Bul, incon-
fidclable as they may appear, they were 1litii.lit

(;

to turn the curiosity of the European nations into a B O O K
new channel, to excite an enterprising ipirit, and 1
to point the way to future discoveries.

ALPHONS o, who poifeffed the throne of Portu- The pafion

gal at the time of prince Henry's death, was so for difcove-
much engaged in supporting his preteilfions to the Cy lIeangru
crown of Castile, or in carr- ing on his expeditions time.
against the Moois in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he could
not prosecute the discoveries in Africa with ardour.
He committed the conduct of them to Fernando
Gomez, a merchant in Lisbon, to whom he grant-
ed an exclusive right of commerce with all the
countries of which prince Henry had taken posses-
sion. Under the reltraint and opprefifon of a mo-
nopoly, the spirit of discovery languished. It ceaf-
ed to be a national object, and became the con-
cern of a private man, more attentive to his own
gain, than to the glory of his country. Some pro-
grefs, however, was made. The Portuguese ven-
tured at length to cross the line, and, to their aflo- 4'
nifhment, found that region of the torrid zone,
which was supposed to be scorched with intolerable
heat, to be not only habitable, but populous and
fertile.

JOHN II. who fuccecdcd his father Alphonfo, ,4

possessed talents capable both of forming d
and ex- Revlve,

wilh addh ·

ecuting great deligns. As part of his revenues, o,',al,',,,
while prince, lhad aiil(;n from duties on the trade
with the newly-di(fovelecd countries, this naturally
turned Iis attention towalrds them, and latis;ficd
him with refiecl to tlieir utility and imi;ortalict.
In proportion as his knowvlecdgc f tlthde counltlic:
extended, the poffillion of themi alpcp;led to be of
greater confcquence. \'hllile the Plortgtlu2l pIro-
Ceeded along the coafl of \l'lica, i'hol (C.a-pe Non

E 2 to

B O O K to tie river of Senegal, they found all that exten-

-. five trat to be sandy, barren, and thinly inhabited

by a wretched people, professing the Mahometan
religion, and subjed to the valt empire of Mo-
rocco. But to the south of that river, the power and
religion of the Mahometans were unknown. The
country was divided into fimall independent princi-
palities, the population was considerable, the foil
fertile *, and the Portuguese soon discovered that
it produced ivory, lich gums, gold, and other va-
luable commodities. By the acquisition of there,
cc:m-me ce was enlarged, and became adventurous.
Men, animated and rendered ative by the certain
protipet of gain, puifued discovery with greater
eargernefs, than when they were excited only by
curiosity and hope.
Its progrers. THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of

vigour from the countenance of such a monarch as
John. He declared himself the patron of every
attempt towards discovery and promoted it with
all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry, and
1484· with superior power. The effects of this were

immediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out,
which, after discovering the kingdoms of Benin and
Congo, advanced above fifteeen hundred miles be-
yond the line, and the Portuguese, for the firfl
time, beheld a new hcavcn, and observed the ftals
of another hemisphere. John was not only folici-
tous to discover, but attentive to secure the pofletli-
on of those countries. SHe built forts on the coast
of Guinea ; he sent out colonies to fettle thee ; lie
efiablifhed a commercial intercourse with the more
powerful kingdoms; he endeavoured to render

* Navigatio Aloyfii Cndarmutfi apud Novuin Oihem Grynai;,

p. z 18. Navigat. all Ifola di San Tome per un pilotto Por-
tugh Ramufio. i. 11 5.

ficl]

such as were feeble or divided, tributary to the B O o K
crown of Portugal. Some of the petty princes I.
voluntarily acknowledged themselves his vafials. u---
Others were compelled to do to by force of arms.
A regular and well digested system was formed
with refpecA to this new object of policy, and by
firmly adhering to it, the Portuguese power and
commerce in Africa were eflablifhed upon a solid
foundation.

BY their conltant intercourse with the people of Hopesof

Africa the Portuguese gradually acquired some a new roue
knowledge of those parts of that country which to the East
they had not visited. The information which they Indies.
received from the natives, added to what they had
observed in their own voyages began to open prof-
pec's more extensive, and to suggest the idea of
schemes more important, than those which had
hitherto allured and occupied them. They had
detected the error of the ancients concerning the
nature of the torrid zone. They found, as they
proceeded southwards, that the continent of Africa,
intfead of extending in breadth, according to the
doctrine of Ptolemy-*, at that time the oracle and
guide of the learned in the study of greography,
appeared sensibly to contract itfclf, and to bend
towards the east. This induced them to give cre-
dit to the accounts of the ancient Phcnician voya-
ges round Africa, which had long been deemed fa-
bulous, and led them to conceive hopes that by fol-
lowing the fame route, they might arrive at the
East Indies, and engross that commerce, which has
been the source of wealth and power to every nati-
on possessed of it. The comprchenfive genius of
prince Henry, as we may conjecture from the
words of the pope's bull, had early formed some
idea of this navigation. All the Portuguetie pilots

*Vide Nov. Orhis Tabul. Gcogrnph. SecuK.d, Ptolcm,
Amit. 1730.

and

B O O K and mathematicians now concurred in representing

1. it as praticable. The king entered with warmth
cy3" into their ientiments, and began to concert mea-

fires for this arduous and important voyage.

Scheme, for BEFORE his preparations for this expedition
oml 'this. were finilh d accounts were transmitted from Africa,

that various nations along the coait had mention-
ed a mighty kingdom situated on their continent,
at a great difiance towards the east, the king of
Whiich, according to their deicription, profefled the
Christian religion. The Portuguese monarch im-
mediately concluded, that this mufi be the emperor
of Abyflinia, to whom the Europeans, seduced by
a mistake of Rubruquis, Marco Polo, and other
travellers to the eail, absurdly gave the name Pref-
ter or Presbyter John ; and as he hoped to receive
information and afliftance from a Christian prince,
in prosecuting a scheme that tended to propagate
their common faith, he resolved to open, if pofli-
b!e, tome intercourle with his court. With this
view, he made choice of Pedro de Covillam and
Alphonfo de Payva, who were perfect maiters of
the Arabic language, and sent them into the east,
to search for the residence of this unknown poten-
tate, and to make him ploffers of friendship.
They had it in charge, likewise, to procure what-
ever intelligence the nations which they visited
could ifupply, with refipci to the trade of India,
and the courie of navigation to that continent *.

Voyage f VTr 1,I, L Jolhll made thlis new attempt by land,
lnli)iu - to obtain ltome knowledge of the country, which ht

wiflled l ardently to dil:over, he did n(:t negled
the proccution of this great dcfign by fla. Thl
i.CG. conduct ol'this voyage, tlhe mol arduous and impor

tant wliich the Portuguese had ever projedtecl, wa:

* Faiia y Sjufi, P'oit. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. Lafiiau Decouv
de PE'ut. i. 46.

com-mittcc

committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whole B O O K
sagacity, experience, and fortitude rendered him I
equal to the undertaking. He firetched boldly " "'
towards the south, and proceeding beyond the ut- 1486'
mofi limits to which his countrymen had hitherto
advanced, discovered near a thousand miles of new
country. Neither the danger to which he was ex-
posed, by a fucceflion of violent tempefis in un-
known seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he susser-
edfrom losing his store-ship, could deter him from
prosecuting his enterprise. In recompence of his
labours and perseverance, he at last descried that
lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the south.
But to descry it, was all that was in his power.
The violence of the winds, the shattered condition
of his ships, and the turbulent spirit of his tailors,
compelled him to return, after a voyage offixteen
'months, in which he'difcovered an extent of coun-
try far greater than any preceding navigator. Diaz
had called the promontory which terminated his
voyage Cabo 'lornmentofo, or the stormy Cape; but
the king, his master, as he now entertained no
doubt of having found the long desired route to In-
dia, gave it a name more inviting, and of better
omen, The Cape of Good Hope *.

THOSE sanguine expectations of success were Morecer-
confirmed by the intelligence which John received tail, pr, -

peelt ot fuc-

over land, in consequence of his embassy to Abyf- ces.
finia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to their
mafler's inlfruclions, had repaired to Grand Cairo.
From that city they travelled along with a caravan
of Egyptian merchants, and croiled over t,, Aden,
on the Red Sea. There they separated l Paylva
failed dirc.tly to Abyflinia; Covillam embl)ated for
the East Indies, and having visited Calcult, Goa,

* Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. z6.

andi

B o o K and other cities on the Malabar coast, returned to

I. Sofala, on the east fide of Africa, and thence to
·-^ Grand Cairo, which Payva and he had fixed upon

as their place of rendezvous. Unfortunately the
former was cruelly murdered in Abyflinia, but Co-
villam found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews, whom
John, whose provident sagacity attended to every
circumstance that could facilitate the execution of
his schemes, had dispatched after them, in order to
receive a detail of their proceedings, and to com-
nunicate to them new inflrutions. By one of there
Jews, Covillam transmitted to Portugal a journal
of his travels by sea and land, his remarks upon the
trade of India, together with exact maps of the
coasts on which he had touched; and from what
he himself had observed, as well as from the in-
formation of skilful seamen in different countries,
he concluded, that by failing round Africa, a pas-
sage might be found to the East Indies *.

Preparati- THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion
ons forano- and report, with the discoveries which Diaz had
ther voy- lately made, left hardly any shadow of doubt with

refpet to the poflibility of failing from Europe to
India. But the vafi length of the voyage, and the
fuiious storms which Diaz had encountered near the
Cape of Good Hope, alarmed and'intimidated the
Portuguese to such a degree, although by long ex-
perience they were now become adventurous and
filful mariners, that some time was lequifite to
prepare their minds for this dangerous and extraor-
dinary voyage. The courage, however, and au-
thority of the monarch, gradually dispelled the vain
fears of his fubjeas, or made it necessary to con-
ceal them. As John thought himrfelf now ulon
the cveof accomplifling that great dcfign, vwhick

* Faiia y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 27. Lafiau Dc-
couv . i48.

hal

had been the principal object of his reign, his ear- B O O K
neftnefs in prosecuting it became so vehement, that 1.
it occupied his thoughts by day, and bereaved him -v--.
of sleep through the night. While he was taking
every precaution that his wisdom and experience
could suggest, in order to ensure the success of the
expedition, which was to decide concerning the fate
of his favourite projet, the fame of the vast disco- The atten-
veries which the Portuguese had already made, the kind fixed
reports concerning the extraordinary intelligence uponit.
which they had received from the east, and the prof-
pect of the voyage which they now meditated,
drew the attention of all the European nations, and
held them in fufpence and expectation. By some,
the maritime skill and navigation of the Portuguese
were compared with those of the Phenicians and
Carthaginians, and exalted above them. Others
formed conjectures concerning the revolutions which
the success of their schemes might occasion in the
course of trade, and the political fiate of Europe.
The Venetians began to be disquieted with the appre-
henfion of losing their Indian commerce, the mono-
poly of which was the chief source of their power
as well as of opulence, and the Portuguese already
enjoyed in fancy, the wealth of the ealt. But, dur-
ing this interval, which gave such scope to the va-
rious workings of curiosity, of hope and of fear,
an account was brought to Europe of an event no Sulddenly
less extraordinary than unexpected, the discovery of u,rnli. t
a New World situated in the weft, and the eyes and
admiration of mankind turned immediately toward!;
that great object.

T 'PI F

# BOOK II.

THE

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

0 F
AMERICA.

BOOK II.

AM ONG the foreigners whom the fame of B 0 0 K
the discoveries made by the Portuguese had allured II
into their service, was Chriftcpher Coltmbus, a lith andc-
subjet of the republic of Genoa. Neither the ducaion cf
time nor place of his birth are known with certain- cOk t:.u..
ty *; but he was defeended of an honourable fa-
mily, though reduced to indigence by various milt
fortunes. His ancefiors having betaken thremfelves
for fubfiftfence to a seafaring life, Columbus discover-
ed, in his early youth, the peculiar character and
talents which mark out a man for that profeflion.
His parents, instead of thwarting this original pro-
penfity of his mind, teem to have encouraged and
confirmed it, by the education which they gave
him. After acquiling some knowledge of the La-
tin tongue, the only language in which icience was
taught at that time, lie was inilruaed in geometry,

*Sec NOTE XI.

c, iflonral)hy,

B O O K cosmography, afironomy, and the art of drawing.

Ii. To these he applied with such ardour and predilec-
'~" ~ tion, on account of their connection with navigati-

on, his favourite object, that he advanced with ra-
pid proficiency in the study of them. Thus qua-
1461. lified, he went to fca at the age of fourteen, and

began his career on that element which conduaed
him to so much glory. His early voyages were
to those ports in the Mediterranean which his coun-
trymen the Genoese frequented. This being a
1467. sphere too narrow for his adive mind, he made an

excursion to the northern seas, and visited the coast of
Iceland, to swhich the English and other nations had
begun to retort on account of its fithery. As navi-
gation, in every direction, was now become enter-
prifing, he proceeded beyond that island, the Thule
of the ancients, and advanced several degrees with-
in the polar circle. Having satisfied his curiosity by
a voyage which tended more to enlarge its know-
ledge of naval affairs, than to improve his fortune,
he entered into the service of a famous lea-captain,
of his own name and family. This man com-
manded a small Iquadion, fitted out at his own ex-
pence, and by cruising sometimes againit the Ma-
hometans, foimetimes againfi thc Venetians, the ri-
vals of his country in trade, had acquired both
wealth and repulation. With him Columbus con-
tinued for several years, no less diltinguifhed for his
courage, than for his experience as a tailor. At
length, in an obstinate engagement, off the coall
of Poitugal, with some Venetian caravels, return-
ing richly laden from the Low Countries, the velf
lil on board which he lirrved took fire, together
with one of the enemy's Ihips, to which it was fail
grapplcd. In this dreadful extremity his intrepidi.
ty and prefcnce of mind did not forltike him. -1c
threw himLilf into the sea, laid hold of a floating
oar, and by the fipl-ort of it, and his dexterity in

swim ming,

swimming, he reached the shore, though above B o o K
two leagues distant, and saved a life relerved for i1.
great undertakings *.

As soon as he recovered firength for the jour- He enters

ney, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his Pe,,,i'iere
countrymen were fettled. They soon conceived lervice.
such a favourable opinion of his merit, as well as
talents, that they warmly solicited him to remain
in that kingdom, where his naval skill and experi-
ence could not fail of rendering him conspicuous.
To every adventurer, animated either with curio-
fity to visit new countries, or with ambition to
distinguish himself, the Portuguese service was at
that time extremely inviting. Columbus listencd
with a favourable ear to the advice of his friends,
and having gained the esteem of a Portuguese lady,
whom he married, fixed his residence in Lisbon.
This alliance, instead of detaching him from a sea-
faring life, contributed to enlarge the sphere of his
naval knowledge, and to excite a desire of extend-
ing it frill farther. His wife was a daughter of
Bartholomew Perefirello, one of the captains em-
ployed by prince Henry in his early navigations,
and who, under his protection, had dilfovered and
planted the islands of Porto Santo and Madeira.
Columbus got poffeilion of the journals and charts
of this experienced navigator, and from them he
learned the course which the Portuguese had held
in making their discoveries, as well as the various
circumstances which guided or encouraged them in
their attempts. The lludy of thele giatified and
inflamed his favourite paflion; and while he con-
templated the maps, and read the deflriptions of
the new countries which Pereltrello had seen, his
impatience to visit them became irrcliftible. In
order to indulge it, he made a voyage to Madeira,
and continued during fiveral years to trade with

* Life of Cjlumbus, c. v.

that

B o O K that island, with the Canaries, the Azores, the set-

II. tlements in Guinea, and all other places which the
(t- PPortuguefe had discovered on the continent of

Africa '.

The cffcaE BY the experience which Columbus acquired,
fovther dlr- during such a variety of voyages to almost every
upon him. part of the globe with which, at that time, any in-

tercourfe was carried on by Tea, he was now become
one of the mot flki!ful navigators in Europe. But
not satisfied with that praise, his ambition aimed at
something more. The successful progress of the
Portuguese navigators had awakened a tpirit of cu-
riofity and emulation, which set every man of fci-
ence upon examining all the circumstances that led
to the discoveries which they had made, or that
afforded a prospect of fuccceding in any new and
bolder undertaking. The mind of Columbus, na-
turally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection, and
turned to speculations of this kind, was so often
employed in revolving the principles upon which
the Portuguese had founded their schemes of dif-
covery, and the mode in which they had carried
them on, that he gradually began to form an idea
of improving upon their plan, and of accomplish-
ing discoveries which hitherto they had attempted
in vain.

He forms To find out a paifage by Tea to the East In-
the ide of dies, was the great object in view at that period.
to India. From the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape dc

Verd, this was the point at which they aimed ill
all their navigations, and, in comparison with it,
all their dilcoveries in Africa appeared inconfidcra-
bli. The fertility and riches of India had been
known for many ages; its spices and other valua-
ble comlmodities were in high llcqueft througho!i
lEurope, and the vail wealth of tie Venctians

* Life of Columbus, c. iv. v.

at ifiii

arising from their having engrossed this trade, had B O0 K
the envy of all nations. But how intent loever the it.
Portuguese were upon discovering a new route to I
those desirable regions, they searched for it only by
fleering towards the south, in hopes of arriving at
India, by turning to the east, after they had failed
round the farther extremity of Africa. This
course, however, was still unknown, and even if
discovered, was of such immense length, that a
voyage from Europe to India mufl have appeared
an undertaking extremely arduous, and of very un-
certain issue. More than half a century had been
employed in advancing from Cape Non to the equa-
tor; a much longer space of time might elapse be-
fore the more extensive navigation from that to In-
dia could be accomplished. Thele reflections upon
the uncertainty, the danger and tediousness of the
course which the Portuguese were pursuing, natural-
ly led Columbus to confider whether a shorter and
more direct passage to the East Indies might not be
found out. And after revolving long and seriously
every circumfiance fuggefied by his superior know-
ledge in the theory as well as practice of navigation,
after comparing attentively the observations of mo-
dern pilots with the hints and conjectures of anci-
ent authors, he at last concluded, that by failing
directly towards the weft, across the Atlantic ocean,
new countries, which probably formed a part of
the vast continent of India, must infallibly be dif-
covered

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, The princi.

and deribed from different sources, induced him to vl;lt, Iis
adopt this opinion seemingly as chimerical as it w as o:
new and extraordinary. The f)herical figure of
the earth was known, and its mngnitude alfertaiin-
ed with rome degree of accuracy. From this il
lwas evident, that the continen!s of Europe,

Afl,.,

B O O K Asia, and Africa, formed but a small portion of the

11. terraqueous globe. It was suitable to our ideas
'----' concerning the wisdom and beneficence of the Au-

thor of Nature, to believe that the vast space itill
unexplored, was not covered entirely by a waite un-.
profitable ocean, but occupied by countries fit for
the habitation of man. It appeared likewise ex-
tremely probable, that the continent, on this fide
of the globe, was balanced by a proportional quan-
tity of land in the other hemisphere. These con-
clufions concerning the existence of another conti-
nent, drawn from the figure and firuture of the
globe, were confirmed by the observations and con-
jetures of modern navigators. A Portuguese pilot,
having stretched farther to the weft than was usual
at that time, took up a piece of timber artificially
carved, floating upon the sea ; and as it was driven
towards him by a westerly wind, he concluded that
it came from some unknown land, situated in that
quarter. Columbus's brother-in-law had found, to
the weft of the Maderia isles, a piece of timber fa-
thioned in the fame mariner, and brought by the
fame wind; and had seen likewise canes of an
enormous size floating upon the waves, which re-
fembled thoie described by Ptolemy as productions
peculiar to the East Indies *. After a course of
westerly winds, trees, torn up by the roots, were
often driven upon the coasts of the Azores, and at
one time the dead bodies of two men, with fingu-
lar features, which resembled neither the inhabi-
tants of Europe nor of Africa, were cast ashore thelc.

As the force of this united evidence, arising

from theoretical principles and practical oblervati-
ons, led Columbus to expect the discovery of new
countries in the Western Ocean, other reasons in-
duced him to believe that these must be connetcil

Lib. i. c. 17.

witli

With the continent of India. Though the ancients B O OK
had hardly ever penetrated into India farther than II.
the banks of the Ganges, yet some Greek authors -v
had ventured to describe the provinces beyond that
river. And, as men are prone, and at liberty, to
magnify what is remote and unknown, they repre-
sented them as regions of an immense extent. Cte-
fias affirmed that India was as large as all the reft of
Alia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny the naturalist fol-
lows *, contended that it was equal to a third part
of the habitable earth. Nearchus asserted, that it
would take four months to march from one extre-
mity of it to the other, in a straight line t. The
journal of Marco Polo, who travelled into Asia in
the thirteenth century, and who had proceeded to-
wards the east far beyond the limits to which any
European had ever advanced, seemed to confirm
these exaggerated accounts of the ancients. By his
magnificent descriptions of the kingdoms of Cathay
and Cipango, and of many other countries, the names
of which were unknown in Europe, India appeared
to be a region of vast extent. From these accounts,
which, however defective, were the moil accurate
that the people of Europe had at that period receiv-
ed, with refpef to the remote parts of the east, Co-
lumbus drew a just conclusion. He contended, that
in proportion as the continent of India stretched
out towards the east, it mufl, in consequence of the
spherical figure of the earth, approach nearer to
the islands which had lately been discovered to the
wecll of Africa ; that the difiance from the one to
the other was probably not very considerable; and
that the most direct, as well as Ihorteft course, to the
remote regions of the cast, was to be found by fail-
ing due welt .t. This notion concerning the vici-

* Nat. Hit. lib. vi. c. 17. t S:rab. Gcogr. lib. xv.
p. loll. See NOTE XII.

VoL I. F nily

B O 0 K nity ,f India t6 the wefiern parts of our continent,

II. was countenanced byfome eminent writers among
I '^~~ the ancients, the fanaion ofwhofe authority was ne-

ceffary, in that age, to procure a favourable recep-
tion to any tenet. Aristotle thought it probable
that the Columns of Hercules, or Straits of Gibral-
tar, were not far removed from the East Indies,
and that there might be a communication by sea be-
tween them *. Seneca, in terms fill more expli-
cit, affirms, that, with a fair wind, one might
fail from Spain to India in a few days t. The fa-
mous Atlantic island described by Plato, which
many fiuppofed to be a real country, beyond which
a vaif unknown continent was filuated, is repre-
iented by him as lying at no great distance from
Spain. After weighing all there particulars, Co-
lumbus, in whose charader the modefly and diffi-
dence of true genius was united with the ardent en-
thuiiafm of a projector, did not relt with such abfo-
lute assurance either upon his own arguments, or
upon the authority of the ancients, as not to consult
such of his contemporaries as were capable of com-
prehending the nature of the evidence which he
produced in support of his opinion. As early as
the year one thousand four hundred and seventy-
four, he communicated his ideas concerning the pro-
bability of discovering new countries, by aliling
weflwards, to Paul, a physician of Florence, emi-
nent for his knowledge of colinography, and who, ion
account both of the learning and candour whicll, lih
discovers in his reply, appears to have been well in-
titled to the confidence which Columbus placed in
him. He wai mly approved of his plan, figgeltedl fc-
vcral fads in confi niation of it, and encouraged himl
to perfev ere in an undcltaking lo laudable, and which

Atiiot. de Colo, lib. ii. c. 14. edit. Du Val, Par. I ó', (
vol. i. p. 472.

*l Scncc. u.l-t. Natur. lib. i. in poemi.

mIllni

must redound so much to the honour of his coun- B o o K
try, and the benefit of Europe . II.

To a mind lets capable of forming and of exe- Hisfchemes

cuting great designs than that of Columbus, all fntocrrynxg
these realbnings, and observations, and authorities, cution.
would have served only as the foundation of some
plausible and fruitless theory, which might have
furniihed matter for ingenious discourse, or fanciful
conjeEture. But with his sanguine and enterprising
temper, speculation led direCtly to action. Fully
satisfied himself with refped to tle truth of his fyi:
tem, he was impatient to bring it to the test of ex-
periment, and to set out upon a voyage of discovery.
The firfi ftep towards this was to secure the patro-
nage of tbme of the considerable powers in Europe,
capable of undertaking such an enterprise. As long
absence had not extinguished the affection which he
bore to his native country, he wished that it should
reap the fruits of his labours and invention. With
this view, he laid his scheme before the senate of Heth li
Genoa, and making his country the first tender of nocre;
his service, offered to fail under the banners of the
republic, in quell of the new regions which he ex-
pedted to discover. But Columbus had resided for
so many years in foreign parts, that his countrymen
were unacquainted with his abilities and character;
and though a maritime people, they were so little
accuflomed to diflant voyages, that they could
form no just idea of the principles ol which lie
founded his hopes of success. They inconsiderate-
ly rcjeced his proposal, as the dream of a chimeri-
cal projclor, and loft for ever the opportunity of
reltoring their commonwealth to its ancient fplcn-
dour t.

" Lire of Colunihs, c. viii.
t Herrera Hilt. (te laa Indias Ocid. Dec . . lib. i. c. 7.

1F z2 H.AVING

B 0 o K HA v 1 NG performed what was due to his country,

II. Columbus was so little discouraged by the repulle

c--o w

e which he had received, that instead of relinquifling
of Portugal; his unde taking, he pursued it with fresh ardour.

He made his next overture to John II. king of Por-
tugal, in whose dominions he had been long efla-
blifhed, and whom he confidered, on that account, as
having the second claim to his service. Here every
circumstance seemed to promise him a more favour-
able reception. He applied to a monarch of an en-
terplifing genius, no incompetent judge in naval
afraiis, and proud of patronising every attempt to
discover new countries. His fubjeds were the most
experienced navigatois in Europe, and the leat apt
to be intimidated either by the novelty or boldneis
of any maritime expedition. In Portugal, Colum-
bus's flill in his profefiion, as well as his'perfonal
good qualities, were thoroughly known; and as the
former rendered it probable that his scheme was not
altogether chimerical, the latter exempted him from
the fiafpicion of any finiser intention in proposing
it. Aczordingly, the king listened to him in the
most gracious manner, and referred the confiderati-
on of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bishop of Ceuta,
and two jexvifh ph ficians, eminent cofinographers,
whom he was accustomed to consult in matters of
this kind. As in Genoa, ignorance had opposed
and disappointed Columbus; in Lisbon, he had to
,combat with prejudice, an enemy no lets formidable.
The pcrfons, acco: ding to whovf decision his fclieere
·vcs to be adoltcd or rejetcd , lad been tl'e cllii'
directois of the lPo:tug:if: navig:aions, and had
adviled to scaich fur a paf'agc to lndia, by fleeting
;. coutlr dir.tly olpofite to that which Colul-mblis
I, conmmenicnld as l~orltcr and more certain. 'hy
could not, thlcrel>or, approve of his 1)roo'.ti
without fbmitting to the double mortificatiol
of con lllmning thcir own tlheory, and of ;ac

lnowlcdgi l'

knowledging his superior sagacity. After teasing B O O K
him with captious questions, and flarting in- II
numerable objecions, with a view of betraying him by whom he
into such a particular explanation of his fyitem, is deceived.
as might draw from him a full ditcovery of its na-
ture, they deferred pafling a final judgment with
retpect to it. In the mean time, they conspired to
rob him of the honour and advantages which he cx-
pected from the success of his scheme, advising the
king to dispatch a vefel, secretly, in order to at-
tempt the proposed discovery, by following exacly
the course which Columbus seemed to point out.
John, forgetting on this occasion the sentiments be-
coming a monarch, meanly adopted this perfidious
counsel. But the pilot, chosen to execute Colum-
bus's plan, had neither the genius, nor the fortitude
of its author. Contrary winds arose, no fight of ap-
proaching land appeared, his courage failed, and he
returned to Lisbon, execrating the project as equally
extravagant and dangerous *.

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranfaStion, Hortula,

Columbus felt the indignation, natural to an inge- and relpaitr
nuous mind, and in the warmth of his resentment ,', Spall.U
determined to break off all intcrcourfc with a na-
tion capable of luchl flagrant treachery. He in-
flantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain
towards the close of the year one thouGfand four hun-
dred and eighty-four. As hle was now at libeity
to court the protc&tion of any patron, whom he
could engage to approve of his plan, and to car;y
it into execution, he rcfolved to lro; ofe it in pcr-
1on, to Ferdinand and Iflibella, who at that tiime
governed the united kindlonms of C:litilc a;ld iAra-
gon. But, as he had already exlpcrici ct tlhe ul- tli',':, iint

* -Litf;ofColumibu?, c. xi !-Ircern, decad i. ! .) i. c. 7.

certa!in

B 0 O K certain issue of applications to kings and ministers,

ii. he took the precaution of fending into England his
5'L"' brother Bartholomew, to whom he had fully com-

municated liis ideas, in order that he might nego-
ciate, at the fame time, with Henry VII. who uas
reputed one of the mofI sagacious as well as opulent
plinces in Europe.

Obticles IT was not without reason that Columbus enter-
to his uc- tained doubts and seas with respect to the recep-
c¢els in
spain. tion of his proposals in the Spanih court. Spain

was, at that juncture, engaged in a dangerous war
with Granada, the last of the Moornfh kingdoms.
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was
not formed to relish bold and uncommon designs.
Isabella, though more generous and enterprising,
was under the influence of her husband in all her
actions. The Spaniards had hitherto made no es-
forts to extend navigation beyond its ancient li-
lits, and had beheld the ama2ing progress of dill
covery among their neighbours the Portuguele,
without one attempt to imitate or to rival them.
'h e war with the infidels afforded an ample field
to the national activity and love of glory. Under
circumstances so unfavourable, it was impoflible for
Columbus to make rapid progiels with a nation,
naturally flow and dilatory in forming all its reiblil-
tions. Hi-s character, however, was admiratbl
adapted to that of the people, wholt confidence airl
protetion he solicited. l-le was grave, though colii-
teous in his deportment ; circumfticd in his wolild
and actions; irreproachable in his morals; and ex-
emplary in his attention to all thc duties and {tfiiI.r
tions of religion. By qualities 1i rcli eatali:', i,
not only gained man'i private friends, but acqli;c.
linch general elitcc, thai, noVwilllhflanding 1!,
plainit ess of his appearance, fuiable to ihe m'icl
ciity of hisi, fotrlunc, he was not confid'red as;
.tlll t advlenturlcr, to wxi'hlml iligcnc lhad fiiggci,

a vihioni

a visionary project, but was received as a person to B O 0 K
whose propositions serious attention was due. I.

FERDINAND and Isabella, though fully occupied His cheme

by their operations against the Moors, paid so much by unfkiful
regard to Columbus, as to remit the consideration judges,
of his plan to the queen's confessor, Ferdinand de
Talavera. He consulted such of his countrymen,
as were supposed belt qualified to defide with re-
fpet to a subjet of this kind. But true science
had, hitherto, made so little progress in Spain,
that those pretended philosophers, feleAed to judge
in a matter of such moment, did not comprehend
the first principles, upon which Columbus founded
his conjedtures and hopes. Some of them, from
mistaken notions concerning the dimensions of the
globe, contended that a voyage to those remote
parts of the east, which Columbus expected to dif-
cover, could not be performed in less than three
years. Others concluded, that either he would find
the ocean to be of infinite extent, according to the
opinion of fbme ancient philosophers; or, if he
Ihould persist in fleering towards the weft beyond a
certain point, that the convex figure of the globe
would prevent his return, and that he must inevi-
tably perish in the vain attempt, to open a con-
munication between the two opposite hcmifphlcrcs,
which nature had for ever disjoincd. Even wit'hout
deigningto enter into any paiticillar dilcullion tome
rejeeed the scheme in gcneral, upon the cicdit of a
maxim, under which the igno ant and unenterprili
ing shelter themillvcs in every age, " That it is
prefumptuots in any pceroll, to lliippofc that lie
alone poffefLs knowlcdgec filpleior to all the reft of
mankind united." 'They mnintainled, that if there
were really any ilch countri-is s Columul)s prrctend-
cd, they could not ihav remaini.d l long conccaled,

nor

B O O K nor would the wildom and sagacity of former ages

II. have left the glory of this invention to an obfcurc
C''" Genoese pilot.

who mike IT required all Columbus's patience and address
ourable to negociate with men capable of advancing such
rep..rtcon- firange pioplofitions. He had to contend not only
cerningi. with the obflinacy of ignorance, but with what is

flill more intractable, the pride of false knowledge.
After innumerable confeiences, and wafting five
years in fruitlels endeavours to inform and to tatisfy
them, Talavera, at last, made such an unfavoura-
ble report to Ferdinand and Isabella, as induced
them to acquaint Columbus, that until the war with
the Moors flould be brought to a period, it was
impoflible for them to engage in any new and ex-
pensive enterprise.

WHA T E V E R care was take to soften the harshness

of this declaration, Columbus confidered it as a final
rejetion of his proposals. But happily for man-
kind, that superiority of genius, which is capable
of forming great and uncommon designs, is ufuall-
accompanied with an ardent enthufiafin, whici
can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped by
disappointment. Columbus was of this fanguinc
tempe'. c Though he fClt deeply the cruel blow gi-
ven to his hopes, anl retired immediately from a
court, where he had bccn amufltd (o long \vith vain
cxpectalions, his cnnfidence in tlie jiinnefs of his o\i)
i'ficm did not diminilh, and his inmpatience to d&-
ilonltlat'- the trilh of it by an acttal cxperim'.lnl
)'c;calc g? cattcr tlian ever. -Having colllted ll"t
proci'otti)io f fT-J'v.i'in Bl;tcs w\llout ficccls, }'-
.pplli'id ncxlt, lo plrffiols f inferior rank, and :!d(l
drelld hlc cei\c .ly the d(uks of Medina Sid,
nia, and Medinal Ccli, lwhlo, tliogh b;':,
',t.rc l ,T ,'fl(.'d ol iower and opu1'n;.c nTis:i
V~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t,;;

than equal to the enterprise which he proje&- B O K
ed. His negociations with them proved as fruitless, il.
as those in which he had been hitherto engaged;
for there noblemen were either as little convinced
by Columbus's arguments as their fiperiors, or
they were afraid of alarming the jealouiy, and
offending the pride of Ferdinand, by countenanc-
ing a scheme, which he had rejected *.

AMID the painful sensations occasioned by such Ngociation

a fuccefflon of disappointments, Columbus had to ,he, in Eng-
fuilain the additional distress, of having received no land.
accounts of his brother, whom he had sent to thz
court of England. In his voyage to that country,
Bartholomew had been so unfortunate as to fall
into the hands of pirates, who having stripped him
of every thing, detained him a prisoner for several
years. At length, he made his efcapc, and arriv-
ed in London, but in such extreme indigence, that
he was obliged to employ himself during a confi-
derable time, in drawing and felling maps, in or-
der to pick up as much money as would purchase a
decent dress, in which he might venture to appear
at court. He then laid before the king the propo-
1als, with which he had been entruited by his bro-
ther, and, notwithstanding Henry's exceflive cau-
tion and parsimony, which rendered him averse to
new and expensive undertakings, he received Cn-
lumbus's overtures, with more approbation, tlhan
any monarch to whom they had hitherto been pre-
fcnted.

MEANWHI LE, Columbnls being n:accluainted coi,,,nli.
with his brother's fate, and having now o iproifctt i,'.l". , ,,

I o it "J 1

,f
of encouragement in Spain, relolvcd to vilit the i.2,,,',,g-

Spaiiiii.

(' tl 111

1
I.ice of Co0nnL c. C. IC( er1. , dCC. I. !il). i. c. 7..

t(-551111

B o O K court of England in person, in hopes of meeting

II. with a more favourable reception there. He had
,---- already made preparations for this purpose, and ta-

ken measures for the disposal of his children during
lis absence, when Juan Perez, the prior of the mo-
naftery of Rabida, near Palos, in which they had
been educated, earnestly solicited him to defer his
journey for a short time. Perez was a man of con-
fiderable learning, and of tome credit with queen
Isabella, to whom hle was known personally. He
was warmly attached to Columibus, with whol:
abilities as well as integrity he had many opportu-
nities of being acquainted. Prompted by curio-
fity or by friendship, he entered upon an accurate
examination of his fyfiem, in conjuntion with a
physician fettled in the neighbourhood, who was a
considerable proficient in mathematical knowledge.
This investigation satisfied them so thoroughly,
with retpe&t to the solidity of the principles on
which Columbus founded his opinion, and the pro-
bability of success in executing the plan which he
proposed, that Perez, in order to prevent his coun-
try fiom being deprived of the glory and benefit,
which must accrue to the patrons of such a grand
enterprise, ventured to write to Isabella, conjuring
her to confider the matter anew, with the attention
which it merited.

Mov ED by the reprcfentations ofa perlon whom

fle refpedted, Isabella desired Perez to repair im
medially to the village of Santa F6, in which,
on at'count of the siege of Granada, the court rc-
fided at that time, that Ihe might confer with him
-upon this important subject. The firit efrTc of tiltir
interview was a gracious invitation of Columbus
"' ' iack to court, accompanied with the present of a

tinall uilm to equilp him for the journey. As thl.l
was n()w a certain profpct, that the w ar with lli

l'1,,,

Moors would speedily be brought to an happy iflue B o o K
by the reduCtion of Granada, which would leav- II.
the nation at liberty to engage in new »unde!tak- '-v--'
ings; this, as well as the mark of royal favour,
with which Columbus had been lately honoured, en-
couraged his friends to appear with greater confi-
dence than formerly in support of his i:heme. The
chief of thele Alonfo de Quintanilia, comptroller
of the finances in Castile, and Louis de Santangel,
receiver of the ecclesiastical revenues in Aagon,
whose meritorious zeal in promoting this great de-
sign, entitles their names to an honourable place in
history, introduced Columbus to many persons of
high rank, and interestcd them warmly in his be-
half.

Bu T it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdi- Is ,; dfr.

nand with favourable sentiments. His cold dif- appointed.
trustful prudence fill regarded Columbus's projc£ .rs
extravagant and chimerical, and in order to render
the efforts of his partizans ineffectual, he had the
address to employ in this new negociation with him,
some of the persons who had formerly pronounced
his scheme to be impraciicable. To their astonish-
ment, Columbus appeared before them with the
fame confident hopes of success as formerly, and
infilled upon the fame high recompence. He pro-
posed that a finall fleet flould be fitted out, under
his command, to attempt the discovery, and de-
manded to be appointed perpetual and heediciary
admiral and viceroy of all tlhe: e:s and lands which
he flould discover, and to have the lenthl of the
profits arining from tler., fettled irrcvocab)ly upon
himiclf and his defccendants. At the lainl tiime, lie
offeied to advanc e tceight part of t!ie ilin nI-i el-
fary for accomplifling his dciign, on conidiion tllat
he Ihould be entitled to a 1)pol)ortional lihaic f e-
liefit from llhe advnltlc. If the
s l't'ip.c fliould

l(9tjllly

B o o K totally miscarry, he made no stipulation for any re.

II. ward or emolument whatever. Instead of viewing
- this condut as the clearest evidence of his full per-

suasion with refpet to the truth of his own fyfitem,
or being firuck with that magnanimity, which,
after so many delays and repulies, would stoop to
nothing inferior to its original claims, the persons
with whom Columbus treated, began meanly to
calculate the expence of the expedition, and the
value of the reward which he demanded. The ex-
pence, moderate as it was, they represented to be
too great for Spain, in the prefint exhausted slate
of its finances. They contended, that the honours
and emoluments claimed by Columbus, were exor-
bitant, even if he should perform the utmost of
what he had promised; and if all his sanguine
hopes should prove illusive, such vat concessions to
an adventurer would be deemed not only inconfide-
rate, but ridiculous, In this imposing garb of
caution and prudence, their opinion appeared to
plausible, and was so warmly supported by Ferdi-
nand, that Isabella declined giving any countenance
to Columbus, and abruptly broke off the negocia-
tion with him which ihe had begun.

TH I was more mortifying to Columbus than all

the disappointments which he had hitherto met
xtith. The invitation to court from Ilabella, like
an unexpected ray of light, had opened fuich prof-
pcaCts of success, as encouraged him to hope thal
his labours were at ll end; but now darkncfs ald
uncertainty returned, and his mind, firm as it w\Vs,
coulld hardly tlpport the: fliock of fiuch a.ln uli,'-

l'cn reverie. -e withdrew in deep anguiifl i'roP
collut, with an inenition of plrotccuting lhis voy;','
to Eno;land, ns his lami rclource.

Ano (';

ABOU T that time Granada surrendered, and Ser- B o o K

dinand and Iabella, in triumphal pomp, took pof- II.
fefion of a city, the redudion of which extir-
pated a foreign power from the heart of their do- last uce'-
minions, and rendered them masters of all the pro- ful.
vinces, extending from the bottom of the Pyrenees Janui49'.
to the frontiers of Portugal. As the flow of 1pi;'its
which accompanies fuccels elevates the mind, and
renders it enterprising, Q(intanilla and Santangel,
the vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus,
took advantage of this favourable situation, in order
to make one effort more in behalf of their friend.
They addrefled themselves to Itabella, and, after
expressing some surprise, that ihe, who had always
been the munificent patroness of generous under-
takings, flould hesitate so long to countenance the
most splendid scheme that had ever been proposed
to any monarch, they represented to her, that Co-
lumbus was a man of a found understanding and
virtuous charater, well qualified, by his experience
in navigation, as well as his knowledge of geome-
t,y, to form just ideas with reiipet to the iftrulure
of the globe and the situation of its various regions ;
that, by offering to rill, his own life and fo:tune il
the execution of his fchcmc, he gav e th most
satisfying evidence both of his integrity and hope
of success; that the fiir requilite for equipping
ilch an armament as he demanded was i 1confidera-
ble, and the advantages vwhich might iaccrue from
his undc:taking were immense, that he dcmandeid
no recompcnce for his invention and labour,
but what was to arise fiomr the countries which
he Ihould difcovrcr; that, as it :was worthy of
lhr Inagnanimity to inake this nob!c attempt
to extend the flihere of lnuman lInov;l.ldg, anii
to open an intcrcoui.irl withi rlgiolns I'ithelto un-.
known, lb it wokuld afslrd the hliglihet lftisflftion
to Iher piety and zeal, alitr rc-ctlablithinig tlc.
Clritfiiim filithl in tils)[ pro\,inc-s of Spain fro();n

wv Iich

B O o K which it had been long banished, to discover a new

II. world, to which fle might communicate the light
'492 and bleflings of divine truth; that if now Ihe did

9 not decide instantly, the opportunity would be loft

irretiievably; that Columbus was on his way to
foreign countries, where tome prince, more fortu--
nate or adventurous, would close with his propo-
fals, and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal ti-
midity which had excluded her from the glory and
advantagesthat she had once in her power to have
enjoyed.

TH ES E forcible arguments, urged by persons of

fiihl authority, and at a juncture so well chosen,
produced the desired effet. They dispelled all Ifa-
bclia's doubts and fears; she ordered Columbus to
be instantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting
the low state of her finances, generously offered to
pledge her own jewels, in order to raise as rtuch
money as would be needed in making preparations
for the voyage. Santangel, in a transport of gra-
titude, kified the queen's hand, and in older lo
save her fiom having recourse to such a mortifying
expedient for procuring money, engaged to ad-
vance immediately the tilm that was requisite *.

Theconi- COLUMBUS had proceeded some leagues oh his
.ions of his·
agreenent journey, when the messenger from Isabella over-
,ith Spain. took him. Upon receiving an account of the un-

expected revolution in his favour, he returned di-
rectly to Santa Fd, though flome rcmainder of dif-
fidence fill mingled itself with his joy. But tlhe
coldial reception which he met with from lfiabella,
together with the near profpc.ct of letting out upon
that voyage which had so Jong been the obNjcct
of his thoughts and wifles, icon effaced the

* Hcrrcra, dec, i. lib. i. c. 8.

crmembrancc

remembrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, B O O K
during eight tedious years of solicitation and fug- I.
penfe. The negociation now went forward with '
facility and dispatch, and a treaty or capitula- 49'
tion with Columbus was signed on the seventeenth
of April, one thousand four hundred and ninety-
two. The chief articles of it were, I. Ferdinand
and Isabella, as sovereigns of the ocean, constituted
Columbus their high admiral in all the seas, islands,
and continents which flould be discovered by his
industry; and flipulated, that he and his heirs for
ever should enjoy this office, with the fame powers
and prerogatives which belonged to the high admi-
ral of Castile, within the limits of his jurisdiction.
2. They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all
the islands and continents which he should discover;
but if, for the better adminifiration of affairs, it
(hould hereafter be necessary to establish a separate
governor in any of those countries, they authorised
Columbus to name three persons, of whom they
would chute one for that office; and the dignity of
viceroy, with all its immunities, was likewite to be
hereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
granted to Columbus and his helis for ever the tenth
of the free profits accruing from the productions
and commerce of the countries which he ihould dif-
cover. 4. They declared, that if any controversy
or law-fiit liall arise with refpiet to any mercantile
tranfation in the countries which should be disco-
vered, it should be determined by the iole authori-
ty of Columbus, or of judges to be appointed by
hiim. 5. They permitted Columbus to advance
one-eighth part of what should be expended in pre-
paring for the expedition, and in carrying on com-
merce with the countries which he should discover,
and intitled him, in retlrn to an eighth part of the
profit *

* Life of Columbus, c. t.. . Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 9.

T,1oun (, ll

B o OK THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears con-

11. joined with that of Isabella in this tranfadion, his
I-=- difirufi of Columbus was ftiii so violent, that he re-

'49%2 fused to take any part in the enterprise, as king of

Aragon. As the whole expence of the expedition
was to be defrayed by the crown of Castile, Isabella
reserved for her ftbjeats of that kingdom an exclu-
five right to all the benefits which might redound
from its success.

The prepa- As soon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, by
his 'yage. her attention and activity in forwarding the prepa-

rations for the voyage, endeavoured to make some
reparation to Columbus for the time which he had
loft in fruitless solicitation. By the twelfth of May,
all that depended upon her was adjufled; and Co-
lumbus waited on the king and queen, in order to
receive their final infirudions. Every thing re-
speding the deflination and conduct of the voyage,
they committed implicitly to the disposal of his pru-
dence. But, that they might avoid giving any just
cause of offence to the king of Portugal, they
ftricly enjoined him not to approach near to the
Portuguese settlements on the coast of Guinea, nor
in any of the other countries to which they claimed
right as discoverers. Ilabella had ordered the lfips,
of which Columbus was to take the command, tu
be fitted out in the port of Palos, a small maritime
town in the province of Andalusia. As the prior
Juan Pcrez, to whom Columbus had already been
lo much indebted, resided in the neighbourhood of
this place, he, by the influence of that good ccclc-
fiaflic, as well as by his own connection with thil
inhabitants, not only raised among them what hc
wanted of the fulm that he was bound by treaty tl
advance, but engaged several of them to accom-
pany him in the voyage. The chief of there ali(,
dates were three brothers of the name of Pin2ont

(;

of considerable wealth, and of great experience in B o o KI
naval affairs, who were willing to hazard their lives II.
and fortunes in the enterprise.

149%.

By T, after all the endeavours and efforts of Ifa-

bella and Columbus, the armament was not fuita-
ble either to the dignity of the nation by which it
was equipped, or to the importance of the service
for which it was destined. It confited of three vef-
fels only. The largest, a ship of no considerable
burden, was commanded by Columbus, as admi-
ral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria, out of
refped for the Blessed Virgin, whom he honoured
with singular devotion. Of the second, called the
Pinta, Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother
Francis pilot. The third, named the Nigna, was
under the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon.
These two were light vessels, hardly fuperi-
or in burden or force to large boats. This fqua-
dron, if it merits that name, was viLtualed for
twelve months, and had on board ninety men,
mostly tailors, together with a few adventu-
rers, who followed the fortune of Columbus,
and some gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom she
appointed to accompany hiln. Though the ex-
pence of the undertaking was one of the circum-
ilances that chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and
retarded so long the negotiation with Columbus,
the fum employed in fitting out this squadron did
not exceed four thousand pounds.

As the art of thipbuilding in the fifteenth cen-

tury wasextremely rude, and the bulk and con-
ftrution of veflels were accommodated to the fliort
and easy voyages along the coast which they wecr
accultomed to perform, it is a proof of t.e courag.s
as well as cnterprifing genius of Columbus, that

VoL 1. IG ie

B o K he ventured, with a fleet so unfit for a diflant na-

I.l. vigation, to explore unknown teas, where he had

no chart to guide him, to. know of the tides and
'49.' currents, and no experience of the dangers to

which he might be exposed. His eagerness to ac-
complilih the great design which had so long en-
grossed his thoughts, made him overlook or difre-
gard every circumstance that would have intimidat-
ed a mind less adventurous. He puihed forward
the preparations with such ardour, and was second-
ed bo effetually by the persons to whom Isabella
committed the ffiperintendence of this business, that
every thing.was soon in readiness for the voyage.
But as Columbus was deeply impressed with senti-
ments of religion, he would not set out upon an ex-
pedition so arduous, and of which one great ob-
jed was to extend the knowledge of the Chrififan
faith, without imploring publicly the guidance and
protetion of Heaven. With this view, he, toge-
ther with all the persons under his command,
marched in bolemn proceflion to the monaflery of
Rabida. After confefling their fins, and obtaining
abfblution from them, they received the holy sacra-
ment fiom the hands of the prior, who joined in
his prayers to theirs for the success of an enterprise
which he had so zealously patronized.

i, kp'r- NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of
Spain.. AuguRt, in the year one thousand four hundred and

ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little before fun-
rie, in presence of a vall crowd of fpeEtators, who
tint up their supplications to Heaven for the profpe-
Augua 3. rous ifile of the voyage, which they wifflcd, rather

than expeaed. Columbus fleered directly for the
Canary Illands, and arrived there without any oc-
currence that would have deserved notice on any
(ither occasion. But in a voyage of such expela-
lion andl imlportarlc, every circumlance was the

obljc4

object of attention. The rudder of the Pinta broke B O 0 K
loose, the day after they left the harbour, and that . II
accident alarmed the crew, no less superstitious 7
than unskilful, as a certain omen of the unfortu-
nate destiny of the expedition. Even in the short
run to the canaries, the ships were found to be so
crazy and ill appointed, as to be very improper for
a navigation which was expeced to be both long
and dangerous. Columbus refitted- them, how-
ever, to the best of his power, and having supplied
himself with fresh provisions, he took his departure
from Gomera, one of the most westerly of the Ca-
nary Islands, on the sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly be The course

which he

said to begin; for Columbus holding his course due held.
weft, left immediately the usual traC of naviga-
tion, and itretched into unfrequented and unknown
seas. The first day, as it was very calm, he made
but little way; but on the second, he loft fight of
the Canaries; ard many of the tailors, dejeeted
already and dismayed, when they contemplated the
boldness of the undertaking, began to beat their
breasts, and to shed tears, as if tley were never
more to behold land. Columbus comforted them
with affilrances of success, and the profpedt of vaif
wealth, in those opulent regions whither he v.as
conducting them. This early discovery of the fpi-
rit of his followers taught Columbus, that he muff
prepare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable
difficulties which might be expected from the nature
of his undertaking, but with such as were likely to
arise from the ignorance and timidity of the people
under his command ; and he perceived that the art
of governing the minds of men would be no less
requisite for accomplilhing the discoveries which he
ihad in view, than naval lkill and an enterprising

G z courage,

B O O K courage. Happily for himself, and for the country

11. by which he was employed, hejoined to the ardent
'-11` temper and inventive genius of a projector, vir-

tues of another species, which are rarely united
with them. He poffeifed a thorough knowlege of
mankind, an insinuating address, a patient perse-
verance in executing any plan, the perfed govern-
ment of his own passions, and the talent of ac-
quiring the diretion of those of other men. All
there qualities, which formed him for command,
were accompanied with that superior knowledge of
his profession, which begets confidence in times of

Vigilance difficulty and danger. To unskilful Spanilh tailors,
and atten-
tion of Co- accustomed only to coasting voyages in the Medi-
lumbus. terranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the

fruit of thirty years experience, improved by an
acquaintance with all the inventions of the Portu-
guefe, appealed immense. As soon as they put to
lea, he regulated every thing by his sole authority;
he fupe intended the execution of every order;
and allowing himself only a few hours for sleep, he
was at all other times upon deck. As his courte lay
through seas which had not formerly been visited,
the founding-line, or instruments for observation,
were continually in his hands. After the example
ot the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to the
motion of tides and currents, watched the flight ol
birds, and appearance of filhes, of fla-weeds, and
of every thing that floated on the waves, and en-
tered every occurrence, with a minute exadnels,
in the journal which he kept. As the length of thl
voyage could not fail of alarming sailors habituated
only to llort excursions, Columbus endeavouic
to conceal from them the real progrcfs which the)
made. With this view, though they run cightcci
leagues on the second day after they left Gomelri
he gave out that they had advanced only fifteen, an(
he uniformly employcd the ialnc artilice of reckoninl

fhor

short during the whole voyage. By the fourteenth B O O K
of September, the fleet was above two hundred jl-
leagues to the weft of the Canary Isles, at a greater '- -
distance from the land than any Spaniard had been Apprchen-
before that time There they were firuck with an sions ln
appearance no less astonishing than it was new. crew.
They observed, that the magnetic needle, in their
compasses, did not point exadly to the polar liar,
but varied a degree towards the weft ; and as they
proceeded, this variation increased. This appear-
ance, which is now familiar, though it till remains
one of the mysteries of nature, into .the cause of
which the sagacity of man hath not been able to
penetrate, filled the companions of Columbus with
terror. They were now in a boundless unknown
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation; na-
ture itself seemed to be altered, and the only guide
which they had left was about to fail them. Co-
lumbus, with no less quickness than ingenuity, in-
vented a reason for this appearance, which, though
it did not satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to
them, as dispelled their fears, or silenced their mur-
murs.

HE till continued to fleer due weft, nearly in the

fame latitude with the Canary islands. In this course
lie came within the sphere of the trade wind, which
blows invaribly from east to weft, between the tro-
pics and a few degrees beyond then. He advanced
before this fleady gale with such uniform rapidity,
that it was seldom necessary to flift a fail. When
about four hundred leagucs to the weft of the Ca-
naries, he found the lea lb covered with weeds, that
it had a resemblance to a meadow of vail extent;
and in some places they were To thick, ;s to rctald
the motion of the vefi;ls. This firangc appearance
occasioned new alarm and difiluiet. T; itilors ima-
gined that they were now .arrived at the utlllil

boundary

B 0. 0 K b.oni4aryy of the pavigable ocean; that these floating

I. wyeeds. would obfltrut their farther progress, and

.-". concealed dangerous rocks, or ftme large tract of
,49t' land, which had funk, they knew not how, in that

place. Colu bus endeavoured to per-fiade them,
that the appearance which had alarmed, ought ra-
ther to have encoWurged them, and was to be con-
fidered as the sign of approaching land. At the
farne time, a bhi.k gale arose, and carried them
forward. Several birds were ieen hoveling about
the (hip ', and direcing their flight towards the
weft. The desponding crew refuned rome degree
of spirit, and began to entertain fresh hopes
The rin- UP o the firfi of Oetober they were, according

to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundred and fe-
venty leagues to the' westward of the Canaries, but
left his mei should be intimidated by the prodigi-
ous length of the navigation, he gave out that they
had proceeded only five hundred and eighty-four
leagues; and, fortunately for Columbus, neither
his own pilot, nor those of the other ships, had
hkill sufficient to correct this error, and discover the
deceit. They had now been above three weeks at
lea; they had proceeded far beyond what former
navigators had attempted or deemed possible; all
their prognostics of discovery, drawn from the
flight of birds and other circumstances, had proved
fallacious; the appealances of land, with which
their own credulity or the artifice of their com-
mander had from time to time flattered and amused
them, had been altogether illusive, and their prof-
peEt of success seered now to be as distant as cver.
These reflections occurred often to men, whlio
had no other ohjcct or occupation, than to rea-
fbn and difcourte concerning the intti:ion and
circunllances of their expedition. They made

* Sec NOTE XIII.

impreflion,

impression, at first, upon the ignorant and timid, B O O K
and extending, by degrees, to such as were 1I.
better informed or more resolute, the conta- v.--
gion spread at length from ship to ship. From fe- 1491'
cret whispers and murmurings, they proceeded to
open cabals and public complaints. They taxed
their sovereign with inconsiderate credulity, in pay-
ing such regard to the vain promises and rash con-
jectures of an indigent foreigner, as to hazard the
lives of so many of her own fubjets, in profecut-
ing a chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they
had fully performed their duty, by venturing so
far in an unknown and hopeless course, and could
incur no blame for refusing, at last, to follow a
desperate adventurer to certain deftrution. They
contended, that it was neceflary to think of return-
ing to Spain, while their crazy vessels were still in
a condition to keep the sea, but exprefred their fears
that the attempt would prove vain, as the wind,
which had hitherto been so favourable to their
course, must render it impoflible to fail in the op-
pofite direction. All agreed that Columbus should
be compelled by force to adopt a measure on which
their common .afety depended. Some of the more
audacious proposed, as the most expeditious and
certain method for getting rid at once of his re-
monitrances, to throw him into the sea, being per-
fuaded that, upon their return to Spain, the death
of an unsuccessful projetor would excite little con-
cern, and be inquired into with no curiosity.

COLUMBUS was fully sensible of his perilous si- Thc addirr

tuation. He had observed, with great concern, in lhothing
the fatal operation of ignorance and of fear in pro- thLen.
ducing disaffection among his crew, and saw that
it wr.s now ready to bulll out into open mutiny.
lie retained, however, perfet )retfenice of mind.
I-He affeled to seem ignorant of their machinations.

Notwithlllnding

B OO K Notwithstanding the agitation and solicitude of his

11. own mind, he appeared with a cheerful counte-

' nance, like a man satisfied with the progress which

he had made, and confident of success. Some-
times he employed all the arts of insinuation to
sooth his men, Sometimes he endeavoured to
work upon their ambition or avarice, by magnifi-
cent descriptions of the fame and wealth which they
were about to acquire. On other occasions, he as-
fumed a tone of authority, and threatened them
with vengeance from their sovereign, if, by their
dastardly behaviour, they should defeat this noble
effort to promote the glory of God, and to exalt
the Spanish name above that of every other nation.
Even with seditious sailors, the words of a man
whom they had been accuilomed to reverence, were
weighty and persuasive. They not only refrained
them from those violent excefies, which they medi-
tated, but prevailed with them to accompany their
admiral for some time longer.
Their futs As they proceedcd, the indications of approach-

ing the land to be feerned moie certain, and excited
hope in proportion. The birds began to appear in
flocks, making towards the south-west. Columbus,
in imitation of the Poituguefe navigators, who had(
been guided, in fevcral of their discoveries, by the
motion of birds, altered his courf't from due vwc'i
towards that quarter whither they pointed thcir
fliglt. But, after holding on for lfveral days in
this new diretion, withoeit any better tlccefs than
formerly, hav.in;g seen no objedt, dui;ing tI'i:vv
dia)ys, but the fCa and the sky, their h'opes ;lbfidcli
fit.ler than they had risen; their fiars re iv(l
with additioual force ; impatience, rage, and (d-
)'i'g.e ,,* f.:'ah', appeared in every countenance. All feni

ot filbordination was loft: the officers, who h11:ld l-
thertP conctlrred with ColIumbln- in opinion, and l';

1'i ltl

ported his authority, now took part with the men; B O 0 K
they aflembled tumultuously on the deck, expos- 1
tulated with their commander, mingled threats
with their expostulations, and required him instant-
ly to tack about and return to Europe. Columbus
perceived that it would be of no avail to have re-
course to any of his former arts, which having
been tried so often, had loft their effets ; and that
it was impossible to rekindle any zeal for the fuc-
cess of the enterprise among men, in whose breafis
fear had extinguished every generous sentiment.
He saw that it was no less vain to think of employ- iltrefs of
ing either gentle or revere measures, to quell a mu- Columbu:.
tiny so general and so violent. It was necessary,
on all there accounts, to soothe paflions which he
could no longer command, and to give way to a
torrent too impetuous to be checked. He promised
solemnly to his men that he would comply with
their request, provided they would accompany
him, and obey his commands for three days lon-
ger, and if, during that time, land were not diflo-
vered, he would then abandon the enterprise, and
direEt his course towards Spain *.

ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient to rncourag-

turn their faces again towards their native counlry, I'aneofu'c-
his proposition did not appear to them unrcafonable. ::-
Nor did Columbus hazard much in confining him-
self to a term so ihort. The preiages cf'dilcover-
ing land were now so numerous and promising, that
ie deemed them infallible. For fbme days the
ifonding line reached the bottom, and the foil
wlhich it brought up indicated land to be at no great
(liftance. The flocks of birds incrca-fed, and weret
cml!ofed Inot only of fca fowl, but of lfuch hlnd

Ovicdo, I-lill. p. Raimu. vol. ili. p. Si. E.

bi rs

B O o K birds as could not be supposed to fly far from the

1. shore. The crew of the Pinta observed a cane
-v .-- floating, which seemed to have been newly cut,

and likewise a piece of timber artificially carved.
The sailors aboard the Nigna took up the branch
of a tree with red berries, perfetly freCh. The
clouds around the setting fun assumed a new appear-
ance; the air was more mild and warm, and,
during night, the wind became unequal and varia-
ble. From all there symptoms, Columbus was so
confident of being near land, that on the evening
of the eleventh of Otober, after public prayers
for success, he ordered the fails to be furled, and
the ships to lie by, keeping ftrit watch, left they
thould be driven ashore in the night. During this
interval of fufpence and expectation, no man shut
his eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently to-
wards that quarter where they expected to discover
the land, which had been so long the object.of their
wishes.
tand diico. AROU T two hours before midnight, Columbus,

red sanding on the forecastle, observed a light at a dif-

tance, and privately pointed it out to Pedro
Guttierez, a page of the queen's wardrobe, Gut-
tierez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comp-
troller of the fliet, all three saw it in motion, as if
it were carried fiom place to place. A little after
midnight, the joyful found of land, land, was
heard from the Pinta, which kept always a-head of
the oilier shi;ps. But, having been so often deceih-
ed by fallacious appearances, they were now be-
come flow of belief, and waited, in all the anguish
of uncertainty and impatience, for the return of

- :a;.y, day. As soon as morning dawned, their doubts
Oc' l' .and fears were dispelled, they beheld an island

;ilout two legues to the north, whole flat and vcr-
dit fields, well flored with wood, and waterci
\,itll many rivulets, presented to them the aftei't

ol

of a delightful country. The crew of the Pinta in- B O O K
ftantly began the le Deum, as a hymn of thanks- II;
giving to God, and were joined by thole of the
other Ihips, with tears of joy and traniports of
congratulation. This office of gratitude to Heaven
was followed by an at of jullice to their comman-
der. Threy threw thenifelves at the feet of Colum-
bus, with feelings of self condemnation mingled
with reverence. They implored him to pardon
their ignorance, incredulity, and insolence, which
had created him so mriih-unneceffary disquiet, and
had so often obftruced the prosecution of his well'
concerted plan; and passing, in the warmth of
their admiration, frcm one extreme to another,
they now pronounced the man, whom they had
so lately reviled and threatened, to be a person in-
spired by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude more
than human, in order to accomplish a design, so
far beyond the ideas and conception of ail former
ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all the boats were Finr inier.

manned and armed. They rowed towards the henaivest,
island with their colours displayed, warlike music,
and other martial pomp; and as they approached
the coast, they saw it covered with a multitude of
people, whom the novelty of the f)pcctacle had
drawn together, and whose attitudes and gefturres
expreifed wonder and afionifimentt at the itrang,
objects which presented themrelves to their view.
Colurmbus was tle firfi European who set foot in the
New World which lie had dcilfovered. He landed
ii a rich dress, and with a naked sword in his hand.
His men followed, and kneeling down, they all
kiflLd the ground which they had so long dclfircd to
fee. Tlhy next erected a cLrcifi::, and proflrat-
ing themfelvcs before it, retuned thallnks to God obr
conduetin^g their vo°:tgte to i.ich a;n hapll)p isile.

'They

B O O K Ttey then took solemn poffeflion of the country

1. for the crown of Castile and Leon, with all the
b'^~' formalities which the Portuguese were accustomed

to observe in acts of this kind, in their new dif-
coveries *.

Their mu- THE Spaniards, while thus employed were fur-
tnilmnt. rounded by many of the natives, who gazed, in

silent admiration, upon aaions which they could
not comprehend, and of which they did not fore-
iee the consequences. The dress of the Spaniards,
the whiteness of their fIins, their beards, their arms,
appeared Itrange and furpiifing. The vast ma-
chines in which they had traversed the occean, that
seemed to move upon the waters with wings, and
uttered a dreadful found resembling thunder, ac-
companied with lightning and smoke, struck them
with such terror, that they began to refpeft their
new guefis as a superior order of beings, and con-
cluded that they were children of the Sun, who
had descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at the

scene now before them, Every herb, and shrub,
and tree, was different from those which flourished
in Europe. The foil seemed to be rich, but bore
few marks of cultivation. The climate, even to
Spaniards, felt warm, though extremely delightful.
The inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence
of nature, eitirely naked. Their black hair, long
and uncurled, floated upon their flhofildcrs, or was
Iou!nd in treiles around their heads. They had no
bcards, and cvcty part of their bodies was pelfcc-
1y) finooth. Their complexion was of aduilky col-
per colour, their features singular, rather than dii-
:It,:'eahlle, their alpet gentle and timid. Though
lot tall, they were well lhaped, and acive. Ihi'
'I,ifc of Columbs , c 2 z 23. HcrrcIa, dec., . l i. c. 3.

faces,

faces, and other parts of their body, were fantaf- B O O K
tically painted with glaiing colours. They were shy 1.
at first through fear, but soon became familiar with
the Spaniards, and with transports of joy receiv-
ed from them hawks-bells, glass beads, and other
baubles, in return for which they gave such provifi-
ons as they had, and some cotton yarn, the only
commodity of value that they could produce.
Towards evening, Columbus returned to his 1hips,
accompanied by many of the islanders in their
boats, which they called canoes, and though rudely
formed out of the trunk of a tingle tree, they row-
ed them with surprising dexterity. Thus, in the
firfi interview between the inhabitants of the old
and new worlds, every thing was conducted ami-
cably, and to their mutual fatisfadion. The for-
mer, enlightened and ambitious, formed already
vast ideas with refpe&t to the advantages which
they might derive fiom those regions that began to
open to their view. The latter, simple and un-
discerning, had no foresight of the calamities and
desolation which were now approaching their coun-
try.

COLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and au- Coltmlumt

thority of admiral and viceroy, called the island ,,li- otill-
which he had discovered Snl Salvador. It is better ,,r":l"l
known by the name of Guanalhani, which tle natives
gave to it, and is one of that large cluller of illands
called the Lucaya or Bahamna ilcs. It is situatcd
above three thoufind miles to the wefi of Gomirca,
from which the squadron took its dlcplaittiie, Ind
only four degrees to the louth of it ; lb little had Co-
lumbus deviated from the \clly couisi, whicl
lie had cllofen as the 1mol proper.

CorLu MIUS cmpjloyed the next day r, '.iffitillg procel.

the coalls of the illand ; and from the uilivcrlhl ao-

l '"'V'i1""!
ve'l) of the inhabitants lie perceived llit tlis \vws

nl ,t

B o K 1nt the rich country for which he fought. But,

11. conformably to his theory concerning the difcovety
'-"V-J' of thole regions .of Asia which itretched towards

-the east, he concluded that San Salvador was one
of the isles which geographers described as fitiuted
in the vast ocean adjacent to India*. Having ob-
served that most of the people whom he had seen
wore small plates of gold, by way of ornament,
in their nostrils, he eagerly inquired where they got
that precious metal. They pointed towards the
south, and made him comprehend by signs, that
gold abounded in, countries situated in that quarter.
Thither he immediately determined to diret his
course, in full confidence of finding there those
opulent regions which had been the objet of his
voyage, and would be a recompence for all his
toils and dangers. He took along with him seven
of the natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring
the Spanilh language, they might serve as guides
and interpreters; and those innocent people confi-
dered it as a mark of diftination when they were fe-
leded to accompany him.

T;fcoVel HE saw several islands, and touched at three of
Cuba. the largest, on which he bestowed the names of St.

Mary of the Conception, Ferrnandina, and Isabella.
But as their foil, productions, and inhabitants,
nearly resembled those of San Salvador, he made
no flay in any of them. He inquired every where
for gold, and received uniformly for answer, that
it was brought from the south. He followed that
course, and soon discovered a country of vast ex-
tent, not perfectly level, like those which he had
already visited, but so diversified with rising
grounds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that lhe
was uncertain whether it might prove an island, or
part of the continent. The natives of San Salva-

Pet. Mart. cpift. 135.

dor,

dor, whom he had on boarc, called it Cuba; Co- B O O K
lumbus gave it the name of Juanna. He entered II.
the mouth of a large river with his squadron, and ' '
all the inhabitants fled to the mountains as he ap-
proached the shore. But as he resolved to careen
his ships in that place, he sent some Spaniards, to-
gethir with one of the people of San Salvador, to
view' the interior parts of the country. They,
having advanced above sixty miles from the
store, roported, upon their return, that the foil was
richer and more cultivated than any they had hi-
therto discovered; that, betides many scattered
cottages, they had found one village, containing
above a thousand inhabitants; that the people,
though naked, seemed to be more intelligent than
'oise of San Salvador, but had treated, them with
the fame refpetful attention, kissing their'feet, and
honouring them as sacred beings allied to Heaven;
that they had given them to eat a certain root, the
taste of which resembled roasted chefnuts, and like-
wife a singular species of corn called mzaize which,
either when roasted whole or ground into meal,
was abundantly palatable; that there seemed to be
no four-footed. animals in the country, but a fpe-
cies of dogs, which could not bark, and a creature
resembling a rabbit, but of a much finaller ize ;
that they had oblerveid tome ornaments of gold
among the people, but of no great value *.

THESE messengers had prevailed with some of His con;c-

the natives to accompany them, who informed Co- trcd' ',
lumbus, that the gold of which they made thcir
ornaments was found in Cubanatlan. By fhis word
they meant the middle or inland part of Cuba ; but
Columbus, being ignorant of their language, as
well as unaccufomned to their pronunciation, and
his thoughts running continually upon his own the-

* Life of Colurnbus, c. 24-28. Ieirera, dec. i. lib. i.
C. 14.

o ry\

B O O K tmy concerning the discovery of the East Indies, he

II. was led, by the resemblance of found, to fuppoie
L-/-' that they spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined

that the opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by
Marco Polo, was not very remote. This induced
him to employ some time in viewing the country.
He visited almost every harbour, from Porto del
Plincipe, on the north coast of Cuba, to the eallern
extremity of the island; but though delighted with
the beauty of the scenes, which every where pre-
sented themselves, and amazed at the luxuriant
fertility of the foil, both which, from their novelty,
made a more lively imprelfion upon his imaginati.
on *, he did not find gold in such quantity as was
sufficient to satisfy either the avarice of his follow-
ers, or the expectations of the court to which he
was to return. The natives, as much astonished
at his eagerness in quefL of gold, as the Europeans
were at their ignorance and simplicity, pointed to-
wards the east, where an island which they called
Hayti was situated, in which that metal was more
abundant than among them. Columbus ordered
his Ifuadron to bend its course thither ; but Maitii
Aldnfo Pinion, impatient to be firfi who fhoulL
take Pofleflion of the treafnles which this counti)
was ftippofed to contain, quitted his companions
tegaldlels of all the admiras signals to flacken fail
until they flould come up with him.

ircoV,,s CoL,UMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, di,
the ill"ond not reach Hayti till the sixth of December. Hi
i'a: a' called the port wheie he first touched St. Nicholas

and the island ititclf Efiagnola, in honour of th
kingdom by which he was employed ; and it is the
only country, of thoie lhe had yet dilcovered, wliil
has retained the name that he gave it. As he culii
neiitlcr meet with the Pinta, ncr have any inter

cSec NOTE X X'.

* ~ ~~~~~~~..
s,i,

course with the inhabitants, who fled in great con- B o o K
fiernation towards the woods, he soon quitted St. I.
Nicholas, and failing along the northern coast of '"
the island, he entered another harbour, which he 492'
called Conception. Here he was more fortunate;
his people overtook a woman who was flying from
them, and after treating her with great kindness,
dismissed her with a present of such toys as they
knew were moRt valued in those countries. The
description which file gave to her countrymen of
the humanity and wonderful qualities of the firan-
gers; their admiration of the trinkets, which she
shewed with exultation; and their eagerness
to participate of the fame favours; removed all
their fears, and induced many of them to repair
to the harbour. The strange objects which they
beheld, and the baubles which Columbus bestowed
upon them, amply gratified their curiosity and their
wishes. They nearly resembled the people of
Guanahani and Cuba. They were naked like
them, ignorant, and simple; and seemed to be
equally unacquainted with all the arts which ap-
pear most necessary in polished societies; but they
were gentle, credulous, and timid, to a degree
which iendered it easy to acquire the ascendant
over them, especially as their excessive admiration
led them into the fame error with the people of the
other islands, in believing the Spaniards to be
more than mortals, and descended immediately
from Heaven. They possessed gold in greater
abundance than their neighbours, which they readi-
ly exchanged for bells, beads, or pins; and, in
this unequal traffic, both parties were highly pleal-
ed, each confidering themfclves as gainers by the
tranfa'tion. Here Columbus was visited by a
prince or cazique of the country. He appeared
with all the pomp known among a simple people,
being carried in a fort of palanquin upon the floul-

VOL. . H dens

B O O K ders of four men, and attended by many of his

11. fubjets, who served him with great refpet. His
"--' deportment was grave and itately, very reserved

towards his own people, but with Columbus and
the Spaniards extremely courteous. He gave the
admiral some thin plates of gold, and a girdle of
curious workmanlhip, receiving in return presents
of small value, but highly acceptable to him *.

Co LU MB US, fill intent on discovering the mines

which yielded gold, continued to interrogate all the
natives with whom he had any intercoufe concern-
ing their situation. They concurred in pointing
out a mountainous country, which they called
Cibao, at some diflance from the sea, and farther
towards the east. Struck with this found, which
appeared to him the fame with Cipango, the name
by which Marco Polo, and other travellers to the
east, distinguish the islands of Japan, he no longer
doubted with refpet to the vicinity of the countries
which he had discovered to the remote parts ol
Asia; and, in full expetation of reaching soon
those regions which had been the object of his voy-
age, he directed his course towards the east. He
put into a commodious harbour, which he called
St. Thomas, and found that district to be under
the government of a powerful caique, named
Gutacanarhri, who, as he afterwards learned, was
one of the five sovereigns among whom the whole
illand was divided. He immediately sent messen-
gers to Columbus, who, in his name, delivered ti
him the present of a maflc cui ioufly falhioned, with
the ears, nose, and mouth of beaten gold, and in-
vited him to the place of his residence, near the
harbour now called Cape Francois, some leagues
towards the ealt. Columbus difl]atched some of his
officers to visit this prince, who, as he behaved

* Life of Columnbus, c. 32. Herrera, dec. i.,lib. i. c. '5,
&c.

witl!

with greater dignity, seemed to claim more atten- B O O K
tion. They returned, with such favourable ac- 11.
counts both of the country and of the people, as
made Columbus impatient for that interview with 149'.
Guacanahari to which he had been invited.

HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on One of his

the twentyfourth of December, with a fair wind, «in l"rt.
and the sea perfectly calm; and as, amidst the
multiplicity of his occupations, he had not shut his
eyes for two days, he retired at midnight, in or-
der to take some repose, having committed the
helm to the pilot, with ftriet injunctions not to quit
it for a moment. The pilot, dreading no danger,
carelessly left the helm to an unexperienced cabin-
boy, and the ship, carried-away by a current, was
dashed against a rock. The violence of the shock
awakened Columbus. He ran up to the deck.
There, all was confusion and despair. He alone
retained pretence of mind. He ordered some of
thefailors to take a boat, and carry out an anchor
astern; but, instead of obeying, they made off
towards the Nigna, which was about half a league
diflant. He then commanded the mafls to be cut
down, in order to lighten the ship; but all his en-
deavours were too late; the vessel opened near the
keel, and filled so fait with water, that its loss was
inevitable. The fimoothnefs of the sea, and the
timely afliftance of boats from the Nigna, enabled
the crew to save their lives. As soon as the island-
e;s heard of this disaster, they crowded to the
shore, with their prince Guacanahari at their head.
Inafead of taking advantage of the distress in which
they beheld the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to
their detriment, they lamented their misfortune
with tears of sincere condolence. Not satisfied
with this unavailing expreflion of their sympathy,
they put to sea a valt number of canoes, and, un-
der the direction of the Spaniards, aflifed in saving

H 2 wlat-

B o K whatever could be got out of the wreck; and by

11. the united labour of so many hands, almofi every
X--"V' thing of value was carried ashore. As fast as the

'349. goods were landed, Guacanahari in person took

charge of them. By his orders, they were all de-
posited in one place, and armed centinels were post-
ed, who kept the multitude at a distance, in order
to prevent them not only from embezzling, but
from infpecing too curiously what belonged to
their guefis *. Next morning this prince visited
Columbus, who was now on board the Nigna, and
endeavoured to console him for his loss, by offering
all that he poffefled to repair it t.

Diftrea of THE condition of Columbus was such, that he
Colunbus. flood in need of consolation. He had hitherto

procured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no lon-
ger doubted but that his treacherous associate had
let fail for Europe, that he might have the merit of
carrying the first tidings of the extraordinary disco-
veries which they had made, and might so far pre-
occupy the ear of their sovereign, as to rob him of
the glory and reward to which he was justly intitled.
There remained but one veflel, and that the small-
elt and tnoft crazy of the squadron, to traverse
tuch a vast ocean, and carry so many men back to
Europe. Each of those circumfiances was alairn-
ing, and filled the mind of Celumbus with the ut-
moit solicitude. His desire cf overtaking Pin>on,
and of effacing the unfavourable impreflions which
his mifirepreFentations might make in Spain, made
it necessary to return thither without delay. The

crolv^'o difficulty of taking fhch a number of persons
leave a pait
of his crew aboard the Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion,
n th ci which the fertility of the country, and the gentle

temper of the people, had already induced him to
form. He resolved to leave a part of his crew in

*See N O T E XV. t Hcrrela,dec. i. lib. i. c. 18.

the

the island, that, by residing there, they might BOOK
learn the language of the natives, study their dif- I
position, examine the nature of the country, search 4V9
for mines, prepare for the commodious settlement
of the colony, with which he proposed to return,
and thus secure and facilitate the acquisition of those
advantages which he expeced from his discoveries.
When he mentioned this to his men, all approved
of the design; and from impatience under the
fatigue of a long voyage, from the levity natural to
sailors, or from the hopes of amassing vai wealth
in a country which afforded such promising fpeci-
mens of its riches, many offered voluntarily to be
among the number of those who Ihould remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the exe- Obtains the

conlent o0

cution of this scheme, but to obtain the content of the naiives.
Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious simplicity soon
presented to the admiral a favourable opportunity
of proposing it, Columbus having, in the best
manner he could, by broken words and signs, ex-
pressed some curiosity to know the cause which had
moved the itlanders to fly with such precipitation
upon the approach of his flips, he informed him
that the country was much infested by the incurfi-
ons of certain people, whom he called Carribeins,
who inhabited several islands to the south east.
These he described as a fierce and warlike race of
men, who delighted in blood, and devoured the
flesh of the pribsners who were bo unhappy as to
fall into their hands; and as upon the firfi appear-
ance of the Spaniards, they were supposed to be
Carribeans, whom the natives, however numerous,
durlt not face in battle, they had recourle to their
usual method of securing their safety, by flying into
the thickest and moit impenetrable woods. Gua-
canahari, while fj.eaking of tllofe dreadl'il inva-
ders, discovered tilch f'llmptoms of terror, as well

!is

BO 0 K as such consciousness of the inability of his own

II. people to resist them, as led Columbus to conclude
`LT-J that he would not be alarmed at the proposition of

49 ' any scheme which afforded him the profpet of an

additional security against their attacks. He in-
ltantly offered him the assistance of the Spaniards to
repel his enemies ; he engaged to take him and his
people under the protection of the powerful monarch
whom he served, and offered to leave in the island
such a number of his men, as should be sufficient,
not only to defend the inhabitants from future incur-
sions, but to avenge their past wrongs.

Builds THE credulous prince closed eagerly with the
fort. proposal, and thought himself already safe under

the patronage of beings sprung from Heaven, and
superior in power to mortal men. The ground was
marked out for a small fort, which Columbus called
Navidad, because he had landed there on Christmas
day. A deep ditch was drawn around it. The
ramparts were fortified with pallifades, and the
great guns, saved out of the admiral's ship, were
planted upon them. In ten days the work was
finished; that simple race of men labouring with
inconsiderate assiduity in erecting this first monu-
ment of their own servitude. During this time
Columbus, by his carefles and liberality, laboured
to increase the high opinion which the natives enter-
tained of the Spaniards. But while he endeavoured
to inspire them with confidence in their disposition to
do good, he wished likewise to give them some ftrik-
ing idea of their power to punish and defiroy such a,
were the objeets of theirjuft indignation. With this
view, in i.'pefence of a valt assembly, he drew up hii
men in order of battle, and made an oftentatiou
?but innocent display of the sharpness of the Spanifl

swords

swords, of the force of their spears, and the opera- B o o K
tion of their cross-bows. These rude people, 1.
strangers to the use of iron, and unacquainted with 4;.9
any hostile weapons, but arrows of reeds pointed
with the bones of fishes, wooden swords, and jave-
lins hardened in the fire, wondered and tiembled.
Before this surprise or fear had time to abate, he
ordered the great guns to be fired. The sudden
explosion itruck them with such terror, that they
fell flat to the ground, coverning their faces with
their hands; and when they beheld the aftonifling
effect of the bullets, they concluded that it was im-
poflible to resist men, who had the command of
such defirudive infiruments, and who came armed
with thunder and lightning againfl their enemies.

AFTER giving such impreflions both of the be- His inflruc-

tions to

neficence and power of the Spaniards, as might those heleft
have rendered it easy to preserve an ascendent over ia it-
the minds of the natives, Columbus appointed
thirty-eight of his people to remain in the island.
He entrusted the command of these to Diego de
Arada, a gentleman of Cordova, investing him
with the fame powv-rs which he himself had receiv-
ed from their Catholic Mlajefties; and furnished him
with every thing requisite for the subsistence or de-
fence of this infant colony. He firitly enjoined
them to maintain concord among themselves, to
yield an unreserved obedience to their conmman-
der, to avoid giving offence to the natives by any
violence or exacion, to cultivate the fiiendlhlip of
Guacanahari, but not to put themselves in his power
by straggling in finall parties, or marching too far
fiom the fort. He promiled to revisit them lton,
with ilicha reinforcement of strength as might ena-
ble them to take full l)oficliion of the country, and
to realp all the fruitr of their difcovcrics. In the

mean

B O O K mean time, he engaged to mention their names to

JI. the king and queen, and to place their merit and
..' . services in the molt advantageous light .

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the

security of the Colony, he left Navidad on the
'493. fourth of January, one thousand four hundred and

ninety-three, and fleering towards the east, disco-
vered, and gave names to most of the harbours
on the northern coast of the island. On the sixth,
he described the Pinta, and soon came up with her,
after a separation of more than fix weeks. Pinzon
endeavoured to justify his conduct, by pretending
that he had been driven from his course by stress of
weather, and prevented from returning by contrary
winds. The admiral, though no stranger to his
perfidious intentions, or the frivolity as well as
falsehood of what he urged in his defence, was so
sensible that this was not a proper time for venturing
upon any high firain of authority, and felt such fa-
tiEfaction in this junction with his consort, which
delivered him from many disquieting apprehensions,
that lame as Pinzon's apology was, he admitted of
it without difficulty, and restored him to favour.
Du;ing his absence from the admiral, Pinzon had
visited several harbours in the island, had acquired
some gold by trafficking with the natives, but had
made no discovery of any importance.

reurpO to FROM the condition of his flips, as well as the
Europe. temper of his men, Columbus now found it ne-

cefary to haften his return to Europe. The former,
having suffered much during a voyage of such un-
usual duration were extremely leaky. The lattuc

* Oviedo ap. Rimufio, iii. p. 82. E. Hertera, dec. i. lb i
c. zo. Lile of Columbus, c. 34.

¢xpref;:l

expressed the utmost impatience to revisit their na- B O O K
tive country, from which they had been so long ab- I1
lent, and where they had things so wonderful and
unheard-of to relate. Accordingly, on the fix- 49
teenth of January, he direted his course towards
the north east, and soon loft fight of land. He had
on board some of the natives, whom he had taken
from the different islands which he discovered; and
betides the gold which was the chief object of re-
search, he had colleted specimens of all the produc-
tions which were likely to become subje&s of com-
merce in the several countries, as well as many un-
known birds, and other natural curiosities, which
might attrac the attention and excite the wonder of
the people. The voyage was prosperous to the four-
teenth of February, and they had advanced near
five hundred leagues across the Atlantic Ocean,
when the wind began to rife, and continued to blow A violent
with encreafing rage, which terminated in a furi- torm aires.
ous hurricane. Every expedient that the naval
fiill and experience of Columbus could devise was
employed, in order to save the ships. But it was
impossible to withstand the violence of the florm,
and as they were fiill far from any land, deftructi-
on seemed inevitable. The tailors had recourse to
prayers to Almighty God, to the invocation of
faints, to vows and charms, to every thing that
religion dictates, or fuperfiition fuggefis to the as-
fiighted mind of man. No profpea of deliverance
appearing, they abandoned themselves to despair,
and expeced every moment to be swallowed up
in the waves. Besides the paflions which naturally
agitate and alarm he human mind in such awful ii-
tuations, when certain death, in one of his moll-
terrible forms, is before it, Columbus had to endure
feelings of distress peculiar to himfeif. He dreaded
that all the knowledge of the aiima.inlg ditcovcrics Ti,,c ,.
which he had made w.as now to peciilil mnankind (lua" ot Co.

weCre

B O K were to be deprived of every merit that might

1I. have been derived from the happy success of his

^-v_-~ schemes, and his own name would descend to pofie-
'493 rity as that of a rath deluded adventurer, inflead of

being transmitted with the honour due to the author
and conductor of the mofi noble enterprise that had
ever been undertaken. These reflections extinguish-
ed all sense of his own personal danger. Less affected
with the loss of life, than solicitous to preserve the
memory of what he had attempted and atehieved,
he retired to his cabbin, and wrote upon parch-
ment, a short account of the voyage which he had
made, of the course which he had taken, of the
situation and riches of the countries which he had
discovered, and of the colony that he had left there.
Having wrapt up this in an oiled cloth, which he
inclosed in a cake of wax, he put it into a cask
carefully flopped up, and threw it into the Tea, in
hopes that some fortunate accident might preserve a
deposit of so much importance to the world *.

Tkes fhel. AT length Providence interposed, to save a life
Azores. reserved for other services. The wind abated, the

sea became calm, and on the evening of the sis-
teenth they discovered land; and though uncertain
what it was, they made towards it. They boon
knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores or wefti
ern isles, subjet to the crown of Portugal. There,
after a violent contest with the governor, in which
Columbus displayed no less spirit than prudence,
he obtained a supply of fresh provisions, and
whatever else he needed. One circumstance, how-
ever, greatly disquieted him. The Pinta, of which
he had loft fight on the first day of the hurricane,
did not appear; he dreaded for some time that ile
had foundered at sea, and that all her crew had

* Life of Columbus, c. 37. Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. ii . . , 2
See NOTE XVI.

pe4rjhed:

perished: afterwards, his former suspicions recur- B 0 0 K
red, and he became apprehensive that Pinzon had I.
borne away for Spain, that he might reach it before -
him, and by giving the first account of his disco- 1493.
veries, might obtain some Ihare of his fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores as Feb. 24.

soon as the weather would permit. At no great Lib'o.a
distance from the coast of Spain, when almost at
the end of his voyage, and beyond the reach of any
disaster, another fiorm arose, little inferior to the
former in violence; and after driving before it dur-
ing two days and two nights, he was forced to take
shelter in the river Tagus. Upon application to Maich 4.
the king of Portugal, he was allowed to come up
to Lisbon; and, notwithitanding the envy which
it was natural for the Portuguese to feel, when they
.beheld another nation entering upon that province
of discovery which they had hitherto deemed pe-
culiarly their own, and in its first essay, not only
rivalling but eclipsing their fame, Columbus was
received with all the marks of diftindtion due to a
man who had performed things so extraordinary
and unexpected. The king admitted him into his
presence, treated him with the highest refpet, and
listened to the account which he gave of his voyage
with admiration mingled with regret. While Co-
lumbus on his part, enjoyed the satisfaction of de-
scribing the importance of his discoveries, and of
being now able to prove the solidity of his schemes
to those very persons, who, with an ignorance dif-
graceful to themselves, and fatal to their country,
had lately rejeced them as the projects of a vifi-
onary or designing adventurer *.

* Life of Columbus, c. 40, 41. H:lrera, dec. x. lib.
ii. c.3.

Co r. MJJUS

B O O K COLU MBU S was so impatient to return to Spain,

ILp that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On the
1493. fifteenth of March he arrived in the Port of Palos,

Returns to seven months and eleven'days from the time when
Spain. he set out thence upon his voyage. As soon as his

ship was discovered approaching the port, all the
inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly to the shore, in or-
der to welcome their relations and fellow-citizens,
and to hear tidings of their voyage. When the
prosperous ifiue of it was known, when they
beheld the firange people, the unknown animals,
and singular productions brought from the countries
which had been discovered, the effusion of joy was
general and unbounded. The bells were rung, the
cannon fired; Columbus was received at landing
with royal honours, and all the people, in solemn pro-
cession, accompanied him and his crew to the
church, where they returned thanks to Heaven,
which had so wonderfully conduced and crowned
with success a voyage of greater length and of
more importance, than had been attempted in any
former age. On the evening of the fame day, he
had the satisfaction of feeing the Pinta, which the
violence of the tempest had driven far to the north,
enter the harbour.

Mrs recep- THE firit care of Columbus was to inform the
rion. king and queen, who were then at Barcelona, of

his arrival and success. Ferdinand and Isabella, no
less astonished than delighted with this unexpected
event, returned an answer in terms the most refpetfiul
and flattering to Columbus, requesting him to repair
immediately to court, that from his own mouth, they
might receive a full detail of his extraordinary ser-
vices and difcoveiies. During his journey to Bar-
celona, the people crowded from the adjacent
country, following him every where with admira-

lion

tion and applause. His entrance into the city was B OO K
conduCted, by order of Ferdinand and Isabella, II.
with pomp suitable to the great event, which added v--
such distinguishing lustre to their reign. The peo- 1493'
pie whom he brought along with him from the coun-
tries which he had discovered, marched first, and
by their singular complexion, the wild peculiarity
of their features, and uncouth finery, appeared
like men of another species. Next to them were
carried the ornaments of gold, fashioned by the
rude art of the natives, the grains of gold found
in the mountains, and dust of the fame metal ga-
thered in the rivers. After these appeared the va-
rious commodities of the new discovered countries,
together with their curious produCtions. Columbus
himself closed the procession, and attracted the
eyes of all the fpeEtators, who gazed with admira-
tion on the extraordinary man, whose superior saga-
city and fortitude had conduted their countrymen,
by a route concealed from part ages, to the know-
ledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella re-
ceived him clad in their royal robes, and feated
upon a throne, under a magnificent canopy. When
he approached they flood up, and raising him as
he kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him to
take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and to
give a circumstantial account of his voyage. He
delivered it with a gravity and composure no less
suitable to the disposition of the Spanifl nation,
than to the dignity of the audience in which he
spoke, and with that modest simplicity, which
charaderifes men of superior minds; who, satisfied
with having performed great aitions, court not
vain applause by an ostentatious display of their ex-
ploits. When he had finished his narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up a so-
lemn thanks to Almighty God for the discovery of

tliolf

B O O K thoie new regions, from which they expected fb

IL. many advantages to flow in upon the kingdoms
v'1- rfubjed to their government *. Every mark of ho-

1493' nour that gratitude or admiration could suggest was

conferred upon Columbus. Letters patent were if-
sued, confirming to him and to his heirs.all the privi-
leges contained in the capitulation concluded at San-
ta F6 ; his family was ennobled; the king and
queen, and, after their example, the courtiers,
treated him, on every occasion, with all the cere-
monious refpea paid to persons of the highest rank.
But what pleated him most, as it gratified the en-
terprifing activity of his mind, bent continually
upon great objecs, was an order to equip, without
delay, an armament of such force, as might enable
him not only to take possession of the countries
which he had already discovered, but to go in search
of those more opulent regions, which he still con-
fidently expected to find t.

Aftoifh- W HI. LE preparations were making for this ex-
ment of
mankindat pedition, the fame of Columbus's successful voy-
hil difcove. age spread over Europe, and excited general atten-

tion. The multitude, struck with amazement when
they heard that a new world had been found, could
hardly believe an event so much above their con-
ception. Men offcience, capable of comprehend-
ing the nature, and of discerning the effects, of
this great discovery, received the account of it with
admiration and joy. They spoke of it with rap-
ture, and congratulated one another upon their fe.
licity, in having lived at the period when, by thih
extraordinary event, the boundaries of humar
knowledge were so much extended, and luch a nem

* Sce NOTE XVIT.
t Life of Columbus, c. 42, 43. Herrera, dec. i. 1t
ic. c: 3.

finli

field of inquiry and observation opened, as would B O o K
lead mankind to a perfet acquaintance with the I.
firucure and productions of the habitable globe *. ' ,
Various opinions and conjectures were formed con- 493
cerning the new-found countries, and what division
of the earth they belonged to. Columbus adhered
tenaciously to his original opinion, that they should
be reckoned a part of those vaR regions of Asia,
comprehended under the general name of India.
This sentiment was confirmed by the observations
which he made concerning the produEtions of the
countries which he had discovered. Gold was
known to abound in India, and he had met with
such promising samples of it in the islands which
he visited, as led him to believe that rich mines of
it might be found. Cotton, another produEtion of
the East Indies, was common there. The pimento
of the islands he imagined to be a species of the
Eaft-Indian pepper. He mistook a root, some-
what resembling rhubarb, for that valuable drug,
which was then supposed to be a plant peculiar to
the East Indies t. The birds which he had brought
home were adorned with the fame rich plumage that
diftinguifes those of India. The alligatorof the
one country appeared to be the fame with the cro-
codile of the other. After weighing all these cir-
cumiftances, not only the Spaniards, but the other
nations of Europe, seem to have adopted the opi-
nion of Columbus. The countries which he had Di;inguia.-
discovered were confidered as a part of India. In 'nbyh th
consequence of this notion, the name of Indies is Weflt lijU.
given to them by Ferdinand and Isabella, in a rati-
fication of their former agreement, which was
granted to Columbus upon his return $. Even as-
ter the error which gave rife to this opinion was de-
teled, and the true position of the New World

* P. Mart. epift. 133, 134, 135. See NOTE XVIII.
t Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 20. Goinala Hil, .

c. 17
t Life of Colulbus, c. 44.

\waS

B O O K was afceitained, the name has remained, and the

II. appellation of Wef Indies is given by all the people
v-- of Europe to the country, and that of Indians to its
1493. inhabitants.

Preparati. TH E name by which Columbus diftinguithed the
Condoy a ge countries which he had discovered was ib inviting;

the specimens of their riches and fertility, which
he produced, were so considerable; and the re-
ports of his companions, delivered frequently with
the exaggeration natural to travellers, so favoura-
ble; that they excited a wonderful spirit of enter-
prise among the Spaniards. Though little accuf-
tomed to naval expeditions, they were impatient
to set out upon another voyage. Volunteers of
every rank solicited to be employed. Allured by
the vast profpeds which opened to their ambition
and avarice, neither the length nor danger of the
navigation intimidated them. Cautious as Ferdinand
was, and averse to every thing new or adventurous,
he seemed to have catched the fame spirit with his
fubjets. Under its influence, preparations for a
second expedition were carried on with a rapidity
unusual among the Spaniards, and to an extent
that would be deemed not inconsiderable in the
present age. The fleet consisted of seventeen flIips,
some of which were of good burden. It had on
board fifteen hundred persons, among whom were
many of noble families, who had feived in honour-
able fiations. The greater part of these being te-
fiined to remain in the country, they were furnish-
ed with every thing requisite for conquert or fettle-
ment, with all kinds of European domestic animals,
with such feeds and plants as were most likely to
thrive in the climate of the Weft Indies, with uten-
sis and Instruments of every fort, and with such arti-
ficers as might be mofi useful in an infant colony *

* Herrera. dec. i. lib. ii. c. 5. Life of Columbus, c. 45

BUT

BUT, formidable and well provided as this fleet B o o

was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft their n.
title to the pofleliion of the newly-difcovered coun- ,.
tries upon its operations alone. The example of The right
the Portuguese, as well as the superstition of the of Sain to
age, made it necessary to obtain from the Roman World con-
pontiff a grant of those territories which theyfirmedby
wished to occupy. The Pope, as the vicar and
representative of Jesus Christ, was supposed to have
a right of dominion over all the kingdoms of the
earth. Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for eve-
ry crime that disgraces humanity, filled the papal
throne at that time. As he was born Ferdinand's
subjed, and very solicitous to secure the protection
of that monarch, in order to facilitate the execution
of his ambitious schemes in favour of his own fa-
mily, he instantly complied with his request, By
an at of liberality which cost him nothing, and
that served to establish the jurifdition and preten-
sions of the papal fee, he bestowed on Ferdinand
and Isabella all the countries inhabited by Infidels
which they had discovered, or should discover;
and in virtue of that power which he derived
from Jesus Christ, he veiled in the crown of
Caflile a right to vast regions, to the poffeflion of
which he himself was so far from having any title,
that he was unacquainted with their situation,
and even with their existence. As it was necessary
to prevent this grant from interfering with that for-
merly made to the crown of Portugal, he appoint-
ed that a line, supposed to be drawn from pole to
pole, a hundred leagues to the westward of the
Azores, should serve as the limit between them ;
and, in the plenitude of his power, conferred all
to the east of this imaginary line upon the
Portuguese, and all to the welt of it upon the
Spaniards*. Zeal for propagating the Christian
faith was the consideration employed by Ferdinand

* Herrcra, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 4. Torquemada Mon. Ind.
lib. xviii . c3.

VOL. I. I in

B o o K in soliciting this bull, and is mentioned by Alexan-

der as his chief motive for issuing it. In order to
manifest some concern for this laudable object, fe-
veral friars., under the direcion of Father Boyl, a
Catalonian monk of great reputation, as apoftolical
vicar, were appointed to accompany Columbus,
and to devote themselves to the instruction of the
natives. The Indians whom Columbus had brought
along with him, having received some tincture of
Chriltian knowledge, were baptized with muchfo-
lemnity, the king himself, the prince his son, and
the chief persons of his court, standing as their
godfathers. Those first fruits of the New World
have not been followed by fuch.an increase as
pious men wished, and had reason to expet.

Second FERDINAND and Isabella having thus acquired a
voyage of title, which was then deemed completely va-
Columbs. lid, to extend their discoveries, and to eftablifl

their dominion overfuch a vast portion of the globe,
nothing now retarded the departure of the fleet.
Columbus was extremely impatient to revisit the co-
lony which he had left, and to pursue that career of
glory upon which he had entered. He set fail from
the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth of September,
and touching again at the island of Gomera, he
steered farther towards the south than in his former
voyage. By holding his course, he enjoyed more
iteadily the benefit of the regular winds, which
reign within the tropics, and was carried towards a
l:rge cluster of islands, situated considerably to the
eal of those which he had already discovered. On
the twenty-fixth day after his departure from Go.
Nov. 2. mcra, he made land *. It was one of the Caribbc¢

or Lecward Islands, to which he gave the name of
Defeada, on account of the impatience of his crer
to discover some part of the New World. Aflte

* Ovicdo ap. .Rmuf. iii. 85. B.

x m '~~~~~~h

this he visited successively Dominica, Marigalante, B o O K
Guadalupe, Antigua, St. John de Porto Rico, and I.
several other islands, scattered in his way as he ad--"-'"3
vanced towards the north-west. All these he found 4
to be inhabited by that fierce race of people whom
Guacanahari had painted in such frightful colours.
His descriptions appeared not to have been exagge-
rated. The Spaniards, as often as they landed,
met with such a reception as convinced them of
their martial and daring spirit; and they discover-
ed in their habitations the relics of those horrid
feasts which they had made upon the bodies of
their enemies taken in war.

BUT as Columbus was eager to know the state Arrives at

of the colony which he had planted, and to supply Hifpanila
it with those necessaries of which he supposed it to
be in want, he made no stay in any of those islands,
and proceeded dire&ly to Hispaniola *. When he
arrived off Navidad, the station in which he had
left the thirty-eight men under the command of
Arada, he was astonished that none of them ap-
p-ared, and expeced every moment to fee them
running with transports of joy to welcome their
countrymen. Full of solicitude about their safety,
and foreboding in his mind what had befallen them,
he rowed instantly to land. All the natives from
whom he might have received information had fled.
But the fort which he had built was entirely demo-
lifhed, and the tattered garments, the broken arms
aad utensils scattered about it, left no room to
doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the garri-
Ibn t.

* P. Martyr. dec. p. 15. 1. 8. crrcra, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 7.

Life of Columbus, c. 46, &c. t Hist. deCura de los Pa-
lacios. MS.

I z While

B o o K WhiletheSpaniardswere heddingtearsoverthofe

. fad memorials of their fellow-citizens, a brother of

1493. the cazique Guacanahari arrived, From him Co-

The fate of lumbus received a particular detail of what had
the he happened after his departure fromn the island. The
leftthere. familiar intercourse of the Indians with the Spa-

niards tended gradually to dirinifh the fuperffitious
veneration with which their first appearance had in-
spired that simple people. By their own indifcre-
tion and ill conduct, the Spaniards speedily effaced
those favourable impressions, and soon convinced
the natives, that they had all the wants, andweak-
neffles, and passions of men. As soon as the pow-
erful restraints which the pretence and authority of
Columbus imposed was withdrawn, the garrison
threw off all regard for the officer whom he had in-
vested with command. Regardless of the prudent
inftrutions which he had given them, every man
became independent, and gratified his desires with-
out controul. The gold, the women, the provifi-
ons of the natives, were all the prey of those licen-
tious oppressors. They roamed in small parties
over the island, extending their rapacity and info-
lence to every corner of it. Gentle and timid as
the people were, those unprovoked injuries at length
exhaufled their patience, and rouzed their courage.
The cazique of Cibao, whose territories the Spa-
niards chiefly infested on account of the gold which
they contained, furprized and cut off several of
them, while they Dfraggled in as perse& security as
.if their condut had been altogether inoffensive.
IHe then assembled his fubjets, and surrounding
the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were
killed in defending it, the reft periihed in attempt'
ing to make their escape by crofling an arm of tli(
sea. Guacanahari, whom all their exaaions hat
not alienated from the Spaniards, took arms in thei

behalf

'behalf, and endeavouring to protet them, had B 0 K
received a wound, by which he was still con- 11
fined *. '49.

THGUGH this account was far from removing Hisprudept

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained with condu&a
refpe& to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Columbus
perceived so clearly that this was not a proper junc-
ture for inquiring into his conducE with scrupulous
accuracy,that he rejected the advice ofifeveral of his
officers, who urged him to seize the person of that
prince,and to revenge the death of their countrymen
by attacking his fubjeds. He represented to them the
necessity of securing the friendship of some poten-
tate of the country, in order to facilitate the fettle-
ment which they intended, and the danger of driv-
ing the natives to unite in some desperate attempt
against them, by.fuch an ill-timed and unavailing
exercise of rigour. Inflead of wafting his time in
punishing past wrongs, he took precautions for pre-
venting any future injury, With this view, he made
choice of a situation more healthy and commodi-
ous than that of Navidad, He traced out the plan
of a town in a large plain near a spacious bay, and
obliged every person to put his hand to a work on
which their common safety depended, the houses
and ramparts were soon so far advanced by their
united labour, as to afford them hfelter and fecu-
rity. This rising city, the first that the Europeans
founded in the New world, he named Isabella, in
honour of his patroness the queen of Catile t.

IN carrying on, this neceflary work, Columbus DiCcontent
had not only to sustain all the hardfliips, and to en- low 1"ss

P. Martyr, decad. p. 22, &e.C Henrera, dec. i. lib. ii.
c, 7. 9. Life of Columbus, c. 49, 56.

f Life of Columbus, c. 51. ierrcra, dec. i. lib. ii. c. io.

counter

B o0 K counter all the difficulties, to which infant sola-

nies are exposed when they fettle in an unculti-
1493; vated country, but he had to contend with what

was more insuperable, the laziness, the impatience,
and mutinous disposition of his followers. By the
enervating influence of a hot climate, the natural
inactivity of the Spaniards seemed to increase.
Many of them were gentlemen, unaccustomed to
the fatigue of bodily labour, and all had engaged in
the enterprise with the sanguine hopes excited by
the splendid and exaggerated descriptions of those
who returned with Columbus from his first voyage,
or by his own mistaken idea that the country which
he had discovered was either the Cipango of Marco
Polo, or the Ophir *, from which Solomon im-
ported those precious commodities which suddenly
diffused such extraordinary riches through his king-
dom. But when, instead of that golden harvest
which they had expeEed to reap without toil or
pains, the Spaniards saw that their profpeEt of
wealth was remote as well as uncertain, and that it
could not be attained but by the flow and perfever-
ing efforts of industry, the disappointment of those
chimerical hopes occasioned such dejection of mind
as bordered on despair, and led to general difcon-
tent. In vain did Columbus endeavour to revive
their spirits by pointing out the fertility of the foil,
and exhibiting the specimens of gold daily brought
in from different parts of the island. They had
not patience to wait for the gradual returns which
the former might yield, and the latter they de-
spifed as scanty and inconsiderable. The spirit of
dilhffedion spread, and a conspiracy was formed,
which might have been fatal to Columbus and the
colony. IHappily he discovered it, and seizing the
ringleaders, punished some qs them, sent others
prilbners into Spain, whither he dispatched twelve

P. Martyr. dec. p. 29.

of

of the ships which had served as transports, with p o o K
an earnest request for a reinforcement of men,
and a large supply of provisions *.

MEANWHILE in order to banish that idleness 1

which by allowing his people leisure to brood over Examines
their disappointment, nourished the spirit of difcon- ito tle
tent, he planned several expeditions into the interior country.
part of the country. He sent a detachment, under
the command of Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and
enterprising officer, to visit the diftricd of Cibao,
which was said to yield the greatest quantity of
gold, and followed him in person with the main
body of his troops. In this expedition, he displayed March i;.
all the pomp of military magnificence that he
could exhibit, in order to strike the imagination of
the natives. He marched with colours flying, with
martial music, and with a small body of cavalry
that paraded sometimes in the front and fornetimes
in the rear, As those were the first horses that ap-
peared in the New world, they were objects of
terror no less than admiration to the Indians, who
having no tame animals themselves, were unac-
quainted with that vast accession of power, which
man hath acquired by fubjeting them to his do-
minion. They imagined them to be rational crea-
tures, that formed but one animal with their riders.
They were astonished at their speed, and confidered
their impetuosity and strength as irresistible. But
while Columbus endeavoured to inspire the natives
with a dread of his power, he did not neglect the
arts of gaining their love and confidence. He ad-
hered scrupulously to the principles of integrity
and justice in all his tranfadtions with them, and
treated them, on every occasion, not only with hu.

* fcrrcra, dec. 1. lib, ii. c. 0, 1 .

inanity,

B O K manity, but with indulgence. The diftri& of Ci-

. bao answered the description given of it by the na-
u,-"-- tives. It was mountainous and uncultivated, but

in every river and brook gold was gathered either in
dust or in grains, some of which were of confider-
able size. The Indians had never openedany mines
in search of gold. To penetrate into the bowels of
the earth, and to refine the rude ore, were operati-
ons too complicated for their talents and industry,
and they had no such high value for gold as to put
their ingenuity and invention upon the stretch in
order tb obtain it *. The small quantity of that
precious metal which they possesed, was either
picked up in the beds of the rivers, or waffed from
the mountains by the heavy rains which fall within
the tropics. But, from those indications, the Spa-
niards could no longer doubt that the contrary con-
tained rich treasures in its bowels, of which they
hoped soon to be masters t. In order to secure the
command of this valuable province, Columbus
ere&ed a finall fort to which he gave the name of
St. Thomas, by way of ridicule upon some of his
incredulous followers, who would not believe that
the country produced gold, until they saw it with
their own eyes, and touched it with their hands ,.

'lhe distress I'{HE account of those promising appearances
nd difaf- of wealth in the country of Cibao came very
the colony seasonably to comfort the desponding colony,
i"c"caic. which was affe&ed with distresses of various kinds.

The flock of provisions which had been brought
from Europe was mostly consumed; what re-
mained was so much corrupted by the heat and
moilture of the climate, as to be alnoft unfit

* Oviedo, lib. ii. p. 90. A. + P. Martyr. dec. p. 32.
H Icrrera, dec. i. lib, ii. . 1z. Lifc of Columbus, c. 5z.

for

for use; the natives cultivated so small a portion B O K.
of ground, and with so little skill, that it hardly v
yielded what was sufficient for their own fubfifence; 1494.
the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto neither time
nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap any confi-
derable fruits of their own industry. On all these
accounts, they became afraid of perishing with
hunger, and were reduced to live already at lhort
allowance. At the fame time, the diseases predo-
minant in the torrid zone, and which rage chiefly
in those uncultivated countries, where the hand of
industry has not opened the woods, drained the
marlhes, and confined the rivers within a certain
channel, began to spread among them. Alarmed
at their violence and unusual symptoms, they ex-
claimed againfl Columbus and his companions in
the former voyage, who, by their splendid but
deceitful descriptions of Hilpaniola, had allured
them to quit their native country for a barbarous
uncultivated land, where they must either be cut off
by famine, or die of unknown distempers. Seve-
ral of the officers and persons of note, initead of
checking, joined in those seditious complaints. Fa-
ther-Boyl, the apoftolical vicar, was one of the
most turbulent and outrageous. It required all the
authority and address of Columbus to re-establish
subordination and tranquillity in the colony.
Threats and promises were alternately employed for
this purpose; but nothing contributed more to sooth
the malcontents than the profpe& of finding, in
the mines of Cibao, such a rich store of treasures as
would be a recompcnce for all their sufferings, and
efface the memoty of former disappointments.

WHEN, by his unwearied endeavours, concord Columbus

and order were so far restored, that he could venture aPem
to leave the island, Columbus resolved to pursue his veries.
difcpveries, that he might be ableto ascertain whe-

ther

B O OK 'ther those new countries with which he had opened

I.' a communication, were conneEted with any region

of the earth already known, or whether they were
to be confidered as a separate portion of the globe,
hitherto unvisited. He appointed his brother Dor
Diego, with the assistance ofa council of officers,
to govern the island in his absence; and gave the
command of a body of soldiers to:Don Pedro Mar-
garita, with which he was to visit the different
parts of the island, and endeavour to establish the
authority of the Spaniards among the inhabitants.
Having left them very particular instructions with
refpeft to their conduct, he weighed anchor on the
twenty-fourth of April, with oriel ship and two
finall barks under his command. During atedious
voyage of full five months, he had a trial of almost
all the numerous hardships to which persons of his
profession are exposed, without making any disco-
very of importance, except the ifiand of Jamaica.
As he ranged along the southern coast of Cuba*,
he was entangled in a labyrinth formed by an in-
credible number of finall islands, to which he gave
the name of the Queen's Garden. In this unknown
course, among rocks and shelves, he was retarded
by contrary winds, assaulted by furious storms,
and alarmed with the terrible thunder and light-
ning which is often almost incessant between the tro-
pics. At length his provisions fell short; his crew,
exhausted with fatigue as well as hunger, murmur-
ed and threatened, and were ready to proceed to
the most desperate extremities against him. Beset
with danger in such various forms, he was obliged
to keep continual watch, to observe every occur-
rence with his own eyes, to issue every order, and
to superintend the execution of it. On no occasion,
was the extent of his ikill and experience as a na-
vigator so much tried. To thcfc the squadron

owed
* Sec NOTE XIX.

owed its safety. But this unremitted fatigue of B o0 o

11.

body and intense application of mind, overpower- I
ing his constitution, thouigh naturally vigorous and s4.
robuff, brought on a feverish disorder, which ter-
minated in a lethargy, that deprived him of sense
and memory, and had almost proved fatal to his
life *.

BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the fiudden Sept. 27;

emotion of joy which he felt upon meetingwith his Ounhi ^fd
brother Bartholomew at Isabella, occasioned such a his birol-olr
flow of spirits as contributed greatly to his recove- s.,'vlra-
ry. It was now thirteen years since the two bro- beia.
thers, whom similarity of talents united in close
friendship, had separated from each other, and
during that long period there had been no inter-
course between them. Bartholomew, after finifil-
ing his negociation in the court of England, had
set out for Spain by the way of France. At Paris
he received an account of the extraordinary disco-
verieswhich his brother had made in his first voy-
age, and that he was then preparing to embark on
a second expedition, Though this naturally in-
duced him to pursue his journeywith the utmost
difpatch,Columbus had failed forHifpaniola before
he reached Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella received
him with the refpe& due to the brother of a man
whose merit and services rendered him so confpicu-
ous; and as they knew what consolation his pre-
fence would afford to Columbus, they persuaded
him to take the command of three ships, which
they had appointed to carryprovifions to the colo-
ny at Isabella t.

* Life of Columbus, c. 54, &c. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c.
13, 14. P. Martyr. dec. p. 34, &c.
t Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 15.

IJE

B 0o R HE could not have arrived at any jun&ure when

Columbus flood more in need of a friend capable of

1494- assisting him with his counsels, or of dividing with

taike ar him the cares and burden of government. For
againfl the although the provisions now brought from Europe,
Spaniads. afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards from

the calamities of famine, the supply was not in
such a quantity as to support them long, and the
island did not hitherto yield what was sufficient for
their sustenance. They were threatened with ano-
ther danger, still more formidable than the return
of scarcity, and which demanded more immediate
attention. No sooner did Columbus leave the
island on his voyage of discovery, than the fol-
diers under Margarita, as if they had been set free
from discipline and Subordination, scorned all re-
itraint. Initead of conforming to the prudent in-
f{ruCtions ofColumbus, they dispersed in straggling
parties over the island, lived at discretion upon the
natives, wafted their provisions, seized their wo-
men, and treated that inoffensive race of men with
all the insolence of military oppression *,

As long as the Indians had any prospect that

their sufferings might come to a period by the vo-
luntary departure of the invaders, they submitted
in silence, and disSembled their sorrow; but they
now perceived that the yoke would be as permanent
as it was intolerable. The Spaniards had built a
town, and surrounded it with ramparts. They had
ereted forts in differentplaces. They had inclosed
and sown severals fields. It was apparent that they
came not to visit the country, but to fettle in it.
Though the number of those strangers was not con-
fiderable, the slate of cultivation among this rude

*'. Martyr, dec. r. 47.

people

people was so imperfec, and in such exa&t propor- B 0 O K
tion to their own consumption, that it was with ,..
difficulty they could afford fubfiflence to their new 2494-
guefls. Their own mode of life was so indolent:
and inacive, the warmth of the climate so ener-
vating, the constitution of their bodies naturally so
feeble, and so unaccustomed to the laborious exerti-
ons of industry, that they were satisfied with a pro-
portion of food amazingly. small. A handful of
maize, or a little of the insipid bread made of the
caffada-root, was sufficient to support men, whole
strength and spirits were not exhausted by any vi-
gorous efforts either of body or mind. The Spani-
ards,though the mot abstemious of all the European
nations, appeared to them excessively voracious. One
Spaniard consumed as much as several Indians. This
keenness of appetite surprised them so much, and
seemed to them to be so insatiable, that they sup-
posed the Spaniards had left their own country,
because it did not produce as much as was requisite
to gratify their immoderate desire of food, and had
come among them in quest of nourishment *. Self-
preservation prompted them to wish for the depar-
ture of guests who wafted so far their slender flock
of provisions. The injuries which they suffered,
added to their impatience for this event. They
had long expeced that the Spaniards would retire
of their own accord. They now perceived that,
in order to avert the deifruEtion with which they
were threatened, either by the flow confumptidn of
famine, or by the violence of their oppreflors, it
was necessary to assume courage to attack those
formidable invaders with united force, and drive
them from the settlements of which they had vio-
lently taken poffeifion.

Hcrrera dec. . lib. ii. c. 17.

SUCH

Ba o o K SucHwerethethefentimentswhichuniverfallypre-
j. vailed among thelndians,wben Columbus returned
Z494. to Isabella. Inflamed by the unprovoked outrages of
Wtarwieh the Spaniards, with a degree of rage of which their

gentle natures,formed to susser and submit, seemed
hardly susceptible, they waited only for a signal
from their leaders to fall upon the colony, Some
of the caziques had already furprized and cut off
several of the stragglers. The dread of this impend-
ing danger united the Spaniards, and re-establish-
ed the authority of Columbus, as they saw no prof-
pea of safety but in committing themselves to his
prudent guidance. It was now necessary to have re-
course to arms, the employing of which againit the
Indians, Columbus had hitherto avoided with the
greatest solicitude. Unequal as the confli& may
seem, between the naked inhabitants of the New
World armed with clubs,fticks hardened in the fire,
wooden swords, and arrows pointed with bones or
flints; and troops accustomed to the discipline, and
provided with the instruments of deftrution known
in the European art of war, the situation of the
Spaniards was far from being exempt from danger.
The vast superiority of the natives in number, com-
penfated many defets. An handful of men was
about to encounter a whole nation. One adverse
event, or even any unforeseen delay in determining
the fate of the war, might prove fatal to the Spa-
niards. Conscious that the success depended on the
vigour and rapidity of his operations, Columbus
inItantly assembled his forces. They were reduced
to a very small number. Diseases, engendered by
the warmth and humidity of the country, had rag-
ed among them with much violence; experience
had not yet taught them the art either of curing
these, or the precautions requisite for guarding
against them ; two-thirds of the original adven-
turers wero dead, and many of those who fur-

vived

vived were incapable of service*. The bodyB o o Xc
which took the field consisted only of two hundred n.
foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; and how ^"
strange soever it may seem to mentidn the last as Ma4L952
composing part of a military force, they were not
perhaps the least formidable and deftruttive of the
whole, when employed against naked and timid
Indians. All the caziques of the island, Guacana-
hari excepted, who retained an inviolable attach-
ment to the Spaniards, were in arms to oppose
Columbus, with forces amounting, if we may be-
lieve the Spanish historians, to an hundred thoutand
men. Inflead of attempting to draw the Spaniards
into the fastnesses of the woods and mountains,
they were so imprudent as to take their station in
the Vega Real, the most open plain in the country.
Columbus did not allow them time to perceive their
error, or alter their position. He attacked them
during the night, when undisciplined troops are
least capable of ading with union and concert, and
obtained an easy and bloodless vi&ory. The con-
fternation with which the Indians were filled by the
noise and havoc made by the fire-arms, by the im-
petuous force of the cavalry, and the fierce onset of
the dogs was so great, that they threw down their
weapons, and fled without attempting resistance.
Many were slain ; more were taken prisoners, and
reduced to servitude t; and so thoroughly were
the reft intimidated, that from that moment they
abandoned themselves to despair, relinquifluing all
thoughts of contending with aggreflbrs whom
they deemed invincible.

COLUMBUS employed several months in march- A tx iln-

ing through the island,' and in fubjeding it to the pord uilpo'
Spaniflh government without meeting with any op-

l* ife of Columbus, c. 61. See NOTE XX.

position.

X o O K position. He imposed a tribute upon all the inha.

nI bitants above the age of fourteen. Each person
4--.. who lived in those diftrics where gold was found,

was obliged to pay quarterly as much gold dust as
filled a hawk's bell; from those in other parts of
the country, twenty-five pounds of cotton were
demanded. This was the sirss regular taxation of
the Indians, and served as a precedent for exat-ions
Rill more intolerable. Such an heavy imposition
was extremely contrary to those maxims which Co-
lumbus had hitherto inculcated with refpe& to the
mode of treating them. But intrigues were car-
rying on in the court of Spain at this juncture, in
order to undermine his power and discredit his ope-
rations, which constrained him to depart from his
own system of administration. Several unfavou-
rable accounts of his condut, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted
to Spain. Margarita and Father Boyl were now at
court; and in order to juftifytheir own conduet, or
to gratify their resentment, watched with malevo-
lent attention for every opportunity of spreading
insinuations to his detriment. Many of the courti-
ers viewed his growing reputation and power with
envious eyes. Fonseca, the archdeacon of Seville,
who was intruftedwith the chief dire&ion of Indian
affairs, had conceived fiich an unfavourable opinion
of Columbus, for foine reason which the contem-
porary wrirers have not mentioned, that he listened
with partiality to every invedtive against him. It
was not easy for an unfriended firanger, unpradlifld
in courtly arts, to counteraa the machinations of f
many enemies. Columbus saw that there was but
one method of supporting his own credit, and of
silencing all his adversaries. He mull produce
iuch a quantity of gold, as would not only jultify

1whal

what he had reported with refpet: to the richness of f o O
the country, but encourage Ferdinand and Isabella i
to persevere in prosecuting his plans. The neceffi- 1495.
ty of obtaining it, forced him not only to impose
this heavy tax upon the Indians, but to exat pay-
ment of it with extreme rigour; and may be plead-
ed in excuse for his deviating on this occasion from
the mildness and humanity with which he uniform-
ly treated that unhappy people *.

THE labour, attention, and forefigbt which the Fatal er-

Indians were obliged to employ in procuring the fc6as of that
tribute demanded of them, appeared the moit into-
lerable of all evils, to men accustomed to pass their
days in a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable offuch a regular and persevering
exertion of industry, and felt it such a grievous re-
firaintupon their liberty that they had recourse to
an expedient for obtaining deliverance from this
yoke which delnonftrates the excess of their impati-
ence and despair. They formed a fchemc offtarving
those oppressors whom they durst not attempt to ex-
pel; and from the opinion which they entertained
with respect to the voracious appetite of the Spani-
ards, they concluded the execution of it to be ve-
ry practicable. With this view, they suspended all
the operations of agricultute; they sowed no maize,
they pulled up the roots of the manioc which were
planted,and retiring to the most inaccessible parts of
the mountains, left the uncultivated plains to their
enemies. This desperate resolution produced some
part of the effeEts which they expected. The Spa-
niards were reduced to extreme want; but they
received such seasonable supplies ofprovifions from
Europe, and found so many resources in their own
ingenuity and industry, that they suffered no great
loss of men. The wretched Indians were the vic-

* Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.
VOL. I. K time

BOOK tirns of their own ill-concerted policy. A vast

--1 multitude shut up among barren mountains, with-
1495. out any food but the spontaneous productions of

the earth, soon felt the utmost difirefres of famine.
This brought on contagious diseases; and, in the
course of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the island perished, after expe-
riencing misery in all its various forms *.

Intrigues BUT while Columbus was thus successfully efta-
lagainf^o- blifhing the foundations of the Spanilh grandeur
thecourt of il the New World, his enemies laboured with un-
Spain. wearied assiduity to deprive him of the glory and

rewards to which his services and sufferings intitled
him. The hardships unavoidable in anew fettle-
ment, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy
climate, the ditiaifers attending a voyage in un-
known seas, were all represented as the fruits of his
restless and inconsiderate ambition. His prudent
attention to preserve discipline and subordination
Was denominated excess of rigour; the punish-
ments which he infliced upon the mutinous and
disorderly were imputed to cruelty. These accufa-
tions gained such credit in a jealous court, that a
cominilionerwas appointed to repair toHifpaniola,
and to inspeCt into the conduct of Columbus. By
the recommendation of his enemies, Aguado, a
groom of the bed-chamber, was the person to
whom this important trust was committed. But in
this choice they seem to have been more influenced
by the obsequious attachment of the man to thei
interest, than by his capacity for the station. Puff-
ed up with such sudden elevation, Aguado display-
ed, in the cxercife of this. ofice, all the frivolous

Hecrrera, dec. i. lib. xi. c. 18, Life of Columbus, c. 6 .

Oviedo. lib. iii. p. 93. D. Bcnzon -Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. i
c. 9. P. Martyr, dec. p. 4.8.

Fclr-

felf-importance, and aced with all the digufting B 0 K
insolence, wlich are natural to little minds, when 2Z
raised to unexpeited dignity, or employed in func- 49s5.
tions to which they are not equal; By lifcening
with eagerness to every accusation against Colum-
bus, and encouraging not only the malcontent
Spaniards, but even the Indians, to produce their
grievances, real or imaginary, lie fomented the
spirit of disention in the iffand, without eflablilh-
ing any regulations of public utility, or that tend-
ed to redress the many wrongs, with the odium
of which he wished to load the admiral's admini-
ftration. As Columbus felt sensibly how humiliat-
ing his situation must be, if he should remain in
the country while such a partial inspector oblerved
his motions, and controuled his jurifldicion, he
took the resolution of returning to Spain, in orderto
lay a full account of all his tranfacrions, particularly
with refpe&t to the points in dispute between him
and his adversaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella,
from whose uftice and discernment he expected an
equal and a favourable decision. He committed the
administration of affairs, during his absence, to Doi 1496.
Bartholomew, his brother, with the title of Ade-
lantado, or Lieutenant--Governor. By a choice
less fortunate, and which proved the source of ma-
ny calamities to the colony, lie appointed Francis
Roldan chief juiice, with very extensive powers *,

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course Returns to

dliflrent fiom that which he had taken in his for- spill.
mner voyage. He fleered almost due cafc firom I-Iil-
paniola, in the parallel of twenty-two degrees of
latitude; as 'experience had not yet discovered the
more certain and expeditious methodl of' cretchinE;
to the north, in order to fall in with the ibuth-welt
winds. y this ill advised choice, which, in the in-

Irlncrm ;, dec. i. lib. ii. c. !S3 . Lib . il . . .

K ' islnicy

BOOK fancy of navigation between the New and Old

m Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the admiral as a
1496. defe& in naval skill, he was exposed to infinite fa-

tigue and danger, in a perpetual struggle with the
trade-winds, which blow without variation from
the east between the tropics. Notwithstanding the
almost insuperable difficulties of such a naviga-
tion, he persisted in his course with his usual pati-
ence and firmness, but made so little way, that he
was three monthswithout feeing land. At length,
his provisions began to fail, the crew was reduced
to the scanty allowance of fix ounces of bread a-day
for each person. The admiral fared no better than
the meanest sailor. But, even in this extreme dif-
trefs, he retained the humanity which distinguishes
his chara&er, and refused to comply with the earnest
solicitations of his crew, some of whom proposed
to feed upon the Indian prisoners whom they were
carrying over, and others insisted to throw them
over-board, in order to lessen the consumption of
their finall stock. He represented, that they were
human beings, reduced by a common calamity to
the fame condition with themselves, and intitled to
share an equal fate. His authority and remonftran-
ces dissipated those wild ideas suggested by despair.
Nor had they time to recur, as he came blon within
fight of the coast of Spain, and all their fears and
fitfferings ended *.

;is recep. COLUMBUS appeared at court with the modest
tion there. but determined confidence of a man conscious not

only of integrity, but of having performed great
services. Ferdinand and Isabella, ashamed of their
own facility in lending too favourable an ear to fri-
volous or ill-founded accufations,received him witd

Hcrrera, dec, i. lib. iii. c. i. Life of Columbus, c. 64.

fucl

such distinguished marks of refpeE, as covered his B o oK
enemies with ihame. Their censures and calum- In
nies were no more heardof at that junture. The ,
gold, the pearls, the cotton, and other commodi- 9
ties of value which Columbus produced, feemned
fully to refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpet to the poverty of the country. By re-
ducing the Indians to obedience, and imposing a
regular tax upon them, he had secured to Spain a
large accession of new fubjeds, and the establish-
ment of a revenue that promised to be considerable.
By the mines which he had found out and examin-
ed, a source of wealth fill more copious was open-
ed. Great and unexpe&ed as those advantages
were, Columbus represented them only as preludes
to future acquisitions, and as the earnef of more im.
portant discoveries, which he still meditated, and
to which those he had already made would conduct
him with ease and certainty *.

THE attentive consideration of all those circum- A plan

stances made such impreflion, not onlyuponIfabella, formed for
who was flattered with the idea of being the patro- regular
ness of all Columbus's enterprises, but even upon efiablifl-
Ferdinand, who having originally expressed his dif- monyf a
approbation of his schemes, was still more apt to
doubt of their success, that they resolved to supply
the colony inHifpaniolawith every thing that could
render it a permanent eftabliflment, and to furnifl
Columbus with such a fleet, that he might proceed
to search for those new countries, ofwhofeexiftence
he seemed to be confident. The measures most
proper for accomplifling both these designs were
concerted with Columbus. Discovery had been
the sole objec of the first voyage to the New
World; and though, in the second, settlement had

* Life of Columbus, c. 6;. Herrera, dec. i, lib. iii. c. I.

been

BOO K been proposed, the precautions taken for that pur*

In. nose had either been insufficient, or were rendered

ineffetual by the mutinous spirit of the Spaniards;
and the unforeseen calamities arising from various
causes. Now a plan was to be formed of a regular
colony, that might serve as a model in all future
eftabliffments. Every particular was confidered
with attention, and arranged with a scrupulous ac-
curacy. The precise number of adventurers who
hould be permitted to embark was fixed. They
wvere to be of different ranks and profeifions; and
the proportion of each was established, according
to their usefulness and the wants of the colony. A
suitable number of women was to be chosen to ac-
company these new settlers. As it was the first
obje&t to raise provisions in a country where scarcity
of food had been the occasion of so much distress,
a considerable body of hufbaridmen was to be car-
ried over. As the Spaniards had then no concep-
tion of deriving any benefit from those productions
of the New World which have finye yielded such
large returns of wealtl to Europe, but had formed
magnificent ideas, and entertained fangsine hopes
with refpea to the riches contained in'the mines
which had been discovered, a band of workmen,
skilled in the various arts enployed in digging and
refining the precious metals, was provided. All
thefe'emigrants were to receive pay and fubfiftenicc
for some years; at the public expence *
Adf(a in ' TLH-US far the regulations were prudent and well

adapted to the end in view. But as it was foreseen
that few would engage voluntarily to fettle in a
country, whose noxious climate had been fatal to so
many of their countrymen, Columbus proposed to
vranfport to HIifpianiola such malefat:ors as had becn

Icrrera dec. i. lib. iii. c, z.

convi&ted

convided of crimes, which, though capital, were B o K,
of a less atrocious nature; and that for thefuture a
certain proportion of the offenders usually sent to
the gallies, ihould be condemned to labour in the
mines which were to be opened. This advice,
given without due refletion, was inconsiderately
adopted. The prisons of Spain were drained, in
order to collec members for the intended colony;
and the judges were inflruted to recruit it by their
future sentences. It is not, however, with such
materials, that the foundations of a society, deftin-
ed to be permanent, flould be laid. Industry, bo-
briety, patience, and mutual confidence are indif-
penfably requisite in an infant settlement, where
purity of morals muff contribute more towards
eftabliflling order than the operation or authority of
laws. But when such a mixture of what is corrupt
is admitted into the original confiitution of the po-
litical body, the vices of those unsound and incu-
rable members will probably insec the whole, and
must certainly be producive of violent and unhap-
py effets. This the Spaniards fatally experienc-
ed; and the other European nations having fuccef-
fively imitated their pracice in this particular, per-
nicious consequences have followed in their fettle-
ments, which can be imputed to no other cause%.

THI-ouGH Columbus obtained, with great facili- Exc;ut.

ty and difljatch, the royal approbation of every lowy
measure and regulation thathe propoli'd, his endea-
vours to carry them into execution were Ib long re -
tarded, as must have tired out the patience ol any
man, less accustomed to encounter difficulties and to,
urinount them. Thole delays were occasioncd
partly by that tcdious formality an.d fi)irit of pro-
craftination, with which the Spaniards condu&t

Hcrrcra, dec. i. liq. iii. t. 2. Touran fIIil. Gcncr. .J
I'Ameriltlc, i. p. 51.

bufinc[ :

B o o Wr business; and partly by the exhausted state of the

·IL treasury, which was drained by the expence of ce.
1496, lebrating the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's

only son with Margaret of Austria, and that of
Joanna, their second daughter, with Philip arch-
duke of Austria *: but mnuf be chiefly imputed
to the malicious artsof Columbus'senempies. Afto.
niihed at the reception which he met with upon his
return, and overawed by his presence, they gave
way, for some time, to a tide of favour too strong
for them to oppose. Their enmity, however, was
too inveterate to remain long inactive. They re-
fumed their operations, and by the affiiance of
Fonseca, the minister for Indian affairs, who was
now promoted to the bishopric of Badajos, they
threw in so many obstacles to protraa the preparati-
ons for Columbus's expedition, that a year elapsed
before he t could procure two ships to carry over a
part of the supplies destined for the colony, and
almost two years were spent before the imall fqua-
dronwas equipped of which he himself was to take
the command 4,

'498. THIS squadron confilled of fix ships only, of no

Third voy.
gie of Co- great burden, and but indifferently provided for a
lumbus. long or dangerous navigation. The voyage which

he now meditated was in a course different from
any he had undertaken. As he was fully perfuad-
ed that the fertile regions of India lay to the
south-west of those countries which he had dif-
covered, he propoled, as the most certain method
of finding out these, to stand direcly south from
the Canary or Cape de Verd Islands, until he
came under the equino&inal line, and then to
stretch to the weft before the favourable wind
for such a course, which blows invariably be-
May ;0. tweel the tropics, With this idea he set fail, and

P. Martyr. epilt. 161. t Life of Columbus, c. 65.
H FIerrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9.

toulchedl

touched first at the Canary, and then at the Cape B o o it
de Verd islands. From the former he dispatched `I
three of his ships with a supply of provisions for '9
the colony in Hispaniola: with the other three, he july 4
continued his voyage towards the south. No re-
markable occurrence happened until they arrived
within five degrees of the line. There they were July g.
becalmed, and at the fame time the heat waxed so
exceflive, that many of their wine calks burst, the
liquor in others foured, and their provisions cor-
rupted *. The Spaniards, who had never ventur-
ed so far to the south, were afraid that the ships
would take fire, and began to apprehend the reality
of what the ancients had taught concerning the de-
itrudive qualities of that torrid region of the globe.
They were relieved, in some measure, from their
fears by a seasonable fall of rain. This, however,
though so heavy and unintermitting that the men
could hardly keep the deck, did not greatly miti-
gate the intenseness of the heat. The admiral,
who with his usual vigilance had direEed every
operation in person, from the beginning of the voy-
age, was so much exhausted by fatigue and want of
sleep, that it brought on a violent fit of the gout,
accompanied with a fever. All these circumflances
constrained him to yield to the importunities of his
crew, and to altar his course to the north weit, in
order to reach some of the Carribee islands, where
he might refit, and be supplied with provisions. D;covers

ON the first of August, the man flationed in the th cOnti

nent of

round top surprised them with the joyful cry of Americ4.
land. They flood towards it, and discovered a
considerable island, which the admiral called Tri-
nidad, a name it still retains. It lies on the coast

P* . Martyr, dec. p. 70.

of

B o o K of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,

n. though a river only of the third or fourth magnitude

in the New world, far furpafes any of the itreams
u49'. that water our hemisphere. It rolls towards the

ocean such a vast body of water, and rufles into it
with such impetuous force, that when it meets the
tide, which on that coast rifes to an uncommon
height, their collision occasions a swell and agita-
tion of the waves no less surprising than formidable.
In this conflid, the irrefiflible torrent of the river
so far prevails, that it freflens the ocean many
leagues with its flood *. Columbus, before he could
perceive the danger, was entangled among those
adverfo currents and tempefluous waves, and it was
wvith the utmotf difficulty that he escaped through a
narrow strait, which appeared so tremendous, that
he called it La Boca del Drago. As soon as the
consternation which this occasioned permitted him
to refleE upon the nature of an appearance so ex-
traordinary, he difeerned in it a source of comfort
and hope. iHe justly concluded, that such a vast
body of wvater as this river contained, could not be
supplied by any island, but muff flow through a
country of immense extent, and of consequence,
that lie was now arrived at that continent which it
had long been the obje& of his wifles to discover.
Full of this idea, he flood to the weft along the
coalt of those provinces which are now known by
the names of Paria and Cumana. He landed in fe-
vcral places, and had some intercourse with the
people, who resembled those of Hispaniola in their

)ippcarance and manner of life. They wore, as
t)rnaments, finall plates of gold, and pearls of con-
i(3herablc value, which they willingly exchanged
fIr lEuropean toys. They icemed to possess a bet-

' Gumnillia lift. dec 'Oenoqlie, tom. i. p. 14.

tcr

ter underfianding, and greater courage, than the B o o K
inhabitants of the islands. The country produced i.
four-footed animals of several kinds, as well as a
great variety of fowls and fruits *. The admiral 9 '
was so much delighted with its beauty and fertility,
that with the warm enthusiasm of a discover-
er, he imagined it to be the paradise described in
Scripture, which the Almighty chose for the refi-
dence of man, while he retained innocence that
rendered him worthy of such a habitation [I. Thus
Columbus had the glory not only of discovering to
mankind the existence of a New World, but made
confi .rable progress towards a perfect knowledge
of it; and was the first man who conducted the
Spaniards to that vast continent which has been the
chief feat of their empire, and the source of their
treasures in this quarter of the globe. The flat-
tered condition of his ships, fearcity of provisions,
his own infirmities, together with the impatience of
his crew, prevented him from pursuing his disco-
vcrics any farther, and made it necessary to bear
away for Hispaniola. In his way thither he disco-
vered the islands of Cubagua and Margarita, which
afterwards became remarkable for their pearl-fifl-
ery. When he arrived at I-Iifpaniola, he was wafted Aug. SC.
to an extreme degree with fatigue and sickness; but
found the affairs of the colony in such a situation,
as afforded him no profped of enjoving that rcpol:
of which he flood so much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that coun- State (,c

try during his absence. His brother, the Adclan- Hill,,n',l,,
tado. in coniequence of an advice which the adnii- val th!r'.
ral gave before his departure, had removed the
colony from Iiabella to a more commodious flation,
ou the opposite fide of the island, and laid the foi)l-

* H rrcra, dec. i. lib, iii. c. 9, io, 1l. I.ire of Cou-lim-
bus, c. 66---73.

1j Herrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. z. Coincra c, qj. $ik
NOTi, XXI.

ial ni' i:

B O K dation of St. Domingo *, which was long the most

In. considerable European town in the New world,
sJ and the feat of the supreme courts in the Spanish do-
49 ' minions there. As loon as the Spaniards were efta-

blifhed in this new settlement, the adelantado, that
they might neither languiih in inativity, nor have
leisure to form new cabals, marched into those parts
of the island which his brother had not yet visited
or reduced to obedience. As the people were un-
able to resist, they submitted every where to the
tribute which he imposed. But they soon found
the burden to be so intolerable, that, overawed as
they were by the superior power of their oppressors,
they took arms against them. Those infurre&ions,
however, were not formidable. A confli& with
timid and naked Indians was neither dangerous
nor of doubtful issue.

Mutiny of BUT while the adelantado was employed againfl
Loldan. them in the field, a mutiny, of an aspet far more

alarming, broke out among the Spaniards. The
ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom Co-
lumbus had placed in a station which required him
to be the guardian of order and tranquility in the
colony. A turbulent and inconsiderate ambition
precipitated him into this desperate measure, so
unbecoming his rank. The arguments which he
employed to seduce his countrymen were frivolous
and ill-founded. He accused Columbus and his
two brothers of arrogance and severity; he pre-
tended that they aimed at eflablifhing an indepen-
dentt dominion in the country ; he taxed them with
.:n intention of cutting off part of the Spaniards
liy hanger and fatigue, that they might more ca-
il-y rdiicc the remainder to fubijeion ; he reprc-
si'. tt it as unworthy of Caltilians, to remain the

' i'. Martyr. dt:c. p. 56.

taln.

tame and passive slaves of three Genoese adventu- B o o K
rers. As men have always a propensity to impute I
the hardlhips of which they feel the pressure, to
the mifcondud of their rulers; as every nation
views with a jealous eye the power and exaltation
of foreigners, Roldan's insinuations made a deep
impression on his countrymen. His character and
rank added weight to them. A considerable num-
ber of the Spaniards made choice of him as their
leader, and taking arms against the adelantado and
his brother, seized the king's magazine of provifi-
ons, and endeavoured to surprise the fort at St.
Domingo. This was preserved by the vigilance
and courage of Don Diego Columbus. The mu-
tineers were obliged to retire to the province of
Xaragua, where they continued not onlyto disclaim
the adelantado's authority themselves but excited
the Indians to throw off the yoke *.

SUCH was the diftraded state of the colony

when Columbus landed at St. Domingo. He was
astonished to find that the three flips which he had
dispatched from the Canaries were not yet arrived.
By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, and the violence
of currents, they had been carried a hundred and
sixty miles to the welt of St. Domingo, and forced
to take helter in a harbour of the province of Xara-
gua, where Roldan and his fcditious followers were
cantoned. Roldan carefully concealed from the
commanders his infurre&tion against the adelanta-
do, and employing his utmost addrcfs to gain their
confidence, persuaded them to set on flore a con-
fiderable part of the new settlers whom they brought
over, that they might proceed by land to St. Do-
mingo. It required but few arguments to prevail

Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. .---. Life of Columbus, c.
7+---77. Gomara, c. 25. P. Martyr, p. 78.

with

B O K rwith those men to espouse his cause. They were

1. the refuse of the jails of Spain, to whom idleness,
498 licentiousness, and deeds of violence were familiar;
1498.

and they returned eagerly to a course of life nearly
resembling that to which they had been accuftoned.
The commanders of the ships perceiving, when it
was too late, their imprudence in disembarking so
many of their men, fRood away for St. Domingo,
and got safe into the port a few days after the ad-
miral; but their stock of provisions was so wafted
during a voyage of such long continuance, that
they brought little relief to the colony*.

Composed BY this juncion with a band of luch bold and
bythe pru- desperate associates, Roldan became extremely for-
dent con- r
duaofo- midable, and no less extravagant in his demands.
lumbus. Columbul, though filled with resentment at his in-

gratitude, and highly exasperated by the insolence
of his followers, made no hafre to take the field.
He trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames
of a civil war, in which, whatever party prevailed,
the power and strength of both muff be so much
wafted, as might encourage the common enemy to
unite and complete their deftrudiori. At the fame
time he observed, that the prejudices and paflions
which incited the rebels to take arms, had so far
inseted those who still adhered to him, that many
of them were adverse, and all cold to the service.
From such sentiments, with refped to the public
interest, as well as from the view of his own situ-
ation, he chose to negociatc rather than to fight.
By a fcaolnable proclamation, offering free pardon
to such as should merit it by returning to their duty,
he made imnpreffion upon tome of the malcontents.

* IIcrrera, dcc. i. lib. iii . c. 2. Lifu of Columbus, c.
78. 79.

By

By engaging to grant such as should desire it, the B 0 0 K
liberty of returning to Spain, he allured all those ...-.
unfortunate adventurers, who, from sickness and 1492.
disappointment, were ditfufted witli the country.
By promising to re-establish Roldan in his former
office, he soothed his pride ; and by complying
with most of his demands in behalf of his follow-
ers, he satisfied their avarice. Thus, gradually and
without bloodshed, but after many tedious negoci-
ations, he difbolved this dangerous combination
which threatened the colony with ruin; and re-
stored the appearance of order, regular govern-
ment and tranquility *.

IN consequence of this agreement with the mu- A nlew

0

,, -, . ,modeoffctr

tineers, lands were allotted them in difltrent parts tementJ f-
of the iiland, and the Indians fcttled in each district tabiiiicd.
were appointed to cultivate a certain portion of
ground for the use of those new masters. The per- 1499.
formance of this work was substituted in place of
the tribute formerly imposed ; and how necefiary
soever such a regulation might be in a sickly and fee-
ble colony, it introduced among the Spaniards the
Rcpartimientos, or distributions of Indians eftablifll-
ed by them in all their settlements, which brought
nuniberlefs calamities upon that unhalppy people,
and fubjeded them to the niofo grievous oppref-
sion 1-. This was not thle only bald Icflct of the in-
furrcdion in I-lifpaniola ; it prevented Columbus
from protlecuting his discoverics on the continent,
as felf-prfclrvation obliged hinm to kccp el)lar his
pcffon his brother the adcanti;d , andlt the iilors
wliom he intended to hav eImployed in tli;t i'er-
vicc. As foonl as his ;ii'Lilrs wo tld perwlit, i;e i'nl
Ionim of his Illips to Spailn \\itil a journal of the

* Icicr l dec I. lib. iii. c. 13, .1. I..;: o f Co !:::. ,,

C. 80, &c.
'I Ilcrrcra, dec I. lib. ii. c. i {, &c.

B o o K voyage which he had made, a description of the

it. new countries which he had discovered, a chart of
'499" the coast along which he had failed, and specimens

of the gold, the pearls, and other curious or valu.
able produtions which he had acquired by traffick-
ing with the natives. At the fame time he tranf-
mitted an account of the infurretion in Hifpani-
ola ; he accused the mutineers not only of having
thrown the colony into such violent convulsions as
threatened its difiblution, but of having obftruted
every attempt towards discovery and improve-
ment, by their unprovoked rebellion against their
superiors, and proposed several regulations for the
better government of the island, as well as the ex-
tintion of that mutinous spirit, which though
suppressed at present, might soon burst out with ad-
ditional rage. Roldan and his associates did not
neglet to convey to Spain, by the fame ships, an
apology for their own condut, together with their
recriminations upon the admiral and his brothers.
Unfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the
happiness of Columbus, the latter gained most cre-
dit in the court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and pro-
duced unexpected effees '.

Thevoyage BUT, previous to these, events had happened
fVafco de which merit attention, both on account of their
Gania to
theEat own importance, and their connetion with the
hcdics, pb history of the New World. While Columbus was
Good engaged in his fucceflive voyages to the weft, the
Hope. spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal, the

kingdom where it first acquired vigour, and be-
came enterprising. Self-condemnation and regret
were not the only sentiments to which the fucccl'
of Columbus, and reflection upon their own iinpru-

' I-errera, dec. ,. lib, iii. c. 14. Ben7on, Iifl Nov. Orl.
lib. i. c. z.

dcrnc

dence in rejecting his proposals, gave rife among g 0 o K
the Portuguese. They excited a generous emula- i"
tion to surpass his performances, and an ardent de- /
fire to make some reparation to their country for '499
their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who
inherited the enterprising genius of his predeceflors,
persisted in their grand fcheine of opening a pall:ge
to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope; and
soon after his accellion to the throne, equipped a
squadron for that important voyage. He gave the
command of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of noble
birth, possessed of virtue, prudence, and courage,
equal to the station. The squadron, like all thoil;
fitted out for dlfcovery in the infancy of navigation,
was extremely feeble, consisting only of three vef-
fels, of neither burden nor force adequate to the
lervice. As the Europeans were at that time alto.
gether unacquainted with the course of the trade-
winds and periodical monsoons, which render na-
vigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in the sea
that separates Africa from India, at some seasons
easy, and at others not only dangerous, but almost
impracicable, the time chosen for Gama's depari
ture was the molt improper during the whole year.
He set fail from Lisbon on the ninth of July, and 1497.
tfanding towards the south, had to struggle for
four months with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their vio- Nov. 0o,
lence began to abate; and during an interval of
calm weather, Gama doubled that formidable pro-
montory, which had so long been the boundary of
navigation, and direced his courle towards the
north-east, along the African coast. He touched
at several ports; and after various adventures,
which the Portuguefe'hiftorians relate with high but
just encomiums upon his condlut and intrepidity,
he came to anchor before the city of Melinda.
Throughout als the vast countries which extend

VOL. I. L .nloni

B O O K along the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to

'. the confines of Zanguebar, the Portuguese had

- '" found a race of men rude and uncultivated, itran-
1499. gers to letters, to arts and commerce, and differing

from the inhabitants of Europe no less in their sea-
tures and complexion, than in their manners and in-
ftitutions. As they advanced from this, they ob-
served, to their inexpreflible joy, that the human
form gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic
features began to predominate, marks of civiliza-
tion appeared, letters were known, the Mahome-
tan religion was eftabliflled, and a commerce, far
from being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time several veflels from India were in the port of
Melinda. Gama now pursued his voyage with al-
most absolute certainty of success, and under the
conduE of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecut,
upon the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-fecond
of May one thousand four hundred and ninety-
eight. What he beheld of the wealth, the popu-
loufnefs, the cultivation, the industry and arts of
this'highly civilized country, far surpassed any idea
that he had formed, from the imperfet accounts
which the Europeans had hitherto received of it.
But as he pollelfed neither Iuffifcient forces to attempt
a settlement, nor proper commodities with which
he could carry on comnmerce of any consequence, he
hastened back to Portugal, with an account of his
fucceis in performing a voyage the longelt, as vell
as most difficult, that liad ever been made since the
lirft invention of navigation. lHe landed at Lisbon
on the fourteenth of iSeptember one thousand four
hundred and ninetyi-nine, two years, two montlis,
and five days, from the time ele left that port *.

'T'iUS, (during the course of the fifteenth cen-
tury, mankind madle greater progress in cxploring

Ramnufio, vol. i. i9. D.

W-~~~~~~
' ~~the

the slate of the habitable globe, than in all the ages B o 0 K
which had elapsed previous to that period. The 1.
spirit of discovery, feeble at first and cautious, "v9
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made its
efforts with hesitation and timidity. Encouraged by
success, it became adventurous, and boldly extend-
ed its operatiens, in the course of its progreilion, it
continued to acquire vigour, and advanced at length
with a rapidity and force which burst through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hitherto
(ircumfcribed the activity of the human race. Al-
inoft fifty years were employed by the Portuguese
in creeping along the coast of Africa from Cape
Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of which lies only
twelve degrees to the south of the former. In lets
than thirty years, they ventured beyond the equi-
notial line into another hemisphere, and penetrat-
ed to the southern extremity of Africa, at the dif-
tance of forty-nine degrees from Cape de Verd.
During the last seven years, a New world was dif-
covered in the weft, not inferior in extent to all the
parts of the earth with which mankind were at that
time acquainted. In the east, unknown fcas and
countries were found out, and a communication,
long dcfircd, but hitherto concealed, was opened
between Europe and the opulent regions of India.
In comparison with evets ib wonderful and unex-
pctcd, all that had hitherto been deemed great or
J)lendid, f-aded away and disappeared. Vast ob-
jcts now prefcntcd thlemilvcs. The human mind,
rouzcd and interetfed by the profped, engaged
with ardour in purlfit of them, and exerted its ac-
tive powers in a new dircrtion.

1'Iiis spirit of entcrprii', though but ncwly Difcrnoric&

awakened in Spain, began Ibonl to operate cxtcn- ca-lic o"
fively. All the attempts towar'.s *difcovcry mlade pliatc'ld-
in hl;at kinldoin, hadl hitherto been carriedl on by vUtr,,.

1. 2 Columlbu

B o O K Columbus alone, anrd at the expence of the fove*

'.
n reign. But now private adventurers, allured by the
·499 magnificent deferiptions he gave of the regions

w499 hich he had visited, as well as by the specimens
of their wealth which he produced, offered to fit
out squadrons at their own risk, and to go in quest
of new countries. The Spanish court, whole Icanty
revenues were exhausted by the charge of its expe-
ditions to the New world, which, though they
opened vast profpeAs of future benefit, yielded a
very sparing return of present profit, was extremely
willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon its
fubjets. It seized with joy an opportunity of ren-
dering the avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of
projectors, instrumental in promoting designs of
certain advantage to the public, though of doubtful

Ojeda the success with refpet to themselves. One of the sirs
tihr. propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo de

Ojeda, a gallant and a&ive officer, who had ac-
companied Columbus in his second voyage. His
rank and character procured him such credit with
the merchants of Seville, that they undertook to
equip four ihips, provided he could obtain the royal
licence, authorising the voyage. The powerful pa-
tronage of the bishop of Badajos, easily secured
success in a suit so agreeable to the court. Without
consulting Columbus, or regarding the rights and
jurifdidion which he had acquired by the capitula-
tion in one thousand four hundred and ninety-two,
Ojeda was permitted to fct out for the New world.
In order to dire& his course, the biflopcomimuni-
cated to him the admiral's journal of his lafl voy-
age, and his charts of the countries which he had
May. discovercd. Ojeda struck out into no new path of

navigation, but adhering servilely to the route
which Columbus had taken, arrived on the coast of
Paria. Hec traded with the natives, and standing
to the welt, proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and

ranged

ranged along a considerable extent ofcoaft beyond B O O K
that on which Columbus had touched. Having _
thus ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that this 1499.
country was a part of the continent, Ojeda return-
ed by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some re-
putation as a discoverer, but with little benefit to
those who had raised the funds for the expedition *.

AMERIGO VEsPUCCI, a Florentine gentleman, is accom-

accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what la- panied by
tion he served, is uncertain; but as he was an ex- efpucci,
perienced sailor, and eminently skilful in all the fci-
ences subservient to navigation, he seems to have
acquired such authority among his companions,that
theywillingly allowed him to have a chief share in
direting their operations during the voyage. Soon
after his return, he tranfinitted an account of his
adventures and discoveries to one of his country-
men; and labouring with the vanity of a traveller
to magnify his own exploits, he had the address and
confidence to frame his narrative, so as to make it
appear that he had the glory of having first disco-
vered the continent in the New World. Ameri-
go's account was drawn up, not only with art, but
with some elegance. It contained an amusing his-
tory of his voyage, and judicious observations upon
the natural productions, the inhabitants, and the
customs of the countries which he had visited. As
it was the first description of any part of the New
World that was publifled, a performance so well
calculated to gratify the paflion of mankind for
what is new and marvellous, circulated rapidly, and From
was read with admiration. The country of which whom the
Amerigo was supposed to be the discoverer, came Amlricr ;s
gradually to be called by his name. The caprice given tote
of mankind, often as unaccountable as unjust, has World,

d Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. i, 2, 3.

perpetu3ted

B OO K perpetuated this error. By the universal consent of
_, nations, AMERICA is the name bestowed on this
1499. new quarter of the globe. The boldpretenfions of

a fortunate impostor have robbed the discoverer of
the New World of a distinction which belonged to
him. The name of Amerigo has supplanted that
of Columbus; and mankind may tegret an a& of
injustice, which, having received the fantion of
time, it is now too late to redress *.

Voyage of DURING the fame year, another voyage of dif-
Aloni covery was undertaken. Columbus not onlv in-

troduced the spirit of naval enterprise into Spain,
but all the sirs adventurers who distinguished them-
selves in this new career, were formed by his in-
ftrutions, and acquired in his voyages the skill and
information which qualified them to imitate his
example. Alonfo Nigno, who had served un-
der the admiral in his last expedition, fitted out,
in conjunction with Chriflopher Guerra, a mer-
chant of Seville, a single ship, and failed to the
coast of Paria. This voyage seems to have been
conducted with greater attention to private emolu-
ment, than to any general or national object. Nig-
no and Guerra made no discoveries of any impor-
tance; but they brought home such a return of gold
and pearls, as inflamed their countrymen with the
desire of engaging in similar adventures t.

.CT Vl;,t SOON after Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the
V:,1ez. in,.- admiral's companions in his first voyage, failed ftom
Z7'". Palos with four flfips. HIe flood boldly towards

the south, and was the first Spaniard who ventured
to cross the equinoctial line; but he seems to have
landed on no part of the coast beyond the mouth

* See NOTEr XXII.
§ P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Hcrrrcra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. .

of

of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons. All BOOK
these navigators adopted the erroneous theory of _
Columbus, and believed that the countries which 1500.
they had discovered, were part of the vast conti-
nent of India *

DURING this first year of the sixteenth century, The Portu-

that fertile diftri&t of America, on the confines oft er Braill.
which Pinzon had ftopt short, was more fully dif-
covered. The successful voyage of Gama to the
East Indies, having encouraged the king of Portu-
gal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to
carry on trade, but to attempt conquest, he gave
the command of it to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In
order to avoid the coast of Africa, where he was
certain of meeting with variable-breezes, or fre-
quent calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral tsood
out to sea, and kept to far to the weft, that, to his
surprise, he found himself upon the shore of a,, un-
known country, in the tenth degree beyond the
line. He imagined, at first, that it was some
island in the Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved;
but, proceeding along its coast for several days, he
was led gradually to believe, that a country ib ex-
tensive formed a part of some great continent. This
latter opinion was well founded, The country
with which he fell in belongs to that province in
South America, now known by the name of Brasil.
He landed; and having formed a very high idea
of the fertility of the foil, and agreeableness of the
climate, he took poffeflion of it for the crown of
Portugal, and dispatched a ship to Lifon with an
account of this event, which appeared to be no less
important than it was unexpected t. Columbus's
discovery of the New World was the effort of an
aid-ive genius, enlightened by science, guided by

I-Ierrera, dcc. i. ill. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.
t I lclrcr la, id c. i. lib. iv'. c. 7.

experience,

u OK experience, and a&ing upon a regular plan, exe-
»v- cured with no less courage than perseverance. But
s5oo. from this adventure of the Portuguese, it appears

that chance might have accomplished that great de-
sign, which it is now the pride of human reason to
have formed and perfeted. If the sagacity of Co-
lumbus had not conducted mankind to America,
Cabral, by a fortunate accident, might have led
them, a few years later, to the knowledge of that
extensive continent .

tonsaha- WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those
tions agailft Co- successive voyages, were daily acquiring more en-
Iumbus. larged ideas of the extent and opulence of that quar-

ter of tie globe which Columbus had made known
to them, he himself, far from enjoying the tran-
quillity and honours with which his services should
have been recompenfed, was firuggling with every
distress in which the envy and malevolence of the
people under his command, or the ingratitude of
the court which he served, could involve him.
Though the pacification with Roldan broke the
union, and weakened the force of the mutineers, it
did not extirpate the feeds of discord out of the
illand. Several of the malcontents continued in
arms, refuting to submit to the admiral. He and
his brothers were obliged to take the field alter-
nately, in order to check their incursions, or to pu-
nifli their crimes. The perpetual occupation and
disquiet which this created, prevented him from
giving due attention to the dangerous machinations
of his enemies in the court of Spain, A good num-
ber of those who were most difiatisfied with his ad-
riniftration, had embraced the opportunity of re-
turning toEuropewith the flips which he dilatched
from St. Domingo, The final difappointmcnt of ll
their hopes inflamed the rage of these unfortunatl

*lerrecra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 5.

adventurers

adventurers against Columbus to the utmost pitch, B o o K
Their poverty and diitrcfs, by exciting compassion, n
rendered their accusations credible, and their corn- 500.
plaints intereting. They teazed Ferdinand and
Isabella incessantly with memorials, containing the
detail of their own grievances, and the articles of
their charge against Columbus. Whenever either
the king or queen appeared in public, they fur-
rounded them in a tumultuary manner, infiltiing
with importunate clamours for payment of the .r-
rears due to them, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their sufferings. They insulted the
admiral's sons wherever they met them, reproach-
ing them as the offspring of the projector, whose
fatal curiosity had difcuvered those pernicious regi-
ons which drained Spain of its wealth, and would
prove the grave of its people. Those avowed en-
deavours of the malcontents from America to ruin
Columbus were seconded by the secret, but more
dangerous insinuations of that party among the
courtiers, who had always thwarted his schemes,
and envied his fucccfs and credit *.

FERDINAND was disposed to liften, not only Tlieir'influ
vith awilling, but with a partial ear, to these accu- enceonFer-

t, dinand and

rations. Notwithitanding the flattering accounts Ifabea.
which Columbus had given of the riches of Ame-
rica, the remittances from it had hitherto been so
scanty, that they tell far flort of defraying the ex-
pence of the armaments fitted out. 'Ihe glory of
the discovery, together with the profped of re-
mnote commercial advantages, was all that Spain
had yet received in return for the efibrts which fle
had made. But time had already diminifled the
first sensations of joy which the discovery of a New
World occasioncd, and famne alone was not an ob-
jeet to satisfy the cold intercfted mind of Ferdinand.

* Life of Columbus, c. 85.

The

B o o K The nature of commerce was then so little-under-

i, sipod, that, whereimmediate gain was not acquired,
500 the hope of distant benefit, or of flow and mode-

rate returns, was totally disregarded. Ferdinand
confidered Spain, on this account, as a loser by the
enterprise of Columbus, and imputed it to his mif-
condua and incapacity for government, that a
country abounding in gold had yielded nothing of
value to its conquerors. Even Isabella, who, from
tlhe favourable opinion which ile entertained of
Columbus, had uniformly protected him, was
Ihakenat length by the number and boldness of his
accusers, and began to fufpet that a difaffeaion so
general must have been occasioned by real gricv-
ances,which called for redress. The biflop of Bada-
jos, with his usual animosity against Columbus, en-
couraged these suspicions, and confirmed them.

F:talecfrcas As soon as the queen began to give way to the
o this. torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to Columbus

was taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a knight of Ca-
latrava, was appointed to repair to HIilpaniola, with
full powers to inquire into the condud of Colum-
bus, and, if he found the charge of mal-admini-
Itration proved, to supersede him, and assume the
government of the island. It was impofliblc to
escape condemnation, when this preposterous coin-
mninion made it the interest of the judge to find
ihe person whom he was sent to try, guilty.
Though Columbus had now composed all the dif'-
fintions in the ifiand ; though he had brought both
Spaniards and Indians to submit peaceably to his
government ; though he had made luch cllelual
provilion for working the mines, and cultivatiig
the country, as would have secured a confiderabic
revenue to the king, as well as large profits to in-
i.ividuals, Bovad\lill, without deigning to attend

to

to the nature or merit of those services, discovercd, B Oo K
from the moment that he landed in Hifpanipla, a _.
determined purpose of treating him as a criminal. 150o.
He took poffeflion of the admiral's houfein St. Io-
mingo, from which he happened at that time to be
absent, and seized his effets, as if he had been al-
ready convided; he rendered himself mafler of the
fort and of the king's stores by violence; he requir-
ed all persons to acknowledge him as fiipreme go-
vernor; he set at liberty the prisoners confined by
the admiral, and summoned him to appear before
his tribunal, in order to answer for his condu&t;
tranfinitting to him, together with the summons, a
copy of the royal mandate, by which Colulnbus
was enjoined to yield implicit obedience to his
commands.

COLUMBUS, though deeply affec'td with the ccI:,,n,,i

ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Isabella, ftt il,
did not hesitate a moment about his own conduct. spain.
He submitted to the will of his sovereigns with a
refpe&ful silence, and repaired directly to the court
of that violent and partial judge whom they had
authorised to try hin. Bovadilla, without admit-
ting him into his presence, ordered him inilantly to
bearrefied, to be loaded withchains, and hurried on oaoir.
board a flhip. Even under this humiliating revcrfe
of fortune, the firmness of mind which distinguish-
es the character of Columbus, did not forlake him.
Conscious of his own integrity, and solacing him-
self with reflecting upon the great things which lie
had atchieved, he endured this insult ollered to his
character, not only with composure, but with dig-
nity. Nor had he the consolation of ymnpathy to
mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had already ren-
dered himnfelf so extremely popular, by granting
various immunities to the colony, by liberal dona-
tions of Indians to all who applied for them, and

by

B o o Kby relaxing the reins ofdifcipline and government,

u- that the Spaniards, who were mostly adventurers,

whom their indigence or crimes had impelled to
abandon their native country, expressed the most
indecent fatisfation with the disgrace and impri-
fonment of Columbus. They flattered themselves,
that now they should enjoy an uncontrouled liberty,
more suitable to their disposition and former habits
of life. Among persons thus prepared to censure
the proceedings, and to asperse the charater of Co-
lumbus, Bovadilla colleted materials for a charge
against him. All accusations, the most improba-
ble as well as inconsistent, were received. No in-
former, however infamouis was rejeced. The
result of this inquest, no less indecent than partial,
he transmitted to Spain. At the fame time, he or-
dered Columbus, with his two brothers, to be car-
ried thither in fetters ; and, adding cruelty to in.
fult, he confined them in different flips, and ex-
cluded them from the comfort of that friendly in-
tercourfe which might have soothed their common
distress. But while the Spaniards in Hispaniola
viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedings of
Bovadillawith a general approbation,which reflets
dilhonour upon their name and country, one man
flill retained the memory of the great acions
which Columbus had performed, and was touched
with the sentiments of veneration and pity due to
his rank, his age ald his merit. Alonfo de Val-
lejo, the captain of the veflel on board which the
admiral was confined, as soon as he was clear of
the island, approached his prisoner with great re-
fpe&t, and offered to release him from the fetters
\itll which he was unjustly loaded. " No," repli-
ed Columbus, with a generous indignation, " I
wear tlhlr irons in consequence of an order from
my sovereigns. They thall find me as obedient to
tlis as to their other injunctions. By their com-

man d

mand I have been confined, and their command B O O K
alone shall set me at liberty *." I.

FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was ex- ' 5

tremely short. As soon as Ferdinand and Isabella Nov. 23.
were informed that Columbus was brought home set at libr

ty but de-

a prisoner, and in chains, they perceived at once privedofall
what universal astonishment this event muff occafi- authority.
on, and what an imprefLon to their disadvantage it Pc'. 7'
muff make. All Europe, they foresaw, would be
filled with indignation at this ungenerous requitalofa
man who had performed acions worthy of the high-
eRt recompence, and would exclaim againif the in-
justice of the nation, to which he had been such an
eminent benefactor, as well as againfl the ingrati-
tude of the princes whose reign he had rendered
illustrious. Afliamed of their own condut, and
eager not only to make some reparation for this in-
jury, but to efface the Rtain which it might fix upon
their characer, they instantly issued orders to set
Columbus at liberty, invited him to court, and
remitted money to enable him to appear there in a
manner suitable to his rank. When he entered the
royal presence, Columbus threw himself at the
feet of his sovereigns. HI-e remained for tome time
silent; the various paflions which agitated his mind
fupprefling his power of utterance. At length he
recovered himself, and vindicated his conduct in a
long discourse, producing the most satisfying proofs
of his own integrity as well as good intention, and
evidence, no less clear, of the malevolence of his
enemies, who, not satisfied with having ruined his
fortune, laboured to deprive him of what alone
was now left, his honour and his fame. Ferdinand
received him with decent civility, and 1iabella wkitl

*Lifeof Columbus, c. 86. Hcrrera, dec. x. lib. iv. c. 8-1 i.
Gomiaral-Iilt. c. 23. Oviedo, lib, iii. c. 6.

tcndci-ncfs

B o o °r tenderness and refpe&. They both expressed their

n,. sorrow for what had happened, disavowed their
15oo. knowledge of it, andj oined in promising him pro.

tetion and future favour. But though they in.
htantly degraded Bovadilia, in order to remove
from themlflves any suspicion of having authoriled
his violent proceedings, they did not restore to Co.
lurmbus his jurif'di&ion and privileges as viceroy of
tliofe countries which he had discovered. Though
willing to appear the avengers of Columbus's
wrongs, that illiberal jealouly which prompted
them to invest Bovadilla with luch authority as put
it in his power to treat the admiral with indignity,
still fubfilted. They were afraid to trust a man to
whom they were so highly indebted, and retaining
him at court under various pretexts, they appointed
Nicholas de Ovando, a knight of the military or-
der of Alcantara, governor of Hispaniola *.

COLUMBUS was deeply affeEed with this new

inlury, which came from hands that seemed to be
employed in making reparation for his past susser-
ings. The sensibility with which great minds feel
every thing that implies any suspicion of their inte-
grity, or that wears the aspet of an affront, is ex-
quifite. Columbus had experienced both from the
Spaniards; and their ungenerous conduCt exafpe-
rated him to such a degree, that he could no longer
conceal the fentimentswhich it excited. Wherever
he went, he carried about with him, as a memo.
rial of their ingratitude,thofe fetters with whiclihc
had been loaded. They were conflantly hung up
in his chamber, and lie gave orders that when ih
died they liould be buried in his grave -.

lcrrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. Io---12. Life of Columl)u,
c. 87.

t Life of Columnbus, c. 86. p. 577.

MEANWIIiL.F,

MEANWHIILE, the spirit of discovery, notwith- o o oK

flanding the severe check which it received by the I.
ungenerous treatment of the man,wlo firi excited IO
it in Spain, continued active and vigorous. Rode- ProgiJT o
rigo di Baftidas, a person of difrintion, fitted out difcov'y.
twvo hips in co-partnery with John de la Cosa, who January.
having served under the ad miral in two of his voy-
ages, was deemed the mnoft iilfu! pilot in Spain.
They fleered diredly towards the continent, arriv-
ed on the coast of Paria, and proceeding to the
weft, discovered all the coast of the province now
known by the name of Terra Firma, from Cape
de Vela, to the gulf of Darien. Not long after
Ojeda, with his former afrociate Amerigo Vespucci,
set out upon a fecondvoyage,and being unacquaint-
ed with the destination of Baitidas, held the fame
course, and touched at the fame places. The voy-
age of Baftidas was prosperous and lucrative, that
of Ojeda unfortunate. But both tended to incrcale
the ardour of discovery; for in proportion as the
Spaniards acquired a more extensive knowledge of
the American continent, their idea of its opu-
lence and fertility increased *.

BEFORE these adventurers returned fromI tlheirOvnr(oRap-

voyages, a fleet was equipped at the public ex-l'°i"lt^ " '
pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new gover- -ll,.nliona.
nor, to Hispaniola. Ilis pretence there was ex-
tremely rcquifite, in order to tfop the inconsiderate
career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent adminiftrati-
on threatened the settlement with ruin. Conscious
of the violence and iniquity of his proceedings
againit Columbus, lie continued to make it his fble
objcct to gain the favour and fuipport of his couin-
tryimen,by accommlodating llinicli'to their paflions

* errera, dec i. lib. iv. c. I.

and

B o o K and prejudices. With this view, he eflablifhed re.

n- gulations, in every point the reverse of those which
50 Columbus deemed essential to the prosperity of the

colony. Instead of the revere discipline, necessary
in order to habituate the dissolute and corrupted
members of which the society was composed, to the
restraints of law and fiibordination, hefuffered them
to enjoy such uncontrouled licence, as encouraged
the wildest excesses. Inltead of protecing the In-
dians, he gave a legal fanetion to the opprefflon of
that unhappy people. He took the exac number
of such as survived their past calamities, divided
them into diftint classes, distributed them in pro-
perty among his adherents, and reduced the whole
island to a state of complete servitude. As the ava-
rice of the Spaniards was too rapacious and impati.
ent to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this servitude became as grie-
vous as it was unjust. The Indians were driven in
crowds to the mountains, and compelled to work
in the mines by mailers who imposed their talks
without mercy or discretion. Labour, so difpro-
portioned to their firength and former habits of
life, wafted that feeble race of men with such
rapid consumption, as mutl have soon terminated
in the utter extinction of the ancient inhabitants
of the illand *.

New reu- THE necessity of applying a speedy remedy to
iationscfa-thofe disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. He
ified. had the command of the most reipectable armament

hitherty fitted out for the New World. It consist-
ed of thirty-two {hips, on board of which two
thousand five hundred persons embarked, with an
intention of fettling in the country. * Upon the ar-
rival of the new governor with this powerful rein-

* Herrera, dec. X. lib. iv. c. i . &c. Oviedo Hit. lib. iii.
c. 6. p. 97. Bcnzon. His. lib. i. c. 12. p. 51.

forcement

forcement to the colony, Bovadilla resigned hisBr °0 K
charge, and was commanded to return initantlv to ._,
Spain, in order to answer for his conduct. l{oldan, 15,;:
and the other ringleaders of the miutineers wv ho
had been moti ative in opposing (olumbus, were
required to leave the illand at the famne time. A
proclamation was ifued, declaring the natives to ;e
free fubjecs of Spain, of whom :no ferticc was to l;e
exaded contrary to their own inclination, and '.vith-
out paying them an adequate price for their iabour.
With respect to the Spaniards then' Ilves, .vriou.
regulations were made, tending to 'uppreis ,he li-
centious spirit which had been so fatal to the colony,
and to eflablifh that reverence for law and ordei on
w.hich society is founded, and to which it is indebt-
ed for its increase and liability. In order to limit
the exorbitant gain which private persons were sup-
poled to make by working the minins, an o:'Ji::ace
was published, directing all the gold to bc brought
to a public fnelting-houfe, and declaring one half
of it to be the property of the crown .

WHILI. these steps were taking for tfcuring tlheI 'r, !:.-

tranquillity and welfare of the colony which Column- b:'1 l _-
bus had planted, he himself was en!a,,cd in the un- c.l.u.bUs,
pleasant employment of soliciting the favour of an
ungrateful court, and, notwitliftandiiig all his me-
rit and services, he solicitcd in vain. lIe demand-
ed, in terms of the original capitulation in one
thouland four hlunCdred and ninety-two, to be re-
inflated in his olfice of viceroy over the countries
which he had dilcovercel. By a ;Lrange fatality,
the cilclnnfliance which he ur'ed in support of his
claim, determined a jealous monaorch to rejei it,

* Solorzano Folitica Illdil.na, lib. i. c, I

. IHerrcrn, dec. i

lib . iv .
c . 1 .

VOtL. I AI AIIhe

Bo o K The greatness of his dircoveries, and the profpet

nc.[ of their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider

the concessions in the capitulation as extravagant
and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting a sub-
iet with the exercise of a jurifdidion that now ap-
peared to be so extremely extensive, and might
grow to be no less formidable. He inspired Isabella
with the fame suspicions, and under various pre.
texts, equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all
Columbus's requisitions to perform that which a so.
lemn treaty bound them to accomplifl. After at-
tending the court of Spain for near two years, as
an humble suitor, he found it impossible to remove
Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and per-
ceived, at length, that he laboured in vain, when
he urged a claim of justice or merit with an inte.
refted and unfeeling prince.

He forms BUT even this ungenerous return did not difcou-
newfchemes rage him from pursuing the great objea which first
ofdicovery. called forth his inventive genius, and excited him

to attempt discovery. To open a new passage to
the East Indies was his original and favourite scheme.
This fill engrossed his thoughts ; and either from
his own observations in his voyage to Paria, or
from some obscure hint of the natives, or from the
accounts given by Baftidas and de la Cosa of their
expedition, he conceived an opinion that beyond
the continent of America, there was a sea which
extended to the East Indies, and hoped to find
some strait or narrow neck of land by which a
communication might be opened with it and the
part of the ocean already known. By a very for-
tuiiatc conjcture, he supposcd this firait or isthmus
to be situated near the gulf of Darien. Full of
this idea, though he was now of an advanced age,
worn out with fatigue, and broken with infirmities,
lie ofi.'rcd, with the alacrity of a youthful advenl

turer,

turer, to undertake a voyage which would afcer- B o o K
tain this important point, and perfect the grand I.
scheme which from the beginning he proposed to
accomplish. Several circumflances concurred in
disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to lend a favoura-
ble ear to this proposal. They were glad to have
the pretext of any honourable employment for re-
moving from court a man with whose demands they
deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose fervicesit
was indecent to neglet. Though unwilling to re-
ward Columbus,they werenotinfenfible of his merit,
and from their experience of his skill and conduEt,
had reason to give credit to his conjetures, and to
confide in his success. To these considerations, a
third rufl be added of still more powerful influence.
Aboutthis time the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral,
arrived from the Indies ; and, by the richness of
its cargo, gave the people of Europe a more per-
fe& idea, than they had hitherto been able to form,
of theopulence and fertility of the east. The Por-
tuguefe had been more fortunate intheirdifcoveries
than the Spaniards. They had opened a communi-
cation with countries where industry arts, and ele-
gance flourished ; and where commerce had been
longer eftablifled, and carried to greater extent
than in any region of the earth. Their first voy-
ages thither yielded immediate, as well as vast re-
turns of profit, in commodities extremely precious
and in great request. Liffbon became immediately
the feat of commerce and of wealth ; while Spainl
had only the expectation of remote benefit, and of
future gain from the western world. Nothing,
then, could be more acceptable to the Spaniards
than Columbus's oifer to conduct them to the east,
by a route which he expelcd to be shorter, as well
as less dangerous, than that which the Portugucfe
had taken. Even Ferdinand was rouscd by such a

M z proli'tl,

B o0 K profped, and warmly approved of the undertak.

BUT intereng as the obje of this voyage

l5C. 3BUT, interesting as the obje&t of this voyage

His fourth was to the nation, Columbus could procure only
oyage. four small barks, the largest of which did not ex-

ceed seventy tons in burden, for performing it.
Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in arc
duous undertakings with inadequate force, he did
not hesitate to accept the command of this pitiful
squadron. His brother Bartholomew, and his fe-
cond ibn Ferdinand, the historian of his ations,
accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz on the
ninth of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary
Islands; from thence he purposed to have flood di-
retly for the continent, but his largest vessel was
so clumsy and unfit for service, as confirained him
to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchang-
ing her for tome ship of the fleet that had carried
June 29. over Ovando. When he arrived off St. Domingo,

he found eighteen of these ihips ready loaded, and
on the point of departing for Spain. Columbus
immediately acquainted the governor with the de-
Itination of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requested per-
mission to enter the harbour, not only that he might
negociate the exchange of his ship, but that he
might take fielter during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from various prog-
notfics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to observe. On that account, he ad-
vised him likewise to put off some days the dec
parture of the fleet bound for Spain. But Ovando
rcfufed his request, and despised his counsel. Un-
der circumnfances in which humanity would have
aflorded refuge to a stranger, Columbus wvas de-

nied

nied admittance into a country of which he had dif- B O K
covered the existence, and acquired the poffelfion.
His salutary warning, which might have been at- 15oz.
tended to without any inconveniency, was regarded
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arrogant-
ly pretended to predi& an event beyond the reach
of human foresight. The fleet set fail for Spain.
Next night the hurricane came on with dreadful
impetuosity. Columbus, aware of the danger,
took precautions against it, and saved his little fqua-
dron. The fleet deitined for Spain met with the
fate which the raffnefs and obstinacy of its com-
manders merited. Of eighteen ihips two or three
only escaped. In this general wreck perifled Bo-
vadilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those who
had been the most active in persecuting Columbus,
and oppressing the Indians. Together with them-
selves, all the wealth which they had acquired by
their injustice and cruelty was swallowed up. It
exceeded in value two hundred thousand pfo'Js; an
immense fum at that period, and sufficient not only
to have screened them fiom any feverefcrutiny into
their condu&t, but to have secured them a gracious
reception in the Spanish court. Among the ships
that escaped, one had on board all the effects of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck
of his fortune. Historians, struck with the exa&t
discrimination of characters, as well as the jufi
distribution of rewards and punilhments, confpicu-
ous in those events, universally attribute them to
an immediate interposition of divine Providence,
in order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man,
and to punilh the oppreflors of an innocent people.
Upon the ignorant and superstitious race of men,
who were witnefes of this occurrence, it made a
different impreflion. From an opinion, which vul-
gar admiration is apt to entertain with refpe& to
persons who have diftinguinled themselves by their
lsgacity and inventions, they believed Columbus

to

B 0 0 K to be possesed of supernatural powers, and ima-

11.

_v. gined that he had conjured up this dreadful florm
1502. by magical art, and incantations, in order to be

revenged of his enemies *

July 1. COLUMBUS soon left Hispaniola, where he had
Searches in met with such an inhospitable reception, and flood
vain for a
passage to towards the continent. After a tedious and dange-
the Indian rous voyage, he discovered Guiana, an island not
ocean. far distant from the coaff of Honduras. There he

had an interview with some inhabitants of the con-
tinent, who arrived in a large canoe. They ap-
peared to be a people more civilized, and who had
made greater progress in the knowledge of useful
arts, than any whom hie had hitherto discovered.
In return to the inquiries which the Spaniards
made, with their usual eagerness, concerning the
places where they got the gold which they wore by
way of ornament, they dire&ted them to countries
situated to the welt, in which, according to their
description, gold was found in such profulion, that
it was applied to the most common uses. Instead
offlieering in quest of a country so inviting, which
would have conduted them along the coast of Yu-
catan to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was
so bent upon his favourite scheme of finding out
that strait which communicated with the Indian
ocean, that he bore away to the ealt towards the
gulf of Darien. In this navigation he discovered
.ll the coalt of the continent, from Cape Gracias
a Dios, to a harbour which, on account of its
beauty iand security, he called Porto Bello. He
searched, in vain, for the imaginary firait,
through which he expected to make his way
into an unknown sea; and though he went on

* Oviedo, lib. iii. 3. 7. 9. Ilerrera, dec. I. lib. v. c. 1,
I.ifc of Columbus, c. 8t.

fllo't.

shore several times, and advanced into the country, B o K
he did not penetrate so far as to cross the narrow ,-,
isthmus which separates the gulph of Mexico from 1soz.
the great southern ocean. He was so much de-
lighted, however, with the fertility of the country,
and conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that
he resolved to leave a finall colony upon the river
Belem, in the province of Veragua, under the
command of his brother, and to return himself to 1503.
Spain, in order to procure what was requisite for
rendering the establishment permanent. But the
ungovernable spirit of the people under his com-
mand, deprived Columbus of the glory of planting
the first colony on the continent of America.
Their insolence and rapacioufiefs provoked the na-
tives to take arms, and as they were a more hardy
and warlike race of men than the inhabitants of
the islands, they cut offpart of the Spaniards, and
obliged the reft to abandon a Itation which they
were unable to maintain *

THIS repulse, the first that the Spaniards metsllipwreck.

with from any of the American nations, was noted on the
the only misfortune that besel Columnbus; it was iclfJ
followed by a succession of all the difaffers to which
navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes, with
violent florms ofthunde.r and lightning, threatened
his leaky vessels with deftrution ; while his difcon-
tented crew, exhausted with fatigue, and dcfiitutc
of provisions, was unwilling or unable to execute
his commands. One of his flips perished; he was
obliged to abandon another, as unfit for fcrvice;
and with the two which remained, lie quitted that
partof the continent which in his anguifi he nanmed
the Coast of Vexation t, and bore away for -lif-
paniola. New ,lil:reflts awaited him in his voy-

* Ierrera, dcc. i. lil. v. c. 5, &':. .ii ( of Ci),iutllums,
c. :9, &c. OvicLlo, lib. iii. c. 9. I ..L colt.tc. ho ,.;';,.

; 'l^'

BOO K age. He was driven back by a violent tempefl:

f
_ rom the coast of Cuba, his ships fell foul of one
1os3. another, and were lo much shattered by the shock,

that, with the utmost difficulty, they reached Ja-
June 24. maica, where he was obliged to run them aground,

to prevent them from finking. The measure of his
calamities seemed now to be full. He was cait
aflore upon an iizand at a considerable dill:ance
from the only fcttlement of the Spaniards in Ameri-
ca. H-is ships were ruined beyond the possibility of
being repaired. To convey an account of his situ-
acion to -ifpaniola, appeared impracticable; and
without this it was in vain to expe& relief. His ge-
nius, fertile in resources, and rnoft vigorous in those
ucrilous extremities when feeble minds abandon
themfeivcs to despair, discovered the only expedient
which al-orded any profpet of deliverance. He
had recourse to the hospitable kindness of the na-
tives, who, confidering the Spaniards as beings of a
Iluperior nature, were cager, on every occasion, to
mrinifter to their wants. From them he obtained
two of their canocs, each formed out of the trunk
of a single tree, hollowed with fire, and so nilt-
jhapcn and aukward as hardly to merit the name
of boats. In these, which were fit only for creep-
inl along the coast, or crossing from one bay t;
aliother, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, .)
(Genocfe, two Gentlemen particularly attached to
Columbus, gallantly offered to set out for -ili.,ni
ola, upon a voyage of above thirty leagues . l'),
they accomplilhed in ten days, after furmounltill
increclible dangers, and enduring such fatigue, tiitar
levcral of the Indians who acconpanied thenm fluji
u.nder it, and dlied. The attention paid to them by
the governor of Hi fpaniolawas neither such as their
courage merited, nor the difl:refs of the persons
from whom they came, required. Ovando, fiom t

' Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 9.

nw 1

mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allowing B o o K
him to let his foot in the island under his govern- n1
ment. This ungenerous passion hardened his heart 5.
against every tender sentiment, which reilet.on
upon the services and misfortunes of that great man,
or tomnpa.iion for his own fellow-citizens, involved
in the lamei calamities, mullt have excited. Men-
dez and Fiefchi spent eight months in soliciting re-
lief for their commander and associates, without
any profpea of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various pallions agitated H,; difrefs

the mind of Columbus, and his companions in .cd- and susser-
verfity. At firit the expectation of speedy delive- ings there,
rance, from the success of Mendez and Fiefchi's
voyage, cheered the spirits of the most despond-
ing. After some time the more timorous began
to fufpet that they had miscarried in their daring
attempt. At length, all concluded that they ,504,
had perished. The ray of hope which had
broke in upon them, made their condition appear
now more difinal. Despair, heightened by dif-
appointment, fettled in every breast. Their last
resource had failed, and nothing remained but
to end their miserable days among naked savages,
far from their country and their friends. The sea-
men, in a transport of rage, rose in open mutiny,
threatened the life of Columbus, whom they re-
proached as the author of all their calamities, ifized
ten canoes, which he had purchased from the In-
dians, and despising his renionltrances and entrea.
ties, made off with them to a distant part of the
island. At the fame time, the natives murmured
at the long residence of the Spaniards in their coun-
try. As their industry was not greater tlan that of
their neighbours in Hispaniola, like them, they
found the burden of supporting tb many strangers
to be altogether intolerable. They began to bring
in provisions with relutance, they furilllhcd them

witl

Bs o K with a sparing hand, and threatened to withdraw
._ ., tthofe supplies altogether. Such a resolution must

15o4. quickly have been fatal to the Spaniards. Their

safety depended upon the good-will of the Indians;
and unless they could revive the admiration and re-
verence with which that simple people had at first
beheldthem, deftru&ion was unavoidable. Though
the licentious proceedings of the mutineers had, in
a great measure, effaced those impreflions which
had been so favourable to the Spaniards, the ingec
nuity of Columbus suggested a happy artifice,
that not only restored but heightened the high opi-
nion which the Indians had originally entertained
of them. By his fliill in astronomy, he knew that
there was shortly to be a total eclipse of the moon.
He affembledallthe principal persons of the diftriEt
around him on the day before it happened, and,
after reproaching them for their fickleness in with-
drawing their affetion and assistance from men
whom they had lately revered, he told them, that
the Spaniards were servants of the great Spirit who
dwells in heaven, who made and governs the world;
that he, offended at their refusing to support men
who were the objeCts of his peculiar favour, was
preparing to punish this crime with exemplary fe-
verity, and that very night the moon flhould with-
hold her light, and appear of a bloody hue, as a
sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem of the
vengeance ready to fall upon them. To this mar-
vellous prcdition some of them listened with the
careless indifference peculiar to the people of Ame-
rica; others, with the credulous aftoniflment na-
tural to barbarians. But when the moon began
gradually to be darkened, and at length appeared
of a red colour, all were itruck with terror. They
ran with consternation to their houles, and return-
ing inflanfly to Columbus loaded with provisions,
threw them at his feet, conjuring hirn to intcrcedt

With.y

with the Great Spirit to avert the deftrution with B O o K
which they were threatened, Columbus, seeming 11
to be moved by their entreaties, promised to com-
ply with their desire. The eclipse went off; the
moon recovered its splendour, and from that day
the Spaniards were not only furnished profusely
with provisions, but the natives, with superstitious
attention, avoided every thing that could give them
offence *.

DuRING those tranfadions, the mutineers had A cruel ad,

made repeated attempts to pass over to Hispaniola t,'i°n"
in the canoes which they had seized. But, from
their own mifcondut, or the violence of the winds
andcurrents, theireffortswere all unsuccessful. En-
raged at this disappointment, they marched to-
wards that part of the island where Columbus re-
mained, threatening him with new danger and in.
fults. While they were advancing, an event hap-
pened more cruel and affliEting than any calamity
which he dreaded from them. The governor of
Hispaniola, whose mind was still filled with some
dark suspicions of Columbus, sent a finall bark to
Jamaica, not to deliver his distressed countrymen,
but to spy out their condition. Left the sympathy
of those whom he employed flould afford them re-
lief, contrary to his intention, he gave the com-
mand of this vessel to Efcobar, an inveterate enemy
of Colurnbus, who adhering to his inftrutions with
malignant accuracy, cast anchor at some distance
from the island, approached the ihore in a small
boat, observed the wretched plight of the Spa-
niards, delivered a letter of empty compliment to
the admiral, received his anfxver, and departed,
Whenthe Spaniards firfl descried the veif'cl sand-
ing towards the island, every heart exulted, as if the

* Life of Columbus, c. 103. -lerrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c,
5, 6. Bcnzon, Iill. lib. i.c. 14.

long

B o Klong expeaed hour of their deliverance had at

I. length arrived; but when it disappeared so sudden-
v' Bly, they funk into the deepest dejedion, and all
5°"4 their hopes died away. Columbus alone, though

he felt most sensibly this wanton insult which Ovan-
do added to his past neglect, retained such compo-
sure of mind, as to be able to cheer his followers.
He assured them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had
reached Hispaniola in safety; that they would fpee-
dily procure {hips to carry them off; and as Efco-
bar's vessel could not take them all on board, that
he had refused to go with her, because he was de-
termined never to abandon the faithful companions
of his distress. Soothed with the expectation of
speedy deliverance, and delighted with his apparent
generosity in attending more to their preservation
than to his own safety, their spirits revived, and he
regained their confidence L.

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

refirted the mutineers, who were now at hand. All
his endeavours to reclaim those desperate men had
no effeEt but to increase their frenzy. Their de-
mands became every day more extravagant, and
their intentions more violent and bloody. The com-
mon safety rendered it necessary to oppose themi
with open force. Columbus, who had been long
allli&ed with the gout, could not take the field.
Ilis brother, the Adelantado, marched against
,Ml ;z. tliei. iThey quickly met. The mutinccrs rc-

jcdted with scorn terms of accommodation, which
le once more ofifred them, and ruflecd on boldly to
the attack. They fell not upon an enemy unprc-
pared to receive them. In the first flock, several
of their motl daring leaders were slain. The Adc-
lantadu, wholll Itrength was equal to his courage,

Iife of Columbus, c. o04. IIcrrern, dec. 1. lib, vi. c. 17.

clo01'd

closed with their captain, wounded, disarmed, and B o O K
took him prisoner *. At fight of this, the relt fled n-
with a dastardly fear, suitable to their former info- ,5c4
lence. Soon after, they submitted in a body to
Columbus, and bound thenifelves by the moit so-
lemn oaths to obey all his commands. Hardly
was tranquility re-established, when the ships ap-
peared, whose arrival Columbus had promised xwith
great address, though he could foresee it with little
certainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards
quitted an island in which the unfeeling jealousy of
Ovando had suffered them to languish above a )ear,
exposed to misery in all its various forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the go- Aug. i.
vernor, with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, is"liver-

*-. ance, and

that labours to atone for insolence by fervilty, ,alat
fawned on the man whom he envied, and had at- Hi'paniDh.
tempted to ruin. He received Columbus with the
molt studied refpet, lodged him in his own house,
and diftinguifled him with every mark of honour.
But, amidst those over-aced demonstrations of re-
gard, he could not conceal the hatred and malignity
latent in his heart. He set at liberty the captain of
the mutineers, whom Columbus had brought over,
in chains, to be tried for his crimes, and threatened
such as had adhered to the admiral with proceeding
to a judicial inquiry into their condut. Columbus
submitted in silence to what he could not redress ,
but discovered an extremeiimpatience to quit a coun-
try under the jurisdiction of a man who had treated
him, on every occalion, with inhumanity and injui-
tice. Iis preparations were lbon iinifhcd, and he
set fail for Spain with two ihips. D)ifaficrs fimilarser.t ,.
to thofc which had accompanied him through lift;

' Life of Columbus, c. r10. Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. i..

continued

B O O Kcontinued to pursue him to the end of his career.
._ _, One of his vessels being disabled, was soon forced
1504. back to St. Domingo; the other, shattered by vi-

olent storms, failed fiven hundred leagues with
December. jury-maffs, and reached with difficulty the port of

St. Lucar *

Death of THERE he received the account of an event the
fahella. mop fatal that could have befallen him, and which

completed his misfortunes. This was the death of
his patroness queen Isabella, in whose justice, hu-
manity, and favour, he confided as his last resource.
None now remained to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his services and sufferings, but Ser-
dinand, who had so long opposed and so often in-
jured him. To solicit a prince thus prejudiced
against him, was an occupation no less irksome
than hopeless. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon
as his health was in some degree re-eftabliihed, he
repaired to court; and though he was received
there with civility barely decent, he plied Ferdinand
with petition after petition, demanding the punish-
ment of his oppressors, and the restitution of all the
privileges bestowed upon him by the capitulation of
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two. Ser-
dinand ainufed him with fair words and unmean-
ing promiles. Infiead of granting his claims, he
proposed expedients in order to elude them, and
Ipun out the affair with such apparent art, as plainly
discovered his intention that it flould never be ter-
minated. The declining health of Columbus flat-
tered Ferdinand with the hopes of being soon de-
livered from an importunate suitor, and encouraged
him to persevere in this illiberal plan. Nor was he

* Life of Columbus, c. 1o8. I-Iercra, dec. i. lib. vi.
C. 12.

deceived

deceived in his expectations. Disgusted with the B o O K
ingratitude of a monarch whom he had served with
such fidelity and success, exahufted with the fa- 1504.
tigues and hardflips which he had endured, and
broken with the infirmities which these brought
upon him, Columbus ended his life at Valladolid Death of
on the twentieth of May one thousand five hundred Columbus,
and fix, in the fifty-ninth year of his age. He died
with a composure of mind suitable to the magnani-
mity which distinguished his character, and with
sentiments of piety becoming that supreme refpec-
for religion, which he manifested in every occur-
rence of his life t.

t Life of Columbus, c. Io8. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c.
13, 14, 15.

i' l-I

# BOOK III.

T 1s E
H I STO R Y

o F
AMERICA.

BO O K III.
rlW HILE Columbus was employed in his Bo 0 K

last voyage, several events worthy of no- ir.

tice happened in Hispaniola. The colony there, 'v-
the parent and nurse of all the subsequent eltablifh- Ste5t4he
ments of Spain in the New WVorld, gradually ac- colony in
quired the form of a regular and prosperous society. Hipaniola"
The humane solicitude of Isabella to protec the In-
dians from oppreflion, and particularly the procla-
mation, by which the Spaniards were prohibited to
compel them to work, retarded, it is true, for some
time, the progress of improvement. The natives,
who confidered exemption from toil as supreme feli-
city, scorned every allurement and reward by which
they were invited to labour. The Spaniards had
not a sufficient number of hands either to work the
mines or to cultivate the foil. Several of the first
colonises, who had been accustomed to the service
of the Indians, quitted the island, when deprived
of those infIruments without which they knew not

VOL. 1. N how

B O O K how to carry on any operation. Many of thofc

mI. who came over with Ovando, were seized with the
Y distempers peculiar to the climate, and in a short
504. space above a thousand of them died. At the fame

time, the demand of one half of the produc of the
mines as the royal {hare, was found to be an exac-
tion so exorbitant, that no adventurers would en-
gage to work them upon such terms. In order to
save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to re-
50s5. lax the rigour of the royal edicts. He made a new

distribution of the Indians among the Spaniards,
compelling them to labour, for a stated time, in
digging the mines, or in cultivating the ground;
but, in order to screen himself from the imputation
of having fubjeted them again to servitude, he en-
joined their masters to pay them a certain fum, as
the price of their work. He reduced the royal
ihare of the gold found in the mines from the half
to the third part, andfoon after lowered it to a fifth,
at which it long remained. Notwithstanding Ifa-
bella's tender concern for the good treatment of
the Indians, and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve
the royal revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to
approve of both these regulations '.

War withl BuT the Indians, after enjoying respite from op-
thetndin". pression, though during a flort interval, now felt

the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that they
made several attempts to vindicate their own liber-
ty. This the Spaniards confidered as rebellion, and
took arms in order to reduce them to fubjecion.
When war is carried on between nations whose itate
of improvement is in any degree similar, the means
of defence bear sonec proportion to those employed
in the attack; and in this equal contest such eflorit
mutt be made, such talents are displayed, and fiuch

I-errera, dec. i. lib. v. c. 3.

pafions

paifions routed, as exhibit mankind to view in a B OOK
situation no less friking than interefling. It is one ..
of the noblest fundions of history, to observe and i5s65
to delineate men at a jundure when their minds
are molt violently agitated, and all their powers
and passions are called forth. Hence the operations
of war, and the struggles between contending states,
have been deemed by historians, ancient as well as
modern, a capital and important article in the an-
nals of human actions, but in a contest between
naked savages, and one of the moit warlike of the
European nations, where science, courage, and dif-
cipline on one fide, were opposed by timidity, ig-
norance, and disorder on the other, a particular de-
tail of events would be as unpleasant as uninitruc-
tive. If the simplicity and innocence of the Indians
had inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had soft-
ened the pride of superiority into companion, and
had induced them to improve the inhabitants of the
New world, instead of opprefing them, rome
sudden ads of violence, like the too rigorous chaf-
tifements of impatient inftrudors, might have been
related without horror. But, unfortunately, this
consciousness of superiority operated in a difFerent
manner. The Spaniards were advanced so far be-
yond the natives of America in improvement of
every kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be beings of an
inferior nature, who were not intitled to the rights
and privileges of men. In peace they fubjeded
theni to servitude. In war, they paid no regard to
thole laws, which, by a tacit convention between
contending nations, regulate holtility, and set some
bounds to its rage. They confidered them not as
men fighting in defence of their liberty, but as
ilaves, who had revolted against their mailers.
Tlheir caziques, when taken, were condemnned,
hikc the leadcrs of banditti, to the moot cruel and

N z ignominious

f o o K ignominious punishments; and all their fubjeds,

_'. without regarding the diftintion of ranks establish-

ed among them, were reduced to the fame state of
abject slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments
were hostilities carried on againfr the cazique of
Higuey, a province of the eastern extremity of the
illand. This war was occasioned by the perfidy of
the Spaniards, in violating a treaty which they had
made with the natives, and it was terminated by
hanging up the cazique, who defended his people
with bravery so far superior to that of his country-
men, as intitled him to a better fate *.

rhe cruel THE conduct of Ovando, in another part of the
cheros island, was fill more treacherous and cruel. The
conduaof province anciently named Xaragua, which extends
Ovando. from the fertile plain where Leogane is now situ.

ated, to the western extremity of the island, was
subjed to a female cazique, named Anacoana,
highly refpe&ed by the natives. She, from that
partial fondness with which the women of America
were attached to the Europeans, (the cause of which
ihall be afterwards explained) had always courted
the friendship of the Spaniards, and loaded them
with good offices. But some of the adherents of
Roldan having fettled in her country, were so
much exasperatcd at her endeavouring to reltrain
their exccffes, that they accused her of having
formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to exter-
minate the Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew
well how little credit was due to such profligate
men, marched, without further inquiry, towards
Xaragua, with three hundred foot and fevcnty
horsemen. To prevent the Indians from taking
alarm at this hostile appearance, he gave out that
his sole intention was to visit Anacoana, to whoni

* Herrcra, dec. . li). vi. c. 9, 1o.

hi

his countrymen had been so much indebted, in the B o o K
mioft refpetful manner, and to regulate with her
the mode of levying the tribute payable to the king 3505.
ps Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive this illus-
trious guest with due honour, assembled the prin-
cipal men in her dominions, to the number of three
hundred, and advancing at the head of these, ac-
companied by a vast croud of persons of inferior
rank, the welcomed Ovando with songs and dan-
ces, according to the mode of the country, and
conduct him to the place of her residence. There
he was feasted for fomle days, with all the kindness
of simple hospitality, and amused with the games
and fpedtacles usual among the Americans upon oc-
cafions of mirth and festivity. But, amidst the fe-
curity which this inspired, Ovando was meditating
the deftruetion of his unfufpicious entertainer and
her fubjeds ; and the mean perfidy with which he
executed his scheme, equalledhisbarbarity in form-
ing it. Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians
the parade of an European tournament, he ad-
vanced with his troops, in battle array, towards
the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs who
attended her were assembled. The infantry took
possessions of all the avenues which led to the vil-
lage. The horsemen encompassed the house. These
movements were the object of admiration without
any mixture of fear, until, upon a signal which had
been concerted, the Spaniards suddenly drew their
lfords, and rusied upon the Indians, defencelefs,and
astonished at an aft of treachery which exceeded
the conception of undesigning men. In a moment
Anacoana was secured. All her attendants, were
seized and bound. Fire was set to the house; and,
without examination or conviction, all these unhap-
py persons, the most illuflrious in their own coun-
try, were consumed in the flames. Anacoana was

reserved

B o o K reserved for a more ignominious fate. She was

Hi. carried in chains to St. Domingo, and, after the

formality of a trial before Spanish judges, the was
5' condemned upon the evidence of those very men

who had betrayed her, to be publicly hanged.*.

Reduaion OVE RAWIED and humbled by this atrocious
oftheIn- treatment of their princes and nobles, who were
its effeas. pbjeds of their highest reverence, the people in all

the provinces of Hispaniola submitted, without far-
ther refitfance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon the
death of Isabella, all the regulations tending to mi-
tigate the rigour of their servitude were forgotten.
The small gratuity paid to them as the price of
5o6. their labour was withdrawn; and at the fame time

the talks imposed upon them were increased. Ovan-
do, without any restraint, distributed Indians a-
mong his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to
whom the queen had left by will one half of the re-
venue arising from the settlements in the New
World, conferred grants of a similar nature upon
his courtiers, as the least expensive mode of re-
warding their services. They farmed out the In-
dians, of whom they were rendered proprietors, to
their countrymen fettled in Hispaniola; and that
wretched people, being compelled to labour in or-
der to satisfy the rapacity of both, the exa&ions of
their oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But,
barbarous as their policy was, and fatal to the inha.
bitants of Hispaniola, it produced for some time,
very considerable effecs. By calling forth the force
of a whole nation, and exerting it in one direcion,
the working of the mineswas carried on with ainaz-
ing rapidity and success. During several years, the
gold brought into the royal finelting-houfcs in His-

* Oviedo, lib. iii, c. 12. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. .

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Relacion de deftruyc. de las Indias, pl'
part. de las Casas, p. 8.

paniola

paniola amounted annually to four hundred and B o o K
sixty thousand pesos, above a hundred thousand hLi
pounds sterling ; which, if we attend to the great ioc6.
change in the value of money since the beginning
of the sixteenth century to the prcfent times, must
appear an immense fum. Vast fortunes were cre-
ated, of a sudden, by some. Others dillipated in
oltentatious profusion, what they acquired with fa-
cility. Dazzled by both, new adventurers crouded
to America, with the most eager impatience, to
lhare in those treasures which had enriched their
countrymen ; and, notwithstanding the mortality
occasioned by the unhealthiness of the climate, the
colony continued to increase*.

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom Progress of

and justice, not inferior to the rigour with which he the colony.
treated the Indians. He established equal laws, and,
by executing them with impartiality accuflomed
the people of the colony to reverence them. He
founded several new towns in different parts of the
island, and allured inhabitants to them, by the
concession of various immunities. He endeavoured
to turn the attention of the Spaniards to some
branch of industry more useful than that of search-
ing for gold in the mines. Some flips of the sugar-
cane having been brought from the Canary islands
by way of experiment, they were found to thrive
with such increase in the rich foil and wvarm climate
to which they were traniplanted, that the cultiva-
tion of them soon became ain obje& of commerce.
Extensive plantations were begun; fugar-works,
which the Spaniards called ig'nigeio's, from the va-
rious ;machinery emplo)yed in them, were cretcd,
and in a few vears the mianufaiture of this com-
modity was the great occupation of the inllabi-

*I-Teircra dec. i. lib. vi. c. i, &c.

tants

3 o0 K tonts of Hispaniola, and the most considerable

source of their wealth*.

, o6. THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to promote

Politicalre- the welfare of the colony, were powerfully second-
grlnand.f ed by Ferdinand. The large remittances which he

received from the New World, opened his eyes,
at length, with refpea to the importance of those
discoveries, which he had hitherto affected to under-
value. Fortune, and his own address, having now
extricated him out of those difficulties in which he
had been involved by the death of his queen, and
by his disputes with his fon-in-law about the go.
vernment of her dominionst, he had full leisure to
turn his attention to the affairs of America. To
his provident sagacity, Spain is indebted for many of
those regulations which gradually formed that fyftemn
of profound, but jealous policy, by which she go-
verns her dominions in the New World. He ertt-
ed a court, diftinguilhed by the title of the Casa d&
Contratacion, or Board of Trade, compoied of per-
sons eminent for rank and abilities, to whom ihc
committed the administration of American affairs.
T'his board assembled regularly in Seville, and xzam
invested with a difftin and extensive jurifdietion.
I le gave a regular form to ecclesiastical government
in America, by nominating archbifliops, biflhops,
deans, together with clergymen of fiubordinatc
ranks to take charge of the Spaniards eftablifliel
there, as well as of the natives, who fiould eni-
brace the Chriltian faith. But, notwithstanding
the obsequious devotion of the Spanish court to the
Papal See, such was Ferdinand's solicitude to prc-
vent any foreign power from claiming jurifdiEtion,
or acquiring influence, in his new dominions, that

* Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8. + Hil. of the Reign of
Chlarles V. ol. ii. p, 6, , c.

hc

he relfrved to the crown of Spain the sole right of BOO K
patronage to the benefices in America, and ftipu-
lated that no papal bull or mandate flhould be pro- 50o6.
mulgated there, until it was previouly examined
and approved of by his councii. With the fame
spirit ofjea!ouly, he prohibited any goods to be x-
ported to America, or any peribn to fettle chere,
without a special licence from that council *.

BUT, notwithstanding this attention tc the po- Thienum-

lice and welfare of the colony, a calamity ir-t.-nd- .Crof lhe
ed which threatened its dissolution. The original ininihes
inhabitants, on whose labour the Spaniards in His- fafl
paniola depended for their prosperity, and e.,cai
their existence, wafted so fast, that the extinction
of the whole race seemed to be inevitable. When
Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the number of
its inhabitants was computed to be at least a mil-
lion :. They were now reduced to sixty thousand
in the space of fifteen years. This consumption of
the human species, no less amazing than rapid, was
the effec of several concurring causes. The natives
of the American islands were of a more feeble con-
ftitution than the inhabitants of the other hemif-
phere. Theycould neither perform the fame work,
nor endure the fame fatigue with men whose organs
were of a more vigorous conformation. The in-
active indolence in which they delighted to pass
theirdays, as itwas theeffectof their debility, con-
tributed likewise to increase it, and rendered them,
from habit as well as conflitution, incapable of hard
labour. The food on which they fubfilteed, afforded
little nouriflmient, and they were accufonomed to
take it in linall quantities, not fiuficient to invigo-
rate a languid frame, and render it equal to the

*Herrera, dec. 1. lib. vi. c. 19. 20.
t Ibid. dec. a. lib. x. c. z,

efforts

-130 OK efforts of induiftry. The Spaniards, without at-

III.
s^_ _tending to those peculiarities in the conftitutionof

zs56. the Americans, imposed talks upon them so difpro-

portioned to their ffrength, that many funk under
the fatigue, and ended their wretched days. Others,
prompted by impatience and despair, cut short
their own lives with a violent hand. Famine,
brought on by compelling such numbers to aban-
don the culture of their lands, in order to labour in
the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases of va-
rious kinds, so!ne occasioned by the hardships to
which they were exposed, and others by their inter-
course with the Europeans, compleated the defola-
tion of the island. Being thus deprived of the in-
itruments which they were accustomed to em-
ploy, the Spaniards found it impoflible to extend
their improvements, or even to carry on the works
58o. which they had already begun. In order to pro-

vide an immediate remedy for an evil so alarming,
Ovandopropofed to transport the inhabitants of the
Lucayo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence that
they might be civilized with more facility, and in-
-ft.rufed to greater advantage in the Christian re-
ligion, if they were united to the Spanish colony,
and under the immediate infpetion of the milliona-
ries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by this ar-
tifice, or willing to connive at an a&t of violence
which policy represented as necessary, gave his as-
.tsnr to the proposal. Several vessels were fitted out
for the Lucayos, the commanders of which infolrm-
ed the natives, with whose language they were now
well acquainted, that they came fiom a delicious
country, in which their departed ancestors resided,
by whom they were lent to invite them to resort
2hliiher, to partake of' the bliss which they enjoyed.
''liat simple peCple lillencd with wonder and crc-
(lulity; and, bfocn of visiting their relations and
friends in that ;lhappy region, followed the Spaniard:;

witl

with eagerness. By this artifice, above forty thou- B O K.
sand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to share in the ,_
sufferings which were the lot of the inhabitants of ,Sos.
that island, and to mingle their groans and tears
with those of that wretched race of men .

THE Spaniards had, for some time, carried on New disco-

W*ri t

* veries and

their operations in the mines of Hispaniola with settlements.
such ardour, as well as success, that they seemed to
have engrossed their whole attention. The spirit
of discovery languished ; and, since the last voyage
of Columbus, no enterprise of any moment had
been undertaken. But as the decrease of the In-
dians rendered it impofiuble to acquire wealth in
that island with the fame rapidity as formerly, this
urged them to search for new countries, where their
avarice might be gratified with more facility. Juan
Ponce de Leon, who commanded under Ovando in
the eastern diftri& of Hispaniola, passed over to the
island of St. John de Porto Rico, which Columbus
had discovered in his second voyage, and penetrated
into the interior part of the country. As he found
the foil to be fertile, and expected firom some fymp-
toms, as well as from the information of the inha-
bitants, to discover mines of gold in the mountains,
Ovando permitted him to attempt making a fettle-
ment in the illand. This was easily effected
by an officer eminent for conduEt no less than
for courage. In a few years Porto Rico was sub-
je&ed to the Spanilh government, the natives were
reduced to servitude; and, being treated with the
fame inconsiderate rigour as their neighbours in
Hispaniola, the race of original inhabitants, worn1
out with fatigue and sufferings, was loon extermi-
nated i.

Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6,
Gomara Hlilt. c. 4 .

t Herrera, dec, i. lib. vii. c. !-4. Gomara lIiR. c. 4,1.
Rclacion de B. de las Cafail, p. io.

ABOUT

BOOK ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in
_>,_ conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of
1sos. Columbus's original companions, made a voyage

to the continent. They held the fame course
which Columbus had taken, as far as to the island
of Guiana; but, handing from thence to the
weft, they discovered a new and extensive province,
afterwards known by the name of Yucatan, and
proceeded a considerable way along the coast of
that country *. Though nothing memorable oc-
curred in this voyage, it deserves notice, because
it led to discoveries of greater importance. For the
iame reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo
must be mentioned. By the command of Ovando,
he failed round Cuba, and firit discovered, with
certainty, that this country, which Columbus once
supposed to be a part of the continent, was a large
island :.

',D eo- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the lafd

iulutius ap- occurrences under the administration of Ovando.
,SrtdO- Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Don
Mifpanioia. Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand

to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other im-
runities and profits which descended to him by in-
Leritance, in consequence of the original capitula-
tion with his father. But if these dignities and re-
venues appeared so considerable to Ferdinand, that
at the expence of being deemed unjuit as well as
ungrateful, he had wrested them from Columbus, it
is not firprifing that he flould be unwilling to con-
ser them on his Ibn. Accordingly, Don Diego
wafted two years in incessant but fiuitlefs importu.
nity. Weary of this, he endeavoured at length to
obtain by a legal sentence, what he could not pro

* JIrrera, dec. 1. liib. vi. c. 1, Ibid. lib. ii. c. ,

Cl l 'C

cure from the favour of an interested monarch. BOOK
He commenced a suit against Ferdinand before the in.
council that managed Indian affairs, and that court, xc6.
with integrity which refleas honour upon its pro-
ceedings, decided against the king, and sustained
Don Diego's claim of the vice-royalty, and all the
other privileges stipulated in the capitulation. Even
after this decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a
subjec in poffeflion of such extensive rights, might
have thrown in new obitacles, if Don Diego had
not taken a ftep which interested very powerful
persons in the success of his claims. The sentence
ofthe council of the Indies gavehin a title to a rank
so elevated, and a fortune so opulent, that he found
no difficulty in concluding a marriage with Donna
Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo,
great commendator of Leon, and brother of the
duke of Alva, a grandee of the firit rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his fa-
mily espoused so warmly the cause of their new ally,
that Ferdinand could not resist their solicitations.
He recalled Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his
successor, though, even in conferring this favour,
he could not conceal his jealousy; for he allowed
him to assume only the title of governor, not that
of viceroy, which had been adjudged to belong to
him*.

HE soon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by his Hep iM

brother, his uncles, his wife, whom the courtesy of to fi.pl-
the Spaniards honoured with the title of vice-queen, °'-
and a numerous retinue of persons of both sexes,
born of good faiilie:. tHe lived with a splendour
and magnificence hitherto unknown in the New
World ; and the family of Coluinbus 1tieincd now
to enjoy the honours and rewards due tollis inven-
tive genius, of which he himself had bccn cruelly
defrauded. The colony itellf acquired new lultre.

IHerrera, dec. x. lib. vii. c. 4, &c.

by

B o o Kby the accession of so many inhabitants of a differ-

IM. ent rank and characer from moRl of those who had
'- -o hitherto migrated to America, andmany of the most

9illustrious families in the Spanish settlements are

descended from the persons who at that time ac-
companied Don Diego Columbus *.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from

this change of governors. Don Diego was not only
authorised by a royal edict to continue the reparti-
mientos, or difiribution of Indians, but the particu-
lar number which he might grant to every person,
according to his rank in the colony, was specified.
He availed himfelfof that permission; and soon as-
ter he landed at St. Domingo, he divided fuchIndi-
ans as wereftill unappropriated, among his relations
and attendants t.

Pearlfifhery THE next care of the new governor was to com-
ofCubagua. ply with an inftru&ion which he received from the

king, about fettling a colony in Cubagua, a fmnal
island which Columbus had discovered in his third
voyage. Though this barren spot hardly yielded
subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quanti-
ties of those oysters which produce pearls werefound
on its coast, that it did not long escape the inquifi-
tive avarice of the Spaniards, and became a place
of considerable retort. Iarge fortunes were ac-
quired by the fishery of pearls, which was carried
on with extraordinary ardour. The Indians, efpe-
cially those from the Lucayo islands, were conm-
pelled to dive for them ; and this dangerous and
unhealthy employment was an additional calamity,
which contributed not a little to the extinction ot
that devoted race \.

* Oviedo, lib. iii. c. i. t- Recopilacion ds- Lcye:,
lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. 1, 2. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. io.

He-rrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. ). Goniara Hill c. 78.

Bnou 'I'

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pin- B o o K

zon set out, in conjunction, upon a second voyage. n.l
They flooddireEtly south, towards the equinotial ,509
line, which Pinzon had formerly crofied, and ad- New oy,
vanced as far as the fortieth degree of southern la- ages'
titude. They were aftoniflhed to find that the con-
tinent of America stretched, on their right hand,
through all this vast extent of ocean. They landed
in different places, to take poiieflion in the name of
their sovereign ; but though the country appeared
to be extrzmely fertile and inviting, their force
was so fiall, having been fitted out rather for dif-
covery than making settlements, that they left no
colony behind them. Their voyage, servcd, how-
ever, to give the Spaniards more exalted and ade-
quate ideas with refpet to the dimeniions of this
new quarter of the globe *.

THOUGH it was above ten years since Columbus A fettl-
had discovered the main land of America, the Spa- ment c

·,,.. - - i

i

* ,tile cont;-

niards had hitherto made no settlement in any part o ncnltat-
it. What had been so long negleced was now fe-t"cp'"id.
rioufly attempted, and with considerable vigour,
though the plan for this purpose was neither formed
by the crown, nor executed at the expence of the na-
tion, but carried on by the enterprising Ipirit of pri-
vate adventurers. This fchenie took its rife fro:n
Alonfo de Ojeda, who had already made two voya-
ges as a dilfcovcrer, by which lie acquired confidera-
ble reputation, but no weallh. But his chiara.t r or
intrepidity and condust easily procured himin alllh-
ciates, who advanced the money requifitc to dc-
fray the charges of the expedition. About the
lame time, D;)ego de Nicuefla, wllo had acquired a
large fortunc in lifpaniola, formed a liiiilar dc-
sign. Ferdinand encouraged both ; and thouglh It

Ier rcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. (.

r(:i ;t d

Bo oK refufedto advance the finalleftfum, was extremely

II. liberal of titles and patents. He ereced two go-
-s". vernments on the continent, one extending from

15 Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the other

from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The former
was given to Ojeda, the latter to Nicuefla. Ojeda
fitted out a ship and two brigantines with three
hundred men; Nicueffa, fix vessels, with seven
hundred and eighty men. They failed about the
fame time fiom St. Domingo for their refpedive
governments. In order to give their title to those
countries some appearance of validity, several of the
most eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were
employed to prescribe the mode in which they
{hould take possession of them *. There is not in
the hitfory of mankind any thing more singular or
extravagant than the form which they devised for
this purpose. They inftruted those invaders, as
soon as they landed on the continent, to declare to
the natives the principal articles of the Christian
faith ; to acquaint them, in particular, with the fu-
preme jurifdition of the Pope over all the king-
doms of the earth; to inform them of the grant
which this holy pontiff had made of their country to
the king of Spain ; to require them to embrace the
dotrines of that religion which they made known
to them; and to submit to the sovereign whose au-
thority they proclaimed. If they refused to com-
ply with this requisition, the terms of which mut
have been utterly incomprchenfible to an unin-
firuted Indian, then Ojcda and Nicueffa were au-
thorifed to attack them with fwordand fire; torc-
duce them, their wives and children, to a state of
servitude; and to compel them by force to rccog-
nize thejurililiEtion of the church, and the authority
of the monarch, to which they would not volunta-
rily subjed thenfelves t,

' Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. i. 5. See NOTE XIIr.

A:

As the inhabitants of the continent could not at B o o b:

once yield assent to doEtrines too refined for their '*
uncultivated understandings, and explained to them ,1509
by interpreters imperfectly acquainted with their The di-
language; as they did not conceive how a foreign ilers at-
priest, of whom they had never heard, could have
any right to difpole of their country, or how an
unknown prince fllould claim jurifdiEtion over thent
as his subjects; they fiercely opposed the new in-
vaders of their territories. Ojeda and Nicueffa en-
deavoured to effeCt by force what they could r.'o
accomnplifh by persuasion. The contempora r wri-
ters enter into a very minute detail in relating their
tranfaftions; but as they made no difcoveryofim-
portance, nor established any permanent fettle-
ment, their adventures are not intitled to any con-
fiderable place in the general history of a period,
where romantic valour, struggling with incredible
hardships, diftinguifll every effort of the Spanish
arms. They found the natives in those countries
of which they went to assume the government, to
be of a character very different from that of their
countrymen in the islands. They were fierce and
warlike. Their arrows were dipped in a poison so
noxious, that every wound was followed with cer-
tain death. In one encounter they cut off above
fevcnty of Ojeda's followers, and the Spaniards,
for the first time, were taught to dread the inhabi-
tants of the New WTorld. Nicueifa was oppol`cd by
people equally rcfolute in defence of their poflelli-
ons. Nothing could soften their ferocity. Though
the Spaniards employed every art to footlhe thenm,
and to gain their confidence, they refuled to hold
any intercourle, or to exchange any friendly office,
with men whose residence among them they confi-
dered as fatal to their liberty and independence. i 0.
'.'llis implacable enmity of the natives, though it
rendered it extremely difficult as well as dangerous

VOL. I. 0 to

B o o Kto establish a settlement in their country, might

In. have been surmounted at length by the perfeve-

, rance of the Spaniards, by the superiority of their

arms, and their skill in the art of war. But every
disaster which can be accumulated upon the unfor-
tunate, combined to complete their ruin. The loss
of their flips by various accidents upon an un-
known coast, the diseases peculiar to a climate the
most noxious in all America, the want of provifi-
ons,unavoidable in a country imperfealy cultivated,
dissention among themselves, and the incessant hof-
tilities of the natives, involved them in a fucceflion
of calamities, the bare recital of which itrikes one
with horror. Though they received two confidera-
ble reinforcements from Hispaniola, the greater
part of those who had engaged in this unhappy ex-
pedition, perillhed, in less than a year, in the most
extreme misery. A few who survived, fettled as a
feeble colony at Santa Maria el Antigua, on the gulf
bs Darien, under the command ofVafcoNugnez de
Balboa, who in the most desperate exigencies, dif-
played luch courage and condudt, as firit gained the
confidence of his countrymen, and marked him out
as their leader in more splendid and successful under-
takings. Nlor was he the only adventurer in this
expedition who will appear with lutre in more in-
portant scenes. Francis Pizarro was one of Ojeda's
companions, and in the school of adversity acquir-
ed or improved the talents which fitted him for the
extraordinary actions which he afterwards per-
formed. Ferdinand Cortes, whose name bccannm
still more famous, had engaged early in this enter
prise, which rouzed all the acive youth of Hifpa
niola to arms ; but the good fortune which accoin
panied him in his fubfcqucnt adventures, interpofet
to save him from the disasters to which his coin
panions were exposcd. HIc was taken ill at St. Do

ming

mingo before the departure of the fleet, and de- B o o K
tained there by that indisposition. ' v

: . 1510.

NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue Of Cnquefcf

this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred
from engaging in new schemes of a similar nature.
When wealth is acquired gradually by the perse-
vering hand of induitry, or accumulated by the
flow operations of regular commerce, the means
employed are so proportioned to the end attained,
that there is nothing to itrike the imagination, and
little to urge upon the active powers of the mind to
uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes were
created almost instantaneously; when gold and
pearls were procured in exchange for baubles;
when the countries which produced these rich com-
modities, defended only by naked savages, might
be seized by the first bold invader; objects so lin-
gular and alluring, rouzed a wonderful spirit of en-
terprize among the Spaniards, who rufled with ar-
dour into this new path that was opened to wealth
and diftintion. While this spirit continued warm
and vigorous, every attempt either towards disco-
very or conquest was applauded, and adventurers
engaged in it with emulation. The passion for new
undertakings, which charaterifes the age of disco-
very in the latter part of the 5th and beginning of
the i6th century, would alone have been sufficient to
prevent the Spaniards fiom flopping short in their
career. But circumstances peculiar to -Iifpaniola at
this juncture concurred with it in extending their na-
vigation and conquefRs. The vigorous treatment of
the inhabitants ofthat island havi ngalmofl-extirpated
the race, many of the Spanifil planters, as I have al-

Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 1 , &c. Gomara Hi-t. c.

57, 58, 59. Bclzon. HEif. lib. i. c. 19---23. P. Martyr,
decad. 122.

O 2 ready

. ,

B o 0 K ready observed, finding it impoflfble to carry on
^n^s their works with the fame vigour and profit, were

obliged to look out for settlements in some country
whose people were not yet wafted by oppreftion.
Others, with the inconsiderate levity natural to menl
tupon whom wealth pours in with a sudden flow,
had fquaridered, in thoughtless prodigality, what
they had acquired with ease, and were driven by
necessity to embark in the most desperate fchernes,
150o. in order to retrieve their affairs. From all these

causes, when Don Diego Columbus proposed to
conquer the island of Cuba, and to establish a co-
lony there, many persons of chief diftintion in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the measure.
He gave the command of the troops destined for
that service to Diego Velafquezj one of his father's
companions in his second voyage, and who, having
been long fettled in Hispaniola, had acquired an
ample fortune, with such reputation for probity and
prudence, that he seemed to be well qualified for
conducting an expedition of importance. Three
hundred men were deemed sufficient for the con-
quest of an island above seven hundred miles in
length, and filled with inhabitants. But they were
of the fame unwarlike characterwith the people of
Hispaniola. They were not only intimidated by
the appearance of their new enemies, but unpre-
pared to resist them. For though, from the time
that the Spaniards took possession of the adjacent
island, there was reason to expect a descent on their
territories, none of the finall communities into
which Cuba was divided, had either made any pro-
vision for its own defence, or had fbrmed any con-
cert for their common safety. The only obftruc-
tion the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey, a
·cazique, who had fled from Hispaniola, and taken
poffeflion of the eastern extremity of Cuba. lie
ilood upon the defensive at their first landing, and
endeavoured to drive them back to their Ihips.

His

His feeble troops, however, were soon broken and B o o K
dispersed; and he himself being taken prisoner, "'.
Velasquez, according to the barbarous maxim of
the Spaniards, confidered him as a slave who had IS
taken arms against his malter, and condemned him
to the flames. When Hatuey was fastened to the
flake, a Franciscan friar labouring to convert him,
promised him immediate admittance into the joys
of heaven, if he would embrace the Christian faith.
" Are there any Spaniards,' fays he, after forne
pause, " in that region of bliss which you describe?"
" Yes," replied the monk, " but only such as are
worthy and good." " The best of them," re-
turned the indignant cazique, " have neither worth
nor goodness; I will not go to a place where I
may meet with one of that accursed race" *. This
dreadful example of vengeance struck the people of
Cuba with such terror, that they scarcely gave any
opposition to the progress of their invaders; and
Velasquez, without the loss of a man, annexed this
extensive and fertile island to the Spanish mo-
narchy t.

THE facility with which this important conquest Dicovery

was completed, served as an incitement to other un- of Florida,
dertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon, having acquired
both fame and wealth by the reduction of Porto
Rico, was impatient to engage in some new enter-
prise. He fitted out three ships at his own ex- 15s2.
pence, for a voyage of discovery, and his reputa-
tion soon drew together a refpe&able body of fol-
lowers. He directed his course towards the Lucayo
islands; and after touching at several of them, as
well as of the Bahama isles, he flood to the south-
weft, and discovercd a country hitherto unknown

* B. de las Casas, p. 40. -t lerrcra, dec. I. lib. ix.
c. 2, 3, &c, Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. p. 179.

to

B o o K to the Spaniards, which he called Florida, either

i. because he felt in with it on Palm Sunday, or on
1512. account of its gay and beautiful appearance. He

attempted to land in different places, but met with
such vigorous opposition from the natives, who
were fierce and warlike, as convinced him that an
increase of force was requisite to effec a settlement.
Satisfied with having opened a communication
with a new country, of whose value and import-
ance he conceived very sanguine hopes, he return-
to Porto Rico, through the channel now known by
the name of the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the passion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to un-
dertake this voyage, he was influenced by one of
those visionary ideas which at that time often min-
gled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among
the natives of Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bi-
mini, one of the Lucayos, there was a fountain of
such wonderful virtue as to renew the youth, and
recall the vigour of every person who bathed in its
salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand rc-
florative, Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged
through the islands, searching, with fruitless folici-
tude and labour for the fountain, which was the
chief objet of their expedition. That a tale so fa-
bulous should gain credit among finple uninfiruded
Indians is not surprising. That it should make any
impreflion upon an enlightened people appears, in
the present age, altogether incredible. The fad,
however, is certain; and the most authentic Spa-
nilh historians mention this extravagant sally of their
credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that pe-
riod, were engaged in a career of activity which
gave a romantic turn to their imagination, and
daily prcfented to them strange and marvellous

objcts.

obje&s. A New World was opened to their view. B o o K
The visited islands and continents of whose ex- .__
iftence mankind in former ages had no conception. ,;.
In those delightful countries nature seemed to assume
another form; every tree and plant and animal
was different from those of the ancient hemisphere.
They feelned to be transported to enchanted
ground; and, after the wonders which they had seen,
in the warmth and novelty of their admiration, no-
thing appeared to them lb extraordinary as to be
beyond belief. If the rapid fucceflion of new and
firiking scenes made such impression even upon the
found understanding of Columbus, that he boasted
of having found the feat of Paradise, it will not ap-
pear firange that Ponce de Leon fiould dream of
discovering the fountain of youth *.

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a disco- Progrcf of

very of much greater importance was made in ano- Balboa i.
ther part of America. Balboa having been raised
to the government of the finall colony at Santa
Maria in Darien, by the voluntary suffrage of his
associates, was so extremely desirous to obtain from
the crown a confirmation of their election, that lie
dispatched one of his officers to Spain, in order to
solicit a royal commiflion, which might invclt him
with a legal title to the supreme command. Con-
fcious, however, that he could not cxpet fucccfs
from the patronage of Ferdinand's niniftcrs, with
whom he was unconneced, or from ncgociating in
a court to the arts of which he was a firanger, he
endeavoured to merit the dignity to which lie as-
pired, and aimed at pcrforming lfone signal fcrvicc
that would secure him the preference to every

* P. Martyr, decaid. z2oz. Enfiyo Chronol. para la

Iift. de la Florida, por D. Gab. Cardenas, p. i. Oviedo,
lib. xvi. c. . I-Icerrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 5. dI-ilt. de a1 Congq.
de la Florida, par Garc. dc la Vcga, lib. i. c. 3.

com petitor.

B o oK competitor. Full of this idea, he made frequent

' I. inroads into the adjacent country, subdued several
'v-' of the caziques, and collected a considerable quan-

tity of gold, which abounded more in that part of
the continent than in the islands. In one of those
excurlions, the Spaniards contended with such ea-
gernefs about the division of some gold, that they
xWere at the point of proceeding to ars of violence
against one another. A young cazique, who was
present, aftonifled at the high value which they set
upon a thing of which he did not discern the use,
tumbled the gold out of the balance with indigna-
tion; and, turning to the Spaniards, " Why do
you quarrel (fays he) about such a trifle ? If you are
o patlionately fond of gold, as to abandon ybur
own country, and to disturb the tranquility of
distant nations for its fake, I will conduct you to a
region where the metal which seems to be the chief
object of your admiration and desire, is so common
that the meanest utensils are formed of it." Tranf..
ported with what they heard, Balboa and his com-
panions inquired eagerly where this happy country
lay, and how they might arrive at it, He informed
them that at the distance of fix funs, that is of fix
days journey towards the south, they should disco-
ver another ocean, near to which this wealthy
kingdom was situated ; but if they intended to at-
tack that powerful (tate, they must aflemble forccs
far itperior in number and firength to those with
which they now appeared *

lihllees Tin-s was the first information which the Spa-
wlicsll le nliards received concerning the great southern ocean,

tr"m or the opulent and extensive country known after-

wards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now be-
fore him objecs fLitcd to his boundless ambition,

* Hcrrcra, dec. !. lib. ix. c. 2. Gomnara, c. 60. P.
M;lrtyr, Dcc;ad. p I t).

and

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He im- B O K
mediately concluded the ocean which the Cazique -l
mentioned, to be that for which Columbus had 1512.
searched without success in this part of America, in
hopes of opening a more direct communication with
the Eait Indies, and he conjectured that the rich
territory which had been described to him, must be
part of that vafi and opulent region of rhe earth.
Elated with the idea of performing what so great a
man had attempted in vain; and eager to accom-
pliih a discovery which he knew would be no less
acceptable to the king than beneficial to his coun-
try, he was impatient until he could set out upon
this enterprize, in comparison of which all his
former exploits appeared inconsiderable. But pre-
vious arrangement and preparation were requilite to
ensure success. He began with courting and fecur-
ing the friendship of the neighbouring Caziques.
kHe sent some of his officers to Hispaniola, with a
large quantity of gold, as a proof of his past fuc-
cess, and an earnest of his future hopes. By a pro-
per distribution of this, they secured the favour of
the governor, and allured volunteers into the ser-
vice. A considerable reinforcement from that
island joined him, and he thought himself in a
condition to attempt the discovery.

THE isthmus of Darien is not above sixty miles Dificulty

in breadth, but this neck of land, which binds to- of execu-
gether the continents of North and South America, t
is strengthened by a chain of lofty mountains
stretching thro' its whole extent, which render it
a barrier of solidity sufficient to refifl the impulse of
two opposite oceans. The mountains are covered
with forests almost inaccefrible. The valleys in that
moist climate, where it rains during two thirds of
the year, are marthy, and so frequently overflowed,
that the inhabitants find it necessary, in many pla-

ces,

B OO K ces, to build their houses upon trees, in order to be

All. elevai.td at some distance from the damp foil, and
151T. the odious reptiles ingendered in the putrid wa-

ters *. Large rivers rush down with an impetuous
current from the high grounds. In a region thinly
inhabited by wandering savages, the hand of in-
duiftry had done nothing to mitigate or correct those
natural disadvantages. To march across this unex-
plored country, with no other guides but Indians,
whoie fidelity could be little truited,was,all on there
accounts, the boldest enterprise on which the Spa-
niards had hitherto ventured in the New World.
But the intrepidity ofBalboawas such as distinguish-
ed him among his countrymen,at a periodwhen eve-
s5'3- ryadventurer was conspicuous for daring courage.

Nor was bravery his only merit, he was prudent in
conduct, generous, affable, and possessed of those
popular talents which, in the most desperate under-
takings, inspire confidence and secure attachment.
Even after the junation of the volunteers from
Hispaniola, he was able to muster only an hundred
and ninety men for his expedition. But they were
hardy veterans, inured to the climate of America,
and ready to follow him through every danger. A
thousand Indians attended them to carry their pro-
visions; and to complete their warlike array, they
took with them several ofthofe fierce dogs, which
were no less formidable than deftruEtive to their
naked enemies.

DTfcoVc,-s BALBOA fct out upon this important expedition
tlle South
,Soh on the firit of September, about the time that the

periodical rains began to abate. He proceeded by
sea, and without any difficulty, to the territories of
a Cazique, whose friendflhip he had gained; but no
looner did he begin to advance into the interiorlpart

* P. Martyr, decad. p. 1IS.

of

of the country, than he was retarded by every ob- B O O K
ftacle which he had reason to apprehend, from m.
the nature of the territory, or the disposition of its 1513.
inhabitants. Some of the Caziques, at his ap-
proach, fled to the mountains with all their people,
and carried off or destroyed whatever could afford
subsistence to his troops. Others collected their sub-
jests, in order to oppose his progress, and he quickly
perceived what an arduous undertaking it was, to
conduct such a body of men through hostile na-
tions, across swamps and rivers, and woods, which
had never been passed but by straggling Indians.
But by iharing in every hardship with the meanest-
soldier, by appearing the foremost to meet every
danger, by promising confidently to his troops the
enjoyment of honour and riches superior to the
most successful of his countrymen, he inspired
them with such enthusiastic resolution, that they fol-
lowed him without murmuring. When they had
penetrated a good way into the mountains, a pow-
erful Cazique appeared in a narrow pass, with a
numerous body of his fubjeets to obftruft their pro-
grefs. But men who had surmounted so many ob-
ftacles, despised the opposition of such feeble ene-
mies. They attacked them with impetuosity, and
having dispersed them with much ease and great
slaughter, continued their march. Though their
guides had represented the breadth of the isthmus
to be only a journey of fix days, they had already
Ipent twenty-five in forcing their way through the
woods and mountains. Many of them were ready
to fink under such uninterrupted fatigue in that fill-
try climate, several were seized with the diseases pe-
culiar to the country, and all became impatient to
reach the period of their labours and fuliflrings. At
length the Indians alrured them, that, firom the top

of

B 00 K of the next mountain they should discover the ocean

m.t which was the objed of their wishes. When, with
,513, infinite toil, they had climbed up the greater part

of that deep ascent, Balboa commanded his men to
halt, and advanced alone to the summit, that he
might be the first who ihould enjoy a spectacle
which he had so long desired. As soon as he be-
held the South Sea stretching in endless profped:
below him, he fell on his knees, and, lifting up his
hands to Heaven, returned thanks to God, who
had condu-ted him to a discovery so beneficial to
his country, and so honourable to himself. His
followers, observing his transports of joy, rufled
forward to join in his wonder, exultation and gra-
titude. They held on their course to the 1hore
with great alacrity, when, Balboa advancing up to
the middle in the waves with his buckler and sword,
took poffelion of that ocean in the name of the
king his maiter, and vowed to defend it, with these
arms, against all his enemies *.

TH. T part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean

which Balboa first difcoverd, frill retains the name
of the Gulph of St. Michael, which he gave to it,
and is situated to the east of Panama. From feve--
ral of the petty princes, who governed in the di-
firi&s adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provifiois
and gold by force of arms. Others sent them to
him voluntarily. To these acceptable presents,
btme of the Caziques added a considerable quantity
of pearls; and he learned from them, with much
fatisfa&cion, that pearl oysters abounded in the sea
which he had newly discovered.

* -Ierrcra, dec. i. lib. x. c. i, &c. Gomara, c. 6z, &c
JM. i\artyr. decad. p. 205, &c.

T1ooG ITi I r

TOGETHER with the acquisition of this wealth, B o o K

which served to soothe and encourage his followers, I"
he received accounts which confirmed his sanguine ,5-3.
hopes of future and more extensive benefits from He receives
the expedition. All the people on the coast of the information

concerning

South Sea, concurred in informing him that there amoreopu-
was a mighty and opulent kingdom situated at a lent coun-
considerable distance towards the east, the inhabi- ty
tants of which had tame animals to carry their
burdens. In order to give him an idea of these,
they drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas
or Sheep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Pe-
ruvians had taught to perform such services as they
described. As the Llama, in its form, nearly re-
fembles a camel,a beast of burden deemed peculiar
to Asia, this circumstance, in conjunction with the
discovery of the pearls, another noted producion
of that country, tended to confirm the Spaniards in
their miffaken theory with refpec to the vicinity
of the New World to the East Indies *.

BUT though the information which Balboa re- Obliged to

ceived from the people on the coast, as well as his return.
own conjeEtures and hopes, rendered him extreme-
ly impatient to visit this unknown country, his pru-
dence restrained him from attempting to invade it
with an handful of men, exhaufled by fatigue, and
weakened by diseases t. He determined to lead
back his followers, at present, to their lettlelernt
at Santa Maria in Darien, and to return next fcafon
with a force more adequate to such ;in arduous en-
tcrprize. In order to acquire a more extensive
knowledge of the isthmus, he marched back by a
dlinf:rent route, which lie found to be no lets dan-
gerous and difficult than that which he had formerly
tiken. But to men elated with fucccls, and ani-

*lerrcra, dec. i. lib. x. c. z. -i See NOTE XXIV.

Inated

B o oK mated with hope, nothing is unfurmountablc. Bai-

I". boa returned to Santa Maria, from which he had
-v- been absent four months, with greater glory, and

4 more treasure, than the Spaniards had acquired in

any expedition in the New World. None of Bal-
boa's officers distinguished himself more in this ser-
vice than Francisco Pizarro, or assisted with great-
er courage and ardour in opening a communicati-
on with those countries, in which he afterwards
ated such an illustrious part *.

Pedrarias BALBOA'S first care was to fend information to
appointed Spain of the important discovery which he had
Darien. made ; and to demand a reinforcement of a thou-

sand men, in order to attempt the conquest of that
opulent country, concerning which he had received
such inviting intelligence. The first account of the
discovery of the New World hardly occasioned
greater joy than the unexpected tidings, that a pas-
sage was at last found to the great southern ocean.
The communication with the East Indies, by a
course to the westward of the line of debarkation,
drawn by the Pope, seemed now to be certain.
The vast weath which flowed into Portugal from
its settlements and conquests in that country, cx-
cited the envy and called forth the emulation of
other ifates. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for
a share in this lucrative commerce, and in his ca-
gernefs to obtain it, was willing to make an effort
beyond what Balboa required. But even in this ex-
ertion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal anti-
pathy of Foufeca, now biffop of Burgos, to cvce
ry man of merit who diftinguiflmd himitlf in the
New World, were conspicuous. Notwithftand-
ing Balboa's recent services, which marked him
out as the most proper person to f.niilh that grcat

* I-Irrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 3.---6. Gornra, c. 64. P. Mar
tyr, dec. p. z99, &c.

undcrtakin

undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was B o o rK
so ungenerous as to overlook these, and to appoint Il-
Pedrarias Davila governor cf Darien. He gave wv
him the command of fifteen flout vessels, and 51
twelve hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at
the public expence, with a liberality which Ferdi-
nand had never displayed in any sorner arma-
ment destined for the New World ; and such was
the ardour of the Spanilh gentlemen to follow a
leader who was about to condua them to a coun-
try, where, as fame reported, they had only to
throw their nets into the sea, and draw out gold',
that fifteen hundred embarked on board the fleet,
and if they had not been reitrained, a much great-
er number would have engaged in the service t.

PEDRARIAS reached the gulph of Darien with-

out any remarkable accident, and immediately sent
some of his principal officers aflore, to inform Bal-
boa of his arrival, with the king's commillion, to
be governor of the colony. To their aftonifl-
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great exploits
they had heard so much, and of whose opulence
they had formed such high ideas, clad in a canvas
jacket, with ]hoes made of packthread, employed,
together with some Indians, in thatching his own
hut with reeds. Even in this limple garb, which
corresponded to ill with the expeCtations and wishes
of his new guesss, Balboa received them with dig-
nity. The fame of his discoverics had drawn ito
many adventurers from the illands, that he could
now mufler four hundred and fifty men. At tllc
head of those daring- veterants, he was more than
a match for the forccs which Pcdraiias brouglit
with him. But though his troops murmured loudi-
ly at the injutlice of the king in fupLcrieldinllg thlir

l* Ie erar , (ec. i. lib, x. c. 14. 1f Iid. dcc. . lib. x.
c. 6. 7 . Martyr, dec. p. 177, 256.

B O O K commander, and complained that strangers would

mn. now reap the fruits of their toil and fuccels, Balboa
"'' submitted with implicit obedience to the will of his
1514. sovereign, and received Pedrarias with all the de-

ference due to his character*.

NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Bal-

Dissention boa, to which Pedrarias owed the peaceable pot-
between
him and session of his government, he appointed a judicial
Balboa inquiry to be made into his condud while under

the command of Nicueffa and Encifo, and impof-
ed a considerable fine upon him, on account of the
irregularities of which he had then been guilty.
Balboa felt sensibly the mortification of being sub-
jeded to trial and to punilhment in a place where
he had so lately occupied the firit flation. Pedra-
rias could not conceal his jealousy of his superior
merit ; so that the resentment of the one, and the
envy of the other, gave rife to dissentions extremes
ly detrimental to the colony. It was threatened
with a calamity itill more fatal. Pedrarias had
July. landed in Darien at a most unlucky time of the

year, about the middle of the rainy season, in that
part of the torrid zone where the clouds pour down
such torrents as are unknown in more temperate
,climates*. The village of Santa Maria was feated
in a rich plain, environed with marshes and woods.
The constitution of Europeans was unable to with-
stand the pestilential influence of such a situation,
in a climate naturally so noxious, and at a season io
peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and deflrudtiv
malady carried off many of the soldiers who ac-
companied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity ol
provisions augmented this distress, as it rendcred
it impoiible to find proper refrcflhment for the

* Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 13, 14. i Richard Hill
Naturelle de I'Air, toin. i. p. 204.

fiedi

sick, or the necessary sustenance for the heal- B 0 0 K
thy *. In the space of a month, above fix ._
hundred persons perished in the utmost misery, 5.
Dejetion and despair spread through the colony.
Many principal persons solicited their difiniflion,
and were glad to relinquish all their hopes of
wealth, in order to escape from that pernicious re-
gion. Pedrarias endeavoured to divert those who
remained from broding over their misfortunes, by
finding them employment. With this view, he
sent several detachments into the interior parts of
the country, to levy gold among the natives, and
to search for the mines in which it was produced.
Those rapacious adventurers, more attentive to
present gain than to the means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without diftintion
wherever they marched. Regardless of the allian-
ces which Balboa had made with several of the ca-
ziques, they itripped them of every thing valuable,
and treated them, as well as their fubjedts, with
the utmost insolence and cruelty. By their tyran-
ny and exactions, which Pedrarias, either from
want of authority or of inclination, did not re-
itrain, all the country from the gulf of Darien to
the lake of Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spa-
niards were inconsiderately deprived of the advan-
tages which they might have derived from the
friendfhlip of the natives, in extending their con-
quclts to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with
concern that such ill-judged proceedings retarded
the execution of his favourite fchemc, sent violent
remonstrances to Spain against the imprudent go-
vernment of Pedrarias, which had ruined a happy
and flourishing colony. Pedrarias, on the other
hand, accused him of having deceived the king,

* Herrera, dec. 1. lib. x. c, 14. P. Martyr, dec. p. 272z
VOL. I. P by

B OOK by magnifying his own exploits, as well as by a
^ml, false representation of the opulence and value of
1514. the country*.
Violent FERDINAND became sensible at length of his
proceed- imprudence in superseding the most acive and ex-
Balboa. perienced officer he had in the New world, and,

by way of compensation to Balboa, appointed him
Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive pri-
vileges and authority. At the fame time he en.
joined Pedrarias to support Balboa in all his enter-
prises, and to consult with him concerning every
,55. measure which he himself pursued. But to effec

such a sudden transition from inveterate enmity to
perfea confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power.
Pedrarias continued to treat his rival with neglect;
and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by the pay-
ment of his fine, and other exaEtions of Pedrarias,
he could not make suitable preparations for taking
poifeflion of his new government. At length, by
the interposition and exhortations of the bishop of
Darien, they were brought to a reconciliation; and,
in order to cement this union more firmly, Pe-
6. drarias agreed to give his daughter in marriage to

Balboa. The first effect of their concord was, that
Balboa was permitted to make several fmiall incur-
sions into the country. Thcfe he conduced with
such prudence, as added to the reputation which lle
had already acquired. Many adventurers retorted
to him, and, with the countenance and support of
Pedrarias, he began to prepare for his expedition
to the South Sea. In order to accomplifl this, it
was necessary to build veflels capable of conveying
his troops to those provinces which he purpofedtc

* Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15. dec. 2. c. t, &c. Go

mara, c.66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. o. Relacion dc B. d
las Casas, p. 12.

invade

invade. After surmounting many obflacles, and en- B o o K
during a variety of those hardships which were the m.
portion of the conquerors of America, he at length 57
finished four small brigantines. In these, with three
hundred chosen men (a force superior to that with
which Pizarro afterwards undertook the fame expe-
dition), he was ready to fail towards Peru, when
he received an unexpected message from Pedra-
rias *. As his reconciliation with Balboa had never
been cordial, the progress which he made revived
his ancient enmity, and added to its rancour. He
dreaded the prosperity and elevation of a man
whom he had injured so deeply. He fufpeted that
success would encourage him to aim at independence
upon his jurifdition; and so violently did the pas-
sions of hatred, fear, and jealousy, operate upon
his mind, that, in order to gratify his vengeance,
he scrupled not to defeat an enterprise of the great-
eft moment to his country. Under pretexts which
were false, but plausible, he desired Balboa to post-
pone his voyage for a short time, and to repair to
Acla, in order that he might have an interview
with him. Balboa, with the unfufpicious confi-
dence of a man conscious of no crime, instantly
obeyed the summons; but as soon as he entered the
place, he was arrested by order of Pedrarias, whose
impatience to satiate his revenge did not susser hint
tolanguif long in confinement. Judges were im-
mediately appointed to proceed to his trial. An
accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of an in-
tention to revolt against the governor, was pre-
ferred againftl him. Sentence of death was pro-
nounced; and though the judges who passed it,
seconded by the whole colony, interceded warmly
for his pardon, Pedrarias continued inexorable;
and, to their aftoniflmient and oirrow, the Spa-

IIerrera, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. 1 . 13. 21.

P 2 niards

13 0 K niards beheld the public execution of a man whomn

they univerfallydeemed more capable than any-who
,517. had borne command in America, of forming and

accomplishing great designs *. Upon his death, the
expedition which he had planned was relinquished.
Pedrarias, notwithstanding the violence and injuf-
tice of his proceedings, was not only screened from
punishment by the powerful patronage of the bi-
ihop of Burgos and other courtiers, but continued
in power. Soon after, he obtained permission to
remove the colony from its unhealthy station at
Santa Maria to Panama, on the opposite fide of the
isthmus; and though it did not gain much in point
of healthfulness by the change, the commodious
situation of this new settlement contributed greatly
to facilitate the subsequent conquefis of the Spa-
niards inthevaft countries situated upon the South-
ern Ocean t.

i515. :DURING these tranfations in Darien, the his-
iew dic tory of which it was proper to carry on in an un-

interrupted tenour, several important events oc-
curred with refpe& to the discovery, the conquest,
and government of other provinces in the New
world. Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a
communication with the Molucca or Spice islands
by the weft, that, in the year one thousand five
hundred and fifteen, he fitted out two ihips at his
own expencc, in order to attempt such a voyage,
and gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de
Solis, who was deemed the most skilful navigator
in Spain. IIe flood along the coast of South Ame-
rica, and on the first' of January one thousand
five hundred and sixteen, entered a river, wvhichl
he called Janeiro, where an extensive commerce is
now carried on. From thence he proceeded to a
spacious bay, which he supposed to be the entrance
into a Itrait that communicated with the Indial

* IIerrra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. zl, zz. .1. Ibid. lib. iv. c. I

oceanl

ocean; but upon advancing farther, he found it to B o o K
be the mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vat ri- I.
vers by which the southern continent of America is 1517.
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent in
this country, De Solis and several of his crew were
slain by the natives, who, in fight of the lhips, cut
their bodies in pieces, roated and devoured them.
Discouraged with the loss of their commander, and
terrified at this shocking fpedacle, the surviving
Spaniards set fail for Europe, without aiming at
any farther discovery *. Though this attempt
proved abortive, it was not without benefit. It
turned the attention of ingenious men to this course
of navigation, and prepared the way for a more
fortunate voyage, in which, a few years posterior
to this period, the great design that Ferdinand had
in view was accomplished.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus acively em- state of the

ployed in extending their discoveries and fettle- °olony in
ments in America, they still confidered Hispaniola panola.
as their principal colony, and feat of govern-
ment. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither incli-
nation nor abilities to have rendered the members
of this colony, who were most immediately under
his jurifdidion, prosperous and happy. But he
was circumscribed in all his operations, by the sus-
picious policy of Ferdinand, who on every occa-
sion, and under pretexts the molt frivolous, re-
trenched his privileges, and encouraged the treafu-
rer, the judges, and other subordinate officers, to
counteraEt his measures, and to dispute his autho-
rity. The mod valuable prerogative which the go-
vernor poffeflld, was that of distributing Indians
among the Spaniards fettled in the island. The ri-
gorous servitude of those unhappy men having
been but little mitigated by all the regulations in

Hcerrera, dec. z. lib. i. c. 7. P. Martyr, decad p. 317.

their

B 0 o K their favour, the power of parcelling out such ne-

iu . ceffary instruments of labour atpleafure, secured to
s,17. the governor great influence in the colony. In or-

der to itrip him of this, Ferdinand created a new
office, with the power of distributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a re-
lation of Zapata, his confidential minister. Mor-
tified with the injustice, as well as indignity, of
this invasion upon his rights, in a point so essential,
Don Diego could no longer remain in a place
where his power and consequence were almost an-
nihilated. He repaired to Spain with the vain
hopes of obtaining redress*. Albuquerque entered
upon his office with all the rapacity of an indigent
adventurer, impatient to amass wealth. He began
with taking the exac number of Indians in the
island, and found that from sixty thousand, who,
in the year one thousand five hundred and eight,
survived after all their sufferings, they were now
reduced to fourteen thousand. These he threw
into separate divisions or lots, and beltowed them
upon fucl as were willing to purchase them at the
higheRl price. By this arbitrary distribution, feve-
ral of the natives were removed from their original
habitations, many were taken from their anci-
ent masters, and all of them fubjeded to hea-
vier burdens, and.to more intolerable labour, in
order to reimburse their new proprietors. Those
additional calamities completed the nifery, and
hastened to the extinction of this wretched and in-
!nocent race of men t.

Controvrfy TiiHE violence of these proceedings, together
tthe eat- with the fatal consequences which attended them,
ment of the not only excited complaints among such as thought
Indians themrflves aggrieved, but touched the hearts of

* crre ra dec. i. lib. ix. c. 5. lib. l x. c. az. t Ilid

dec. i. lib. x. c. 12.
t,

all who retained any sentiments of humanity. B o K
From the time that ecclesiastics were sent into Ame- IL
ricato inftrut and convert the natives, they per- "1
ceived that the rigour with which the Spaniards
treated them, rendered their ministry altogether
fruitless. The missionaries, in conformity to the
mild spirit of that religion which they were em-
ployed to publish, early remonstrated against the
maxims of their countrymen with refped to the
Americans, and condemned the r1partimieiztos, or
diflributions, by which they were given up as
slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to na-
tural juitice and the precepts of Christianity, than
to found policy. The Dominicans, to whom the
inftru&ion of the Americans was originally com-
mitted, were most vehement in testifying against
the rCpartimientos. In the year one thousand five
hundred and eleven, Montefno, one of their most
eminent preachers, inveighed against this practice
in the great church at St. Domingo, with all the
impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don Diego Co-
lumbus, the principal officers of the colony, and
all the laymen who had been his hearers, com-
plained of the monk to his superiors; but they, in-
stead of condemning, applauded his doctrine, as
equally pious and seasonable. The Franciscans,
influenced by the spirit of opposition and rivalflip
which fubfifls between the two orders, discovered
some inclination to take part xvith the laity, and to
espouse the defence of the replarltiieitos. But as
they could not with decency give their avowed ap-
probation to a system of opprclTion, so repugnant
to the spirit of religion, they endeavoured to pal-
liate what they could not justify, and alleged, in
excuse for the conduct of their countrymen, that
it was impoflible to carry on any improvement in
the colony, unlcfs the Spaniards polleffed Iuch do-

minion

B O o K minion over the natives, that they could compel

nI. them to labour *.
X? . THE Dominicans, regardless of such political and

contrary interested considerations, would not relax in any
dcifionsc degree the rigour of their fentirents, and even re-
fin fused to absolve, or admit to the sacraments, such

of their countrymen as held the natives in fervi-
tude t. Both parties applied to the king for his de-
cifion in a matter of such importance. Ferdinand
empowered a committee of his privy-council, as-
sifted by some of the most eminent civilians and di-
vines in Spain, to hear the deputies sent from His-
paniola, in support of their refpe&ive opinions.
After a long difcuflion, the speculative point in
controversy was determined in favour of the Domi-
nicans, the Indians were declared to be a free peo-
ple, intitled to all the natural rights of men; but,
notwithstanding this decifion,the repartimientoswere
continued upon their ancient footing 14. As this
determination admitted the principle upon which
the Dominicans founded their opinion, it was not
calculated either to silence or to convince them. At
length, in order to quiet the colony, which was
alarmed bytheir remonstrances and censures, Ferdi-
nand issued a decree of his privy-council, declaring,
that after mature consideration of the Apostolic
s5xI. Bull, and other titles by which the crown of Caffile

claimed a right to its poffeflions in the New world,
the servitude of the Indians was warranted both
by the laws of God and of man; that unless they
were filbjeded to the dominion of the Spani-
ards, and compelled to reside under their in-
fpedion, it would be inipoffible to reclaim

*Herrera, dec. i. lib. viii. c. l. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p.
;,. + Oviedo, ibid. t: Herrcra, dec. I. lib. viii. c. 12.
.ix. C., .

them

them from idolatry, or to instruct them in the BOOK
principles of the Christian faith; that no farther .I
scruple ought to be entertained concerning the 1517.
lawfulness of the repartimientos, as the king and
council were willing to take the charge of that
upon their own consciences; and that there-
fore the Dominicans, and monks of other religi-
ous orders, ihould abitain, for the future, from
those invectives, which, from an excess of charita-
ble, but ill-informed zeal, they had uttered against
that practice *.

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree

might be fully understood, Ferdinand conferred
new grants of Indians upon several of his courti-
ers :. But, in order that he might not seem alto-
gether inattentive to the rights of humanity, he
published an edict, in which he endeavoured to
provide for the mild treatment of the Indians un-
der the yoke to which he fubjeted them; he re-
gulated the nature of the work which they should
be required to perform, he prescribed the mode
in which they should be clothed and fed, and gave
directions with refpeat to their inftrution in the
principles of Christianity §.

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their experi- Effea of

ence of what was past, judged concerning the fu- there.
ture, soon perceived the inefficacy of those provi-
sions, and foretold,;that as long as it was the inter-
eft of individuals to treat the Indians with rigour,
no public regulations could render their servitude
mild or tolerable. They confidered it as vain to
waste their own time and strength in attempting
to communicate the sublime truths of religion
to men, whose spirits were broken, and their facul-

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. is. c. 14. t See NOTE XXV.
§ IHrrera, ibid.

ties

Oe 0 K ties impaired by oppression. Some of them, in
,--. despair, requested the permifTion of their fuperi-

517. ors to remove to the continent, and to pursue the

objec& of their miflion among such of the natives
as were not hitherto corrupted by the example of
the Spaniards, or alienated by their cruelty from
the Christian faith. Such as remained in Hifpanm-
ola continued to remonstrate, with decent firmness,
againl; the servitude of the Indians *

Bartiolo- THE violent operations of Albuquerque, the
mew delas new distributor of Indians, revived the zeal of the
Cafls ap-
parsinde- Dominicans against the r;epartimientos, and called
ince of the forth an advocate for that opprefed people, who

possessed all the courage, the talents, and activity
requisite in supporting such a desperate cause.
This was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of
Seville, and one of the clergymen sent out with
Columbus in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in
order tofettle in that island. He early adopted
the opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics, with
respect to the unlawfulness of reducing the natives
to servitude; and that he might demonstrate the
sincerity of his conviction, he relinquifllcd all the
Indians who had fallen to his own fiare in the di-
vision of the inhabitants among their conquerors,
declaring tlat he flould ever bewail his own mif-
fortune and guilt, in having exercised for a mo-
ment this impious dominion over his fellow crea-
rures t. From that time, he was the avowed pa-
tron of the Indians; and, by his bold interpoliti-
ons in their behalf, as well as by the jrefpe& duc
to his abilitics and chara-er, lie had often the
.merit of letting some bounds to the cxccffes of
his countrymen. He did not fail to remonflrate

I Ierrera, dec, 1. lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hia. Gcncr. t!c

.lAmernitlC, tom. i. p. 252. [ I'. Aug. Davila Pldtill;
l-1i1. dtic ; Fullndcion dc Ia Pirovincia dc St. JIgo de Mexico.
p. 303, 33.-. I-crrcr a, dec. i. lib,. x. c. 12.

v/warnml

warmly against the proceedings of Albuquerque; B o0 K
and, though he soon found that attention to his j -
own interest rendered him deaf to admonition, 1517.
he did not abandon the wretched people whose
cause he had espoused. H· e instantly set out for
Spain, with the rnoft sanguine hopes of opening
the eyes and softening the heart of Ferdinand,
by that striking picture of the oppression of his
new fubjets, which he would exhibit to his
view *.

HE easily obtained admittance to the king, i5s16

whom he found in a declining fiate of health. So'licita
With much freedom, and no less eloquence, he re- in the court
presented to him all the fatal effets of the repartinzi- of Spain.
entos in the New World, boldly charging him with
the guilt of having authorised this impious mea-
sure, which had brought misery and deftrudlion
upon a numerous and innocent race of men, whom
Providence had placed under his proteEtion. Ser-
dinand, whose mind as well as body was much en-
feebled by his distemper, was greatly alarmed at
this charge of impiety, which at another jun&ture
he would have despised. He listened with deep
compunction to the discourse of Las Casas, and
promised to take into attentive consideration the
means of redressing the evil of which he com-
plained. But death prevented him from executing
his resolution. Charles of Aufsria, to whom all his
crowns devolved, resided at that time in his pater-
nal dominions in the Low Countries. Las Casas,
with his usual ardour, prepared immediately to let
out for Slanders, in order to occupy the ear of the
young monarch, when cardinal Ximenes, who, as
regent, afliined the reins of government in Castile,
conmmanded him to dcfift from the journey, and
engaged to hear his complaints in pcrfon.

I-Icerrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 12. Dcc. 2. lib. i. c. i.
.avila Padilla Hilt. p. 304.

I-..

BOOK HE accordingly weighed the matter with at.

I. tention equal to its importance; and as his im-
Z5 petuous mind delighted in fcheines bold and un.

rThre~ga-common, he soon fixed upon a plan which afto-
"so of nilhed the ministers trained up under the for-
xienes. mal and cautious administration of Ferdinand.

Without regarding either the rights of Don Diego
Columbus, or the regulations established by the
late king, he resolved to fend three persons to
America, as superintendents of all the colonies
there, with authority, after examining all cir-
cumftances on the spot, to decide finally with
refped to the point in question. It was a matter
of deliberation and delicacy to chufe men qua-
lified for such an important station. As all the
laymen fettled in America, or who had been
consulted in the administration of that depart-
ment, had given their opinion that the Spaniards
could not keep possession of their new fettle-
ments, unless they were allowed to retain their
dominion over the Indians, he saw that he could
not rely on their impartiality, and determined
to commit the trust to ecclesiastics. As the Do-
minicans and Franciscans had already espoused
opposite fides in the controversy, he, from the
fame principle, excluded both these fraternities
from the commission. He confined his choice to
the monks of St. Jerome, a finall, but refpe&a-
ble order in Spain. With the Afliftance of their
general, and in concert with Las Casas, he soon
pitched upon three persons whom he deemed equal
to the charge. To them he joined Zuazo, a pri-
vate lawyer of distinguished probity, with un-
bounded power to regulate all judicial proceed-
ings in the colonies. Las Cafis was appointed to
accompany them, with the title of Protctor of
the Indians*.

* errera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

To vest such extraordinary powers as mightB 0 o K

at once overturn the system of government elta- __
blihied in the New World in four persons, who, 1517.
from their humble condition in life, were little in- The man-
titled to pofTefs this high authority, appeared to thewere
Zapata, and other ministers of the late king, aeecuuted
measure so wild and dangerous, that they refused
to issue the dispatches neceflary for carrying it into
execution. But Ximenes was not of a temper pa-
tiently to brook opposition to any of his schemes.
He sent for the refraEtory ministers, and addressed
them in such a tone, that in the utmost confl-erna-
tion they obeyed his orders*. The superintend-
ents, with their associate Zuazo, and Las Casas,
failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival, the
first act of their authority was to set at liberty all
the Indians who had been granted to the Spanish
courtiers, or to any person not residing in Ame-
rica. This, together with the information which
had been received from Spain concerning the
objet of the commiflion, spread a general alarm.
The colonies concluded that they were to be de-
prived at once of the hands with which they car-
ried on their labour, and that, of consequence,
ruin was unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Je-
rome proceeded with such caution and prudence,
as soon dillipated all their fears. They discovered,
in every ftep of their condut, a knowledge of
the world, and of affairs, which is seldom acquired
in a cloister; and displayed a moderation and
gentleness still more rare, among persons trained
up in the solitude and austerity of a mnonaftic life.
Their ears were open to information from every
quarter, they compared the diflerent accounts
which they received, and, after mature confi-
deration of the whole, they were fully satisfied
that the itate of the colony rendered it imlpofli-

* I-Ierrcra, dec z. lib. ii. c. 6.

ble

B 0K ble to adopt the plan proposed by Las Casas, and

Ill.

__, recommended by the cardinal. They plainly per-
x517. ceived that the Spaniards fettled in America were

so few in number, that they could neither work
the mines which had been opened, nor cultivate
the country; that they depended for both upon
the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they mutt instantly relinquifl their conquests, or
give up all the advantages which they derived
from them; that no allurement was so powerful
as to surmount the natural aversion of the Indians
to any laborious effort, and that nothing but the
authority of a master could compel them to work;
and if they were not kept constantly under the eye
and discipline of a superior, so great was their na-
tural listlessness and indifference, that they would
neither attend to religious inftrution, nor observe
those rites of Christianity which they had been al.
ready taught. Upon all those accounts, they found
it necessary to tolerate the repartimientos, and to sus-
ser the Indians to remain under fubjeftion to their
'Spanish masters. They used their utmost endea-
vours, however, to prevent the fatal effets of this
eftabliihment, and to secure the Indians the confo-
lation of the beit treatment compatible with a
state of servitude. For this purpose, they revived
former regulations, they prescribed new ones, they
negleced no circumntance that tended to mitigate
the rigour of the yoke; and, by their authority,
their example, and their exhortations, they laboured
to inspire their countrymen with sentiments of equi-
ty and gentleness towards the unhappy people up-
on whose indultry they depended. Zuazo, in his
department seconded the endeavours of the super-
intendents. He reformed the courts of jultice, in
such a manner as to render their decisions equita-
ble as well as expeditious, and introduced vari-
ous regulations which greatly improved the interior

police

police of the colony. The fatisfadion >,ith his B 00 K
condut, and that of'the superintendents, was now ,-.
universal among the Spaniards fettled in the New 1517.
World, and all admired the boldness of Ximenes,
in having departed from the ordinary path of bu-
finess in forming his plan, as well as his sagacity in
pitching upon persons, whose wildom, mdderati-
on and ditintereftednefs rendered them worthy of
this high trust *.

LAS CASAS alone was disSatisfied. The pru-IasCafas

dential considerations which influenced the super- (li'ttishfie
intendents, made no impression upon him. He re-
garded their idea of accommodating their conduc
to the state of the colony, as the maxim of an un-
hallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was
unjust, because it was beneficial. lie contended,
that the Indians were by nature free, and, as their
protetor, he required the superintendents not to
bereave hem of the common privilege of humani-
ty. They received his most vehement remnonftran-
ces without emotion, but adhered firmly to their
own system. The Spanish planters did not bear
with him so patiently, and were ready to tear him
in pieces for insisting in a requisition so odious
to them. Las Casas, in order to fcrecn himself
from their rage, found it neceflary to take ihclter
in a convent; and perceiving that all his cf'orts in
America were fruitless, he loon siet out for Europe,
with a fixed resolution not to abandon the protec-
tion of a people whom he deemed to be cruelly
opprefled*.

I-I.\D Xiinenes retained that vigour of mind rjsn ncci;-

with lwhich he usually applied to h lfinels, L.as th'l",',t'.
Calas muitf have met with no very gracious re- tclcf('i.r-

* Icrrcra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. i;. R ncm'r el. 1Tit. Gcncr.
lib. 2. c. 1+, 15, G. * Ic l ci.i, dec. 2. lii. ii. c. 16.

CCptioll

B o0 K ception upon his return to Spain. But he found

IIL the cardinal languishing under a mortal distemper,
s,7- and preparing to resign his authority to the young

king, who was daily expeced from the Low
Countries. Charles arrived, took poffefiion of the
government, and, by the death of Ximenes, loft
a minister, whose abilities and integrity intitled
him to diret his affairs. Many of the Flenifh
nobility had accompanied their sovereign to Spain.
From that warm prediletion to his countrymen,
which was natural at his age, he consulted them
with refpe& to all the tranfasdions in his new
kingdom, and they, with an indiscreet eagerneis,
intruded themselves into every business, and seized
almost every department of administration'. The
diretion of American affairs was an objec too
alluring to escape their attention. Las Casas ob-
served their growing influence, and though pro-
jeaors are usually too sanguine, to conduE their
schemes with much dexterity, he possessed a bust-
ling indefatigable acivity, which sometimes ac-
complifhes its purposes with greater success, than
the most exquisite discernment and address. -He
courted the Flemish ministers with assiduity. He
represented to them the absurdity of all the max-
ims hitherto adopted with refpet to the govern-
ment of America, and particularly the defets of
that arrangement which Ximenes had introduced.
The memory of Ferdinand was odious to the Flem-
ings. The superior virtue and abilities of Xime-
nes had long been the objet of their envy. They
fondly withed to have a plausible pretext for con.
demning the measures, both of the monarch and
of the minister, and of refleting some discredit
on their political wisdom. The friends of Don
Diego Columbus, as well as the Spanilh courtiers,

* Hilt. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 43.

who

who had been dissatisfied with the cardinal's admi- B O O K
niftration, joined Las Casas in censuring the scheme -,
offending fuperintendants to America. This uni- 1757.
on of so many interests and passions was irrefilti-
ble; and in consequence of it, the fathers of St.
Jerome, and their associate Zuazo, were recalled.
Roderigo de Figueroa, a lawyer ofifome eminence,
was appointed chiefjudge of the ifiand, and receiv-
ed inftrufions, in compliance with the request of
Las Casas, to examine once more, with the utmost
attention the point in controversy between him
and the people of the colony, with refpet to the
treatment of the natives; and in the mean time to
do every thing in his power to alleviate their sus-
ferings, and prevent the extinction of the race*.

THIS was all that the zeal of Las Casas couldschlen-" of

procure, at that juncture, in favour of the Indians. tlheclonies
The impoffibiity of carrying on any improvement'vt!h e-
in America, unless the Spaniil planters couldgse'
command the labour of the natives, was an infu-
perable objetion to his plan of treating them as
free subje&s. In order to provide some remedy for
this, without which he found it was in vain to
mention his scheme, Las Casas proposed to purchase
a sufficient number of negroes friom the Portuguese
i'ttlenents on the coatt of Africa, and to tranf-
port them to America, in order that they might
be employed as saves in working the mines and
cultivating the ground. Onc of the lirfn advaln-
tages which the Portuguese had derived si om their
discoveries in Afriica, arole friom the trade in hlaves.
Various circumstances concurred in reviving this
odious commerce, which had been leng abolifnled
in Elurope, and which is no lcts repuglnant to the
feelings of human:ity, than to the principles of re-
ligion. As early as the year onel tlhoutllnd five hun-

I- HIcrrira, dcc. 2. lib. ii, c. i(, 19, 21. lib. iii. c. 7; 8.
VOL. I. (2 dred

BO O K dred and three, a few negro-flaves had been sent

into the New World*. In the year one thousand
,5,7. five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the

importation of them in great numberst. They
were found to be a more robust and hardy race
than the natives of America. They were more ca-
pable of enduring fatigue, more patient under ser-
vitude, and the labour of one negro was compu-
ted to be equal to that of four Indians:. Cardinal
Ximenes, however, when solicited to encourage
this commerce, peremptorily rejeEted the propo-
fition, becaiufe he perceived the iniquity of reduc-
ing one race of men to slavery, while he was con-
fulting about the means of restoring liberty to ano-
therll. But Las Casas, from the inconsistency na-
tural to men who hurry with headlong impetuo-
fity towards a favourite point, was incapable of
making this diftinEion. While he contended ear-
neftly for the liberty of the people born in one
quarter of the globe, he laboured to enslave the
inhabitants of another region; and in the warmth
of his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke,
pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to im-
pose one still heavier upon the Africans. Unfor-
tunately for the latter, Las Casa's plan was adopt-
ed. Charles granted a patent to one of his Flem;ifli
favourites, containing an exclusive right of ir-:lport-
ing four thousand negroes into America. Ile flld
his patent to some Genocfe merchants for twenty-
five thoutand ducats, and they were the first hlio
brought into a regular form that con-mierce f'or
slaves between Afiica and America, which has fiice

,sc'as been ca'ried on to such an amazing extent §
proposes BUT the Genocfe merchants, tonduding their

^n . operations, at first, with the rapacity of monopo-
)Jiipanlola.

* Herrera dec. i. lib. v. c. 12. 1F Ibid. lib. viii. c. 9.

J: Ibid . lib, x. c. 5. 11 Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. t.
§ Ibid. lib. ii. c. 20.

lifts,

lifts demanded such an high price for negroes, B o o
that the number imported into Hispaniola made i"'
no great change upon the state of the colony. Las
Casas, whole zeal was no less inventive than inde-
fatigable, had recourse to another expedient for
the relief of the Indians. He observed, that molt
of the persons who had fettled hitherto in America,
were soldiers and sailors employed in the difcove-
ry or conquest of the country; the younger sons of
noble families, allured by the profpea of acquiring
sudden wealth; or desperate adventurers, whom
their indigence or crimes forced to abandon their
native land. Initead of such men, who were dif-
solute, rapacious, and incapable of that fober per-
fevering induftrywhich is requisite in forming new
colonies, he proposed to supply the new settlements
in Hispaniola and the other islands with a fuffici-
ent number of labourers and husbandmen, who
should be allured byfuitable premiums to remove
thither. These, as they were accustomed to fa-
tigue, would be able to perform the work, to which
the Indians, from the feebleness of their conftitu-
tion, were unequal, and might soon become useful
and opulent citizens. But though Hispaniola
ltood much in need of a recruit ofinhabitants, hav-
ing been visited at this time with the small-pox,
which swept off many of the natives, and though
Las Casas had the countenance of the Flemiih mi-
nifters, this scheme was defeated by the bishop of
Burgos, who thwarted all his projetts*.

LAS CASAS now despaired of procuring any re- Forms the

lief for the Indians in those places where the Spa- cidea f,
niards were already fettled. The evil was become ny.
ib inveterate there, as not to admit of a cure.. But
such discoveries were daily makin in the conti-
nent, as gave an high idea both o its extent and

lierrcra, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 21.

Q_ Qpopuloufnefs.

B o o K populousness. In all those vast regions there was

III but one feeble colony planted; and except a finall
5I7' spot on the isthmus of Darien, the natives fill oc-

cupied the whole country. This opened a new and
more ample field for the humanity and zeal of Las
Casas, who fattered himself that he might prevent
a pernicious system from being introduced there,
though he had failed of success in his attempts to
overturn it, where it was already etablifhed. Full
of this idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccu-
pied country, stretching along the sea-coast from
the gulf of Paria to the western frontier of that
province now known by the name of SantaMartha.
He proposed to fettle there with a colony compo-
fed ofhufbandmen, labourers and ecclesiastics. IIe
engaged, in the space of two years, to civilize ten
thousand of the natives, and to instruct them so
thoroughly in the arts of social life, that from the
fruits of their industry, an annual revenue of fifteen
thousand ducats should arise to the King. In ten
years, he expected that his improvements would
be so far advanced, as to yield annually sixty thou-
sand ducats. He stipulated, that no sailor or fol-
dier should ever be permitted to fettle in this dif-
tri&t; and that no Spaniard should enter it without
his permiflion. He even projected to clothe the
people whom he took along with him in iome pe-
culiar garment, which did not resemble the Spa-
nihl dress, that they might appear to the natives to
be a different race ,of men iiom those who had
brought so many calamities upon their country."
From this scheme, of which I have traced only the
great lines, it is manifest that Las Casas had formed
ideas concerning the method of treating the Indi-
ans, similar to thoei by which the Jcfuits afterw arcl
carried on their great operations in another paiL o(
the fame continent. He fulppofid that the ],uro-

* 1errern, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. z.

pealls,

peans, by availing themselves of that ascendant BOO K
which they possessed in consequence of their fupe- mI
rior progress in science and improvement, might ;5T7.
gradually form the minds of the Americans to re-
lifh those comforts of which they were destitute,
might train them to the arts of civil life, and ren-
der them capable of its functions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council ofFavourably

the Indies this project appeared not only chimeri- received.
cal, but dangerous in a high degree. They deemed
the faculties of the Americans to be naturally so
limited, and their indolence so excessive, that any
attempt to inftrucb or improve them would be
fruitless. They contended, that it would be ex-
tremely imprudent to give the command of a
country extending above a thousand miles along
the coast, to a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a
firanger to the affairs of the world, and unac-
quainted with the arts of governnment. Las Casas,
far from being discouraged with a repulse, which
he had reason to expect, had recourse once more
to the Flemish favourites, who zealously patroniz-
ed his scheme, merely because it had been rejected
by the Spanish ministers. They prevailed with ,
their maflter, who had lately been railed to the Im-
perial dignity, to refer the consideration of this
ineafure to a felet number of his privy-counfcl-
lors; and as Las Casas excepted againil the mem-
bers of the council of the Indies, as p;artial and in-
terested, all of them were excluded. The decision
of men chosen by recoinendLation of the Flemings,
was perfecily conrormable to their Icntimenrs.
They warmly approved of Las Ca.-its's plan; and
gave orders fbr carrying it into exec.ution, but rc-
ltridted the territory allotted him to three hundred
miles along the coast of Cumana, allowing him,
however, to extend it as far as le pleated towards
the interior part of the country*.

: Gomnara llifl, Gencr. c. 77. Icrrcra., dee. . lib. iv. c.
3. Ovicdo, lib. xix. c. 5'.F

THI- S

B o oK THIS determination did not pass uncenfured,

'· iAlmoft every person who had been in the Weft In-
57T. dies exclaimed against it, and supported their opi-

A rolemn nion so confidently, and with such plausible rea.
deliberation r
concerning sons, as made it advifeable to pause and review the
the modeof fubje& more deliberately. Charles himself, though
treating the dir. hor
Indiians. accustomed, at this early period of his life to a-

dopt the sentiments of his miniflers, with such
fubmifflon and deference as did not promise
that decisive vigour of mind which distinguished
his riper years, began to fufpe& that the eagerness
with which the Flemings took part in every affair
relating to America, flowed from forme improper
motive, and discovered an inclination to examine
in person into the state of the question concerning
the character of the Americans, and the proper
Iune io. manner of treating them. An opportunity of

making this inquiry, with great advantage, soon
occurred. Quevedo, the bishop of Darien, who
had accompanied Pedrarias to the continent in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirteen haps
pened to land at Barcelona, where the court then
resided. It was soon known, that his sentiments
concerning the talents and dispositions of the In-
dians differed from those of Las Casas; and Char-
les naturally concluded, that by confronting two
refpeaable persons, who, during their long refi-
dence in America, had full leisure to observe the
manners of the people whom they pretended to
describe, he might be able to discover which of
therm had formed his opinion with the greatest
difcclnment and accuracy.

A DAY for this folermn audience was ap-

pointed. The emperor appeared with extra-
ordinary pomp, and took his feat on a throne
in the great hall of the palace. His princi-
pal courtiers attended. Don Diego Columbus,
admiral of the Indies, was summoned to be pre-
cent. The bishop of Darien was called upon fil'

to

to deliver his opinion. He, in a short discourse, B O O K
lamented the fatal desolation of America, by the ,
extinEtion of so many of its inhabitants; he ac- 1517.
knowledged that this mufft be imputed, in some de-
gree, to the exceflive rigour and inconsiderate
proceedings of the Spaniards; but declared, that
all the people of the New World, whom he had
seen either in the continent or in the islands, ap-
peared to him to be a race of men marked out,
by the inferiority of their talents, for servitude,
and whom it would be impossible to inftru&t or
improve, unless they were kept under the conti-
nual infpetion of a master. Las Casas, at great-
er length, and with more fervour, defended his
own system. He rejected with indignation the
idea that any race of men was born to servitude,
as irreligious and inhumane. He asserted, that
the faculties of the Americans were not naturally
despicable, but unimproved; that they were ca-
pable of receiving inftruftion in the principles of
religion, as well as of acquiring the industry and
arts which would qualify them for the various of-
sices of social life; that the mildness and timidi-
ty of their nature rendered them so fibmiflive
and docile, that they might be led and formed
with a gentle hand. He professed, that his inten-
tions in proposing the scheme now under confide-
ration were pure and disinterested; and though,
from the accomplilhment of his designs, ineffima-
ble benefits would result to the crown of Castile,
he never had claimed, nor ever would receive
any recompence upon that account.

CHARLES, after hearing both, and cQnfultingThefcleme

with his ministers, did not think himself fuffici- ofLasCafas
ently informed to effablifi any general arrange- a.P
ment with refpe& to the state of the Indians; z50o.
but as he had perseEt confidence in the integrity
of Las Casas, and as eyen the bishop of Darien

admitted

BIo0 K admitted his scheme to be of such importance,
'_ ., that a trial ihould be made of its effe&s, he issued
1517. a patent, granting him the diftrit in Cumana

formerly mentioned, with full power to establish
a colony there according to his own plan *.

Hisprepa- LAS CASAS puihed on the preparations for his
executing voyage with his usual ardour. But, either from
it. his own inexperience in the conduct of affairs, or

from the secret opposition of the Spanifn nobility,

lvho universally dreaded the success of an inftitu-
tion that might rob them of the industrious and
useful hands which cultivated their estates, his
progress in engaging husbandmen and labourers
was extremely flow, and he could prevail on no
more than two hundred to accompany him to
Cumana.

Depart, for NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal.
Aii-,icTi, With this fender train, hardly sufficient to take
and meets
with formi poffefion of such a vait territory, and altogether
dabicobia- unequal to any attempt towards civilizing its inha-

bitants, he set fail. The first place at which he
touched was the island of Porto-Rico. There he
received an account of a new obstacle to the exe-
cution of his icheme, more inluperable than any
he had hitherto encountered. When he left Amne-
rica in the year one thousand five hundred and fe-
vcnteen, the Spaniards had little intercouriiewith
any part of the continent, except the countries ad--
jacent to the gulph of Darien. But as every
i)ecies of internal industry began to stagnate in
I-Iifpaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the
natives, the Spaniards were deprived of those
hands with which they ;,.d hitherto carried on
their operations, this prompted them to try

* Hcrrcra, dec. z. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfola Annalcs
dr( Ar;lgon, 7, 7. IRcmifal Iilt. Gcncr. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.

various

various expedients for supplying that loss. Con- B o o K
fiderable numbers of negroes were imported; but, _
on account of their exorbitant price, many of the 1517.
planters could not afford to purchase them. In or-
der to procure saves at an easier rate, some of these
fitted out vessels to cruise along the coast of the con-
tinent. In places where they found themselves in-
ferior in strength, they traded with the natives, and
gave European toys in exchange for the plates of
gold which they wore as ornaments; but, wherever
they could surprise or overpower the Indians, they
carried them off by force, and fold them as slaves
in Hispaniola *. In those predatory excursions the
molt atrocious adts of violence and cruelty were
committed. The Spanifi name was held in de-
teftation all over the continent. Whenever any hips
appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the woods,
or rulhed down to the shore in arms, to repel those
hated disturbers of their tranquillity. They forced
forne parties of the Spaniards to retreat with preci-
pitation; they cut off others ; and in the violence
of their refentient against the whole nation, they
murdered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal
had prompted them to fettle in the province of
Cumana t. This outrage againfl- perions revered
for their fantity, excited such indignation among
the people of Hispaniola, who, notwithstanding all
their licentious and cruel proceedings, were pof-
feled with a wonderful zeal for religion, and a iu-
perflitious refpct for its ministers, that they de-
termined to inflift exemplary puniflhment, not on--
ly upon the perpetrators of that criime, but upon
the whole nation. With this view, they gave the
command of five ships and three hundred men to
D)iego Ocampo, with orders to lay waste the coln -
try of Cumana with fire and sword, and to tranf-

I Hcrrerl;, dec. . lib. ii. c. 3. 1- Ovico IIill. lib. 19. c. 3.

port

B o o K port all the inhabitants as slaves to Hispaniola.

nx., This armament Las Casas found at Porto Rico, in
1517. its way to the continent; and as Ocampo refused

to defer his voyage, he immediately perceived that
it would be impofible to attempt the execution
of his pacific plan in a country which was the feat
of war and desolation *.

lcth April. IN order tp provide against the effets of this
fLboUS to unfortunate incident, he set fail immediately for
ibemn, St. Domingo, leaving his followers cantoned out

among the planters in Porto Rico. From many
concurring causes, the reception which Las Casas
met with in Hispaniola was very unfavourable.
In his negotiations for the relief of the Indians, he
had censured the condu& of his countrymen fettled
there with such honest severity, as rendered him
universally odious to them. They confidered their
own ruin as the inevitable consequence of his fuc-
cess. They were now elated with hope of receiving
a large recruit of slaves from Cumana, which must
be relinquiihed if Las Casas was assisted in fettling
his projected colony there. Figueroa, in confe-
quence of the inftru&tions he had received in Spain,
had made ah experiment concerning the capacity
of the Indians, which was represented as decisive
against the system of Las Casas, He colleEted in
Hispaniola a good number of the natives, and set-
tled them in two villages, leaving them at perfect
liberty, and with the uncontrouled diretion of
their own a&ions, But that people, accustomcd
to a mode of life extremely different, incapable
of fi.ming new habits at once, and dejeced too
with their own misfortunes, as well as those of
their country, exerted lo little industry in culti-
vating the ground, appeared so devoid of folici-
tudc or foresight in providing for their own wants,
and were filch strangers to arrangement in con-

'PIllerrcra, (lec. z. lib, x, c, 8. 9.

dudmp:n

duEling their affairs, that the Spaniards pro- B K
pounced them incapable of being formed to live IJn
like men in social life, and confidered them as 1517.
children, who ihould be kept under the perpetu-
al tutelage of persons superior to themselves in
wisdom and sagacity *.

NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumstances, Final mi-

which alienated the people to whom he applied ca'riage o
from himself and from his measures, Las Casas,
by his activity and perseverance, by some concef-
sions, and many threats, obtained at length a small
body of troops to protect him and his colony at
their first landing. But upon his return to Porto-
Rico, he found that the diseases of the climate had
been fatal to several of his people; and that
others having got employment in that island, re-
fused to follow him. With the handful that re-
mained, he set fail and landed in Culnana.
Ocampo had executed his commission in that pro-
vince with such barbarous rage, having maflacred
many of the inhabitants, lent others in chains to
Hispaniola, and forced the reft to fly for fllelter
to the woods, that the people of a small colony,
which he had planted at a place which he named
Toledo, were ready to perish for want in a defo-
lated country. There, however, Las Casas, was
obliged to fix his residence, though deserted both
by the troops appointed to protect him, and by
those under the command of Ocampo, who fore-
law and dreaded the calamities to which he muif
be exposed in that wretched station. He made
the firit provision in his power for the iafebty and
filbfiftence of his followers; but as his utmotft es-
torts availed little towards fecurinr either the one
or the other, he returned to L-ii(i, iiioli, in order
to solicit more effecctual aid lor the preservation of
men, who from confidence in him had ventured

. Hcrrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c.

into

BO K into a pofl of so much danger. Soon after his

,j c. departure, the natives, having discovered the fee-
s517. ble and defenceless state of the Spaniards, assem-

-bled fecrctly, attacked them with the fury natural
to men exasperated by many injuries, cut off a
good number, and compelled the reft to fly in
the utmost conrternation to the island ofCubagua.
The small colony fettled there, on account of
the pearl filhery, catching the panic with which
they had been seized, abandoned the island, and
not a Spaniard remained in any part of the conti-
nent, or adjacent islands, from the gulph of Paria,
to the borders of Darien. Astonished at such a
fucceflion of disasters, Las Casas was ashamed to
shew his face after this fatal termination of all his
Iplendid schemes. He shut himfelfup in the con-
vent of the Dominicans at St. Domingo, and soon
after assumed the habit of that order .

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from

Curnana happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace
the progress of Las Cafas's negociations from their
first rife to their final issue without interruption.
l-is fvftem ivas the obje& of long and attentive
difcuflion; and though his efforts in behalf of the
oppressed Americans, partly from his own raflt-
ness and imprudence, and partly from the male-
volent oppolition of his adversaries, were not at-
tended with that fucccfs which he promised with
too slugvuine confidence, they gave rife to vari-
ous regulations which were of some benefit to that
unhappy people. I return now to the history ot
the Spjanifl discoveries, as they occur in the or-
der of time f.

e lIcrrcr:l, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5.

XJO ic o Iili. lib. xix. c. . Gomara, c. 77. Davilla Patlill,I
l , i. . (7. 7

Rine fitl ftifl

G .
C l . l. . c. 22, 23.

I| IIc'ic;'a, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. p. 329.

Dll1: C ,'

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in B o K

the year one thousand five hundred and eleven, --
still retained the government of that island, as 1517.
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though he New disco-

-··- ---r-'-l - ---- ----~ veries tow~v-

seldom acknowledged his superior, and ained at ards the
rendering his own authority altogether indepen- wefa
dent *. Under his prudent administration Cuba
became one of the most flourilhing of the Spa-
nifh settlements. The fame of this allured many
persons from the other colonies, in hopes of find-
ing there either some permanent efl-ablinfmnent,
or some employment for their activity. As Cuba
lay to the weft of all the ifands occupied by the
Spaniards, and as the ocean, which llretches be-
yond it towards that quarter, had not hitherto
been explored, there circumstances naturally in-
vited the inhabitants to attempt new discoveries.
An expedition for this purpose, in which aftivity
and resolution might conduce to sudden wealth,
was more suited to the genius of the age, than the
patient industry requisite in clearing ground, and
manufacturing sugar. Instigated by this spirit,
several officers, who had served under Pedrarias in
Darien, entered into an association to undertake a
voyage of discovery. They persuaded Francisco
Hernandez Cordova, an opulent planter in Cuba,
and a man of cliftinguiihed courage, to join witl
them in the adventure, and chloi him to be their
commander. Velasquez not only approved of
the dcfign, but aslilled in carrying it on. As
the veterans from Darien were extremely indigent,
he and Cordova advanced money for )urchalin,
tlree finall veiltls, and furnilhing them with every
thing rIequitite either for tnraifi or for war, a lun-
dred and ten en mbarked on board of thelm,
and fitiled from St. Jago de Cuba, on the eighth

" Hcrrera, dIcC. z2. Ci.i i;z.

B o K of February one thousand five hundred and seven-

1 teen. By the advice of their chief pilot, Antonio
x5X7. Alaminos, who had served under the first admiral

Columbus, they flood diretly weft, relying on
the opinion of that great navigator, who uniform-
ly maintained that a weaterly course would lead to
the mott important discoveries.

ON the twenty-firft day after their departure

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved to be
Cape Cotoche, the eastern point of that large penin-
fula projecting from the continent of America,
which itill retains its original name of Yucatan.
As they approached the shore, five canoes came
Yucatan. off full of people decently clad in cotton gar-

ments; an altonifhing fpeEtacle to the Spaniards,
who had found every other part of America pof-
sessed by naked savages. Cordova endeavoured
by finall presents to gain the good will of there
people. They, though amazed at the strange ob-
je&s now presented for the first time to their
view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habita-
tions, with an appearance of cordiality. They
landed accordingly, and as they advanced into the
country, they observed with new wonder some
large houses built with stone. But they soon
found that, if the people of Yucatan had made
progress in improvement beyond their country-
men, they were likewise more artful and warlike.
For though the Cazique received Cordova with
many tokens of friendihip, he had ported a con-
fiderable body of his subjeCts in armbufh behind a
thicket, who upon a signal given by him, rushed
out and attacked the Spaniards with great bold-
ness, and some degree of martial order. At
the first flight of their arrows, fifteen of the Spa-
niards were wounded; but the Indians were itruck
with such terror by the fuddcn explosion of the
fire-arms, and so surprised at the execution done

by

by them, by the cross-bows, and by the other BOO K
weapons of their new enemies, that they fled ..
precipitately, and Cordova quitted a country 1517.
where he had met with such a fierce reception,
carrying off two prisoners, together with the or-
naments of a finall temple, which he plundered
in his retreat.

HE continued his course towards the weft with- armpea-

out losing fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth Clly'
day arrived at Campeachy. There the natives
received them more holpitably; but the Spaniards
were much surprised that on all the ixtenfive
coast along which they had failed, and which they
imagined to be a large island, they had not obferv-
ed any river *. As their water began to fail, they
advanced, in hopes of finding a supply; and at
length they discovered the mouth of a river at Po-
tonchan, some leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to pro-

te&t he tailors while employed in filling the casks;
but notwithstanding this precaution, the natives
rushed down upon them with such fury, and in
such numbers, that forty-feven of the Spaniards
were killed upon the spot, and one man only of
the whole body escaped unhurt. Their com-
mander, though wounded in twelve different
places, direced the retreat with presence of mind
equal to the courage withwhich he had led them
on in the engagement, and with much difficulty
they regained their fllips. After this fatal re-
pulse, nothing remained but to haffen back to
Cuba with their flattered forces. In their pas-

tihpe dhi iher they fuflered the most exquisite distress

for waln of water, that men wounded and sickly,
flht up in finall velfels, and exposed to the heat
of the torrid zone, can be supposed to endure.

* Sec NOTE XXVI.

Some

BO K Some of them, finking under these calamities;
s_^- died by the way; Cordova, their commanders
1517. expired soon after they landed in Cuba *

Voyage of NOTWITHSTANDING the disastrous conclusion
Crijalva. of this expedition, it contributed rather to ani-

mate than to damp a spirit of enterprize among
the Spaniards. They had discovered an extensive
country, situated at no great distance from Cuba,
fertile in appearance, and possessed by a people
far superior in improvement to any hitherto
known in America. Though they had carried on
little commercial intercourse with the natives,
they had brought off ome ornaments of gold, not
considerable in value, but of singular fabric.
These circumstances, related with the exaggera-
tion natural to men desirous of heightening the
merit of their own exploits, were more than sus-
ficient to excite romantic hopes and expectations.
Great numbers offered to engage in a new expe-
dition. Velasquez, solicitous to diftinguifl him-
self by some service so meritorious, as might en-
title him to claim the government of Cuba inde-
pendent of the admiral, not only encouraged
their ardour, but at his own expence fitted out
four ships for the voyage. Two hundred and
forty volunteers, among whom were several per-
sons of rank and fortune, embarked in this en-
terprife. The command of it was given to Juan
de Grijalva, a young man of known merit and
courage; with inltructions to obfcrve with attention
the nature of the countries which he flould disco-
ver, to barter for gold, and if circumstances were

* Icrnrcra, tec. 2. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. Hillor. Vcrdadlert

de la Conquilla de la Ncuva Bfpaila por Bernall Diaz. dcl Ca;-
till, cap. i. . Oviedo. lib. xvii. c. 3. Gominra, c. 5:2
P. Martyr de infulis nupcr invcntis, p. 329.

invitingr

inviting, to fettle a colony in some proper station. B o O K
He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of 1mI.
April one thousand five hundred and eighteen.
The pilot Alaminos held the lame course as in the
former voyage, but the violence of the currents Difccvers
carrying the ihips to the foutl, the firfl land which NewvSpain.
they made was the island of Coziimel, to the eat: of
Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to the woods ay 3.
and mountains at their approach, they made no
long fRay there, and without any remarkable occur-
rence they reached Potonchan on the opposite fide
of the peninsula. The desire of avenging their
countrymen who had been slain there, concurred
with their ideas of good policy, in prompting them
to land, that they might chaltife the Indians of that
diftriat with such exemplary rigour, as might itrike
terror into all the people around them. But though
they disembarked all their troops, and carried
a-fiore some field-pieces, the Indians fought with
such courage, that the Spaniards gained the vitory
with difficulty, and were confirmed in their opinion
that the inhabitants of this country would prove
more formidable enemies than any they had met
with in other parts of America. From Potonchan,
they continued their voyage towards the welt, keep-
ing as near as poflible to the lmore, and casting an-
chor every evening, from dread of the dangerous
accidents to which they might be exposed in an un-
known efa. During the day, their eyes were turn-
ed continually towards land, with a mixture offur-
prilc and wonder at the beauty of the country, and
the novelty of the objects which they beheld. Ma-
ny villages were lcattered along the coast, in which
they could distinguish houses of llonethat appeared
white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth of
their admiration, they fancied theft to be citics
adorned with towers and pinaclcs; and one of the
soldiers happening to remark that this country rc-

Vol. . R fenlblcd

B O O K fembled Spain in its oppearance, Grijalva, with uni-

I versal applause called it New Spain, the name which

still distinguishes this extensive and opulent pro-
vince of the Spanish empire in America. They

June 9. landed in a river which the natives called Tabafno,
Tabasco and the fame of their victory at Potonchan having

reached this place, the Cazique not only received
them amicably, but bestowed presents upon them
of such value, as confirmed the high ideas which
the Spaniards had formed with respeCt to the wealth
and fertility of the country. These ideas were raised
fill higher by what occurred at the place where
they next touched. This was considerably to the
welt of Tabasco, in the province since known by
Guaxaca the name of Guaxaca. There they were received

with the refpeA paid to superior beings. The peo-
ple perfumed them as they landed with incense of
gum copal, and presented to them as offerings the
mnoft choice delicacies of their country. They were
extremely fond of trading with them, and in fix
days the Spaniards obtained ornaments of gold, of
curious workmanflip, to the value of fifteen thou-
sand pesos, in exchange for European toys of finall
price. The two prisoners whom Cordova had
brought from Yucatan, had hitherto fervedas inter-
preters; but as they did not understand the lan-
guage of this country, the Spaniards learned from
the natives by signs, that they were subjects of a;
great mlonarch called Montezuma, whose dominion
extended over that and many other provinces.
Leaving this place, with which he had so much
reason to be pleased, Grijalva continued his courif
June Y9. towards the wetl. Ie landed on a finall island,

which he named the island of sacrifices, because
there the Spaniards, beheld for the first time, the
hlorrid fpetacle of human vitirns, which the bar-

dbarous superstition of the natives offered to thcir
Ul'JIa e gods. He touched at ancther finall island, which

- 1,

he called St. John de Ulua. From this place he a o o K
dispatched Pedro de Alvarado, one of his officers, I-.
to Velasquez, with a full account of the important
discoveries which he had made, and with all the
treasure that he had acquired by trafficking with
the natives. After the departure of Alvarado, he
himself, with the remaining veflels, proceeded a-
longthe coast as far as the river Panuco, the coun-
try flill appearing to be well peopled, fertile, and
opulent.

SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended, that ReafonroP
it was not enough to have discovered those de- ot leavinS

a colcny

lightful regions, or to have performed, at their dif there.
ferent landing-places, the empty ceremony of tak-
ing pofeflion of them for the crown of Caltile, and
that their glory was incomplete, unless they plant-
ed a colony in tome proper station, which might
not only secure the Spanish nation a footing in the
country, but, with the reinforcements which they
were certain of receiving, might gradually subje't
the whole to the dominion of their sovereign. But
the squadron had now been above five months at
sea; the greatest part of their provisions was e:r-
haufted, and what remained of their stores so much
corrupted by the heat of the climate, as to bc al-
most unfit for ufc; they had loft Iobme men by
death; others were sickly; the country was crowdedl
with people who fcemed to bc intelligent as well as
brave; and they were under the govcrnlmnt ol
one powerful monarch, who could bring tlhem Lo
a:t againfi their invaders with united torcc. To
plant a colony under so many circnmlhlllnleccs cf(liif-
iadvantagc, was to expole' it to incvitable dcf rulci-
on. Grijalva, thoulgh pIoflttld both of ambition
and courage, was deltitute of the fiipcrior talents
capable of forming or cxcciuting such a great plan.
le j udlged it more prudent to Icturn to Cuba, hluv-

1. 2 ing

B o o K ing fulfilled the purpose of his voyage, and accom.

II- pliihed all that the armament which he commanded

enabled him to perform. He returned to St. Jago
de Cuba, on the twenty-fixth of Otober, from
which he had taken his departure about fix months
before*.

Preparati- THIS was the longest as well as the most success-
tr °e'xpn ful voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto made
dition. in the New World. They had discovered that

Yucatan was not an island as they had supposed,
but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their course for many
hundred miles along a coast formerly unexplored,
stretching at firit towards the weft, and then turn-
ing to the north; all the country which they had
discovered appeared to be no less valuable than ex-
tensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba, Ve-
lafquez, transported with success so far beyond his
most sanguine expectations, immediately dispatch-
ed a person of confidence to carry this important
intelligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich produc-
tions of the countries which had been discovered
by his means, and to solicit such an increase of au-
thority'as might enable and encourage him to at-
tempt the conquest of them. Without waiting the
return of his messenger, or for the arrival of Gri-
jalva, of whom he was become so jealous or dif-
trustful, that he resolved no longer to employ him,
lie began to prepare such a powerful armament, as
might prove equal to an eiterprife of so much dan-
ger and importance.

Bur as the expedition upon which Velafqucz
was now intent, terminated in conquests of greater

* Hcrrcra, dec. I . lib. iii. c. , z, 9, lo. Bernal Dinz,
c. 8---17. OvicdoHift. lib. xvii. c.. zo. Gonara, c. 4.9.

mnomclnt

moment than what the Spaniards had hitherto
atchieved, and led them to the knowledge of a
people, who, if compared with such of the Ameri-
cans as were then known, may be confidered as
highly civilised; it is proper to pause before we
proceed to the history of events extremely different
from those which we have already related, in order
to take a view of the slate of the New World
when firfl discovered, and to contemplate the policy
and manners of the rude uncultivated tribes that
occupied all the parts of it, with which the Spa-
niards were at this time acquainted.

# BOOK IV.

THE
H I STORY

O F
AMERICA.

B O O K IV.
T WENTY-SIX years had now elapsed since B o o K

Columbus conduced the people of Europe 1v.

to the New World. During that period the Spa- '
niards had made great progress in exploring itsWhat parts
various regions. They had visited all the iflandswere then
scattered in different clusters through that part ofknown"
the ocean which flows in between North and South
America. They had failed along the eastern coast
of the continent from the river De la Plata to the
bot: om of the Mexican gulf, and had found that
it stretched without interruption through this vast
portion of the globe. They had discovered the
great Southern Ocean, which opened new prol-
pests in that quarter. They had acquired oime
knowledge of the coafl of Florida, which led them
to oblferve the continent as it extended in an oppo-
fitc direEtion; and though they pufled their dif.
coveries no farther towards the north, other na-

tion .

B o O K tions had visited those parts which they neglected.

iv. The Engliih, in a voyage, the motives and fuccets
~'^^ of which shall be related in another part of this

History, had failed along the coast of America
from Labrador to the confines of Florida; and the
Portuguese, in quest of a Ihorter passage to the Ealt
Indies, had ventured into the northern seas, and
viewed the fame regions *. Thus at the period
Y;here 1 have chosen to take a view of the state of
the New World, its extent was known almost from
its northern extremity to thirty-five degrees south
of the equator. The countries which stretch front
thence to the southern boundary of America, the
great empire of Peru, and the extensive dominions
subjea to the ibvereigns of Mexico, were fRill un-
discovered.

The vas WVItEN we contemplate the New World, the firr
extent of
the New circumstance that strikes us is its immense extent.
World. It was not a filall portion of the earth, so incon-

fiderable that it might have elcaped the obfcrvati-
on or research of former ages, which Columbus
discovered. He made known a new hemisphere,
of greater extent than either Europe, or Asia, or
Africa, the three noted divisions of the ancient
continent, and not much inferior in dimensions to
a third part of the habitable globe.

AMIERICA is remarkable not only for its ma;ni-

tude, but for its position. It stretches from the
northern polar circle to a high southern latitude,
above fifteen hludrcd miles beyond the farthcll
extremity of the old continent on that lide of the
line. A country of luch extent passes through all
the climates capable of becoming the habitation of
pnan, and fit for yiclding the various productions

* IIerrclral, dec. i, lib. vi. c. 16.

pccuria¥

peculiar either to the temperate or to the torrid B o o K
regions of the earth. Iv.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the 1'"0

Grand ob-

grandeur of the objects which it presents to view ;,as itple
is most apt to strike the eye of an obierver. fcnts to
Nature seems here to have carried on her opera- vie
tions with a bolder hand, and to have distinguish-
ed the features of this country by a peculiar mag-
nificence. The mountains of America are much Its moun-
superior in height to those in the other divisions ta'ln
of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which
may be confidered as the base of the Andes, is
elevated farther above the sea than the top of
the Pyrenees. This stupendous ridge of the An-
des, no less remarkable for extent than eleva-
tion, rites in different places more than one third
above the Pike of Teneriffe, the highest land in
the ancient hemisphere. The Andes may literal-
ly be said to hide their heads in the clouds; the
tforms often roll, and the thunder bursts below
their summits, which, though exposed to the r:;ys
of the fun in the centre of the torrid zone, are
covered with cverlafting fiows *.

FlROM those lofty mountains descend rivers rivrs,

proportionally large, with which the streams in
the ancient continent are not to be compared,
either for length of courfc, or the vast body of
water which thev roll towards the ocean. The
Maragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata, in South
America, the Miilifippi and St. Laurence in
North America, flow in such spacious channels,
that, long before they feel the influence of the
tide, they refimble arms of the tia rather than
rivers of frcfll water t.

* See NOTE XXVII.
·!I Scc NOTE XXV.IL.

THEin

B o0 K TtE lakes of the New World are no less con.

Iv. fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and
'ai7 rivers. There is nothing in other parts of the

globe which resembles the prodigious chain of
lakes in North America. They may properly be
termed inland seas of frefl water; and even those
of the second or third class in magnitude, are of
larger circuit than the greatest lake of the antient
continent.

THE New World is of a form extremely fa-

Itsform fvourable to commercial intercourse. When a
vour.ble tocontinent, like Africa, is composed of one vast
commerce. solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea pene-

trating into its interior parts, with few large ri-
vers, and those at a considerable distance from
each other, the greater part of it seems defrined
to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be debar-
red from any active or enlarged communication
with the reft of mankind. When, like Europe,
a continent is opened by inlets of the ocean of
vast extent, such as the Mediterranean and Baltic;
or when, like Asia, its coast is broken by deep
bays advancing far into the country, such as the
Black Sea, the gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of
Bengal, of Siam, and of Leotang ; when the fur-
rounding seas are filled with large and fertile
islands, and the continent itself watered with a
variety of navigable rivers, those regions may be
taid to possess whatever can facilitate the progress
of their inhabitants in commerce and improve-
ment. In all these refpe&ts America may bear
a comparison with the other quarters of the globe.
Tjle gulf of Mexico, which flows in between North
nrid South America, may be confidered as a Medi,
tcrranean sea, which opens a maritime commerce
with all the fertile countries by which it is incirclcd.
Thc islands ifiattcred in it arc inferior only to those

in

in the Indian Archipelago, in number, in magni- B o K.
tude, and in value. As we firetch along the jY.
northern division of the American hemisphere,
the Bay of Chefapeak presents a spacious inlet,
which condu&s the navigator far into the interior
parts of provinces no leis fertile than extensive;
and if ever the progress of culture and population
ihall mitigate the extreme rigour of the climate in
the more northern difirids of America, Hudson's
Bay may become as fulbfervient to the commercial
intercourse in that quarter of the globe, as the
Baltic is in Europe. The other great portion of
the New World is encompassed on every fide by
the sea, except one narrow neck, which separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean ; and though
it be not opened by spacious bays or arms of the
sea, its interior parts are rendered acceflible by a
number of large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary
fireams, flowing in such various directions, that,
without any aid from the hand of industry and art,
an inland navigation may be carried on through
all the provinces from the river De la Plata to the
gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty of nature con.
fined to the southern division of America; its
northern continent abounds no less in rivers which
are navigable almost to their sources, and by its
immense chain of lakes provision is made for an
inland communication, more extensive and com-
modious than in any quarter of the globe. The
countries itretching from the gulf of Darien on
one fide, to that of California on the other, which
form the chaili that binds the two parts of the
American continent together, arc not deflitute of
peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide is
washed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by
the Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into the
former, oime into the latter, and fccure to them
all the commercial benefits that may result from a
communication with both.

BUT

BOO K BUT what most diffinguifles America from

Tv- other parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature
^^J ^ of its climate, and the different laws to which it is
Trpias subjed with refpea to the distribution of heat and
climate. cold. We cannot determine precisely the portion

of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by
measuring its distance from the equator. The
climate of a country is asseted, in some degree,
by its elevation above the sea, by the extent of
continent, by the nature of the foil, the height of
adjacent mountains, and many other circumftan-
ces. The influence of these, however, is, from
various causes, less considerable in the greater part
of the ancient continent; and from knowing the
position of any country there, we can pronounce
with more certainty what will be the warmth of its
climate, and the nature of its productions.

prd-oni- THE maxims which are founded upon obferva-
nac of tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other.

There, cold predominates. The rigour of the
frigid zone extends over half of that which should
be temperate by its position. Countries where the
grape and the fig hould ripen, are buried under
snow one half of the year; and the lands situated
in the fame parallel with the most fertile and bcft
cultivated provinces in Europe, are chilled with
perpetual frosts, which almoff destroy the power
of vegetation *. As we advanced to those parts
of America which lie in the fame parallel with
provinces of Asia and Africa, blessed with an
uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth as is
most friendly to life and vegetation, the dominion
of cold continues to be felt, and winter, though
during a short period, often reigns with extreme
severity. If we proceed along the American con-
tinent into the torrid zone, we shall find the cold

Sec NOTE XXIX.

prevalent

prevalent in the New "v'orld extending itself also Bo o K
to this region of the globe, and mitigating the r'-
excess of its fervour. While the negro on the
coast of Africa is 'scorched with unremitting heat,
the inhabitant of Peru breathes an air equally
mild and temperate, and is perpetually shaded
under a canopy of grey clouds, which intercept
the fierce beams of the fun, without obftrudcing
his friendly influence *. Along the eastern coast
of America, the climate, though more finlilar to
that of the torrid zone in other parts of the earth,
is nevertheless considerably milder than those
countries of Asia and Africa which lie in the fame
latitude. If from the southern tropic we continue
our progress to the extremity of the American
continent, we meet with frozen seas, and coun-
tries horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for
cold, sooner than in the north*.

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli-carfeof

mate of America so extremely different from that t11.
of the ancient continent. Though the utmost
extent of America towards the north be not yet
discovered, we know that it advances nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter have
large seas to the north, which are open during part
of the year; and even when covered with ice, the
iwind that blows over them is less intensely cold
than that which blows over l:ld in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land stretches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out iihmenfely to the wefl. A chain of
enormous mountains, covered with fimow and ice,

* Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage,
p. 184.

t Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyage de Quiros, chec

Hilt. Gen. dcs Voyages, torn. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hist.
Natur. de 1'Air. ii. 305, &c.

runs

B o K runs through all this dreary region. The wind, in
IV*, passing over such an extent of high and frozen land,

becomes so impregnated with cold, that it acquires
a piercing keenness, which it retains in its progress
through warmer climates, and is not entirely miti-
gated until it reach the Gulph of Mexico. Over
all the continent of North America, a north-wef-
terly wind and excessive cold are synonymous
terms. Even in the molt sultry weather, the mo-
ment that the wind veers to that quarter, its pene-
trating influence is felt in a transition from heat to
cold, no less violent than sudden. To this power-
ful cause we may ascribe the extraordinary domi-
nion of cold, and its violent inroads into the fou-
thern provinces in that part of the globe *.

OTHER causes no less remarkable, diminish the

active power of heat in those parts of the American
continent which lie between the tropics. In all
that portion of the globe, the wind blows in an
invariable direction from east to weft. As this
wind blows its course across the ancient continent,
it arrives at the countries which stretch along the
western shore of Africa, inflamed with all the fiery
particles which it hath colleEted from the sultry
plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the African
defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the
region of the earth which feels the molt fervent
heat, and is exposed to the unmitigated ardour of
the torrid zone. But this fame wind which brings
fich an accession of warmth to the countries lying
between the river of Senegal and Cafraria, traver-
fes theAtlanticOcean before it reaches theAmerican
shore. It is cooled in its passage over this valt bo-
dy of water, and is felt as a refreshing gale along
the coalts of Brasil t, and Guiana, rendering

* Charlevoix Hill. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hilf. generale
Voy;lges, tom. xv. z2l1, &c. S'e Se NOTES XXX.

tlwcle

these countries, though among the warmest in B o 0 Ki
America, temperate, when compared with those V,.-
which lie opposite to them in Africa *. As this
wind advances in its course across America, it meets
with immense plains, covered with impenetrable
forests, or occupied by large rivers, marshes, and
fiagnating waters, where it can recover no confi-
derable degree of heat. At length it arrives at
the Andes, which run from north to south through
the whole continent. In palsing over their ele-
vated and fiozen summits, it is so thoroughly cool-
ed, that the greater part of the countries beyond
them hardly feel the ardour to which they tiemr ex-
posed by their situation t. In the other provinces
of America, from Tierra Firmn wellward to the
Mexican Empire, the heat of the climate is temper-
ed, in some places, by the elevation of the land
above the sea, in others, by their extraordinary
humidity, and in all, by the enormous mountains
scattered over this trac. The iilands of America
in the Torrid Zone are either finall or mountain-
ous, and are fanned alternately by refrefling Lea
and land-breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the southern limits of America, and in the seas be-
yond it, cannot be afcerrained in a manner equal-
ly satisfying. It was long fuppolfd that a va0l con-
tinent, diltinguifled by tlic name of 'terra A/t'
tralis Incognila, lay between the Illutliernl extremi-
ty of America and the Antaraic pole. The fame
principles which account for the extraordinarv
degree of cold in the northern reogions of America,
were employed in order .o explain thit which is
felt at Cape Horn and the aj;ljc(cnr (coultries. The
imnmenfe extent of the loutlilcrn continent, and the

: Sec NOTE XXX .Y
1 Acofta llilt. Novi Orbis, lib. ii, c. It. Iluflbn -ilT.

N.turellc, &c. torn. ii. g , t, ix'. 'v, e. Ol orn's Col-
Wled. of Vo.ages, ii p. S6p.

lar>;

B 0oo K large rivers which it poured into the ocean, were

IV.
_sVy mentioned and admitted by philosophers, as causes

sufficient to occasion the unusual sensation of cold,
and the fill more uncommon appearances of fro-
zen seas in that region of the globe. But the
imaginary continent to which such influence was
ascribed, having been searched for in vain, and
the space which it was supposed to occupy, having
been found to be an open sea, new conjeEtures
must be formed with refpeft to the causes of a
temperature of climate so extremely different from
that which we experience in countries removed
at the fame distance from the opposite pole *.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha-
iieo, sirs racteriftic qualities es the American continent,

. which arise from the peculiarity of its situation,

and the disposition of its parts, the next objeE that
merits attention is its condition when first disco-
vered, as far as that depended upon the industry
and operations of man. The effets of human
ingenuity and labour are more extensive and con-
fiderable, than even our vanity is apt at first to
imagine. When we survey the face of the habit-
table globe, no small part of that fertility and
beauty, which we ascribe to the hand of Nature,
is the work of man. His efforts, when continued
through a succession of ages, change the appear-
ance and improve the qualities of the earth. As
a great part of the ancient continent has long been
occupied by nations far advanced in its arts anl
industry, our eye is accustomed to view the earth
in that form which it assumes when rendered fit to
be the residence of a numerous race of men, and
to supply them with nourifhmnent.

* See NOTE XXXII,

B iT

BUT in the New World, the Rlate of mankind B 6O .

was ruder, and the afpeEt of Nature extremely Iv-
different. Throughout all its vast regions, there Rude
were only two monarchies remarkable for extent uncultiva.
of territory, or diilinguifled by any progrefs.in im. ted
provement. The reit of this continent was pof-
ieffed by small independent tribes, destitute of arts
and industry, and neither capable to correct the
defeEts, nor desirous to meliorate the condition of
that part of the earth allotted to them for their ha-
bitation. Countries, occupied by such people,
were alnoft in the fame slate as if they had been
without inhabitants. Immense forests covered a
great part of the uncultivated earth ; and as the
hand of industry had not taught the rivers to run in
a proper channel, or drained off the stagnating
water, many of the most fertile plains were over-
flowed with inundations, or converted into marfl-
es. In the southern provinces, where the warmth
of the fun, the moilture of the climate, and the
fertility of the foil, combine in calling forth the
moit vigorous powers of vegetation, the woods
are so choked witih its rank luxuriance, as to be
alnoft impervious, and the surface of the.ground
is hid from the eye under a thick covering of flirubs
and herbs and weeds. In this state of wild unaf-
fillted nature,. a great part of the large provinces in
South America, which extend from the bottom of
the Andes to the sea, itill remain. The European
colonies have cleared and cultivated a few spots'
along the coast, but the original inhabitants, as rude
and indolent as ever, have done nothing to open or
improve a country, poflring almost every advan-
tage of situation and climate. As we advance to-
wards the northern provinces of America, Nature
continues to wear the anme uncultivated aspcd, and
in proportion as the rigour of the climate incrcal:,
appears more desolate and horrid. lherc, ti e
forcfts, though not enculmbicrcd wiith thle . iame

VOL. I. S exuberance

B K. etxuberance of vegetation, are of equal extent .

V_ v'. prodigious marfles overspread the plains, and few

marks appear of human activity in any attempt to'
cultivate or embellifl the earth. No wonder that
the colonies sent from Europe were astonished
at their firit entrance into the New World. It ap-
peared to them waste, solitary, and uninviting.
When the English began to fettle in America, they
termed the countries of which they took possession,
The Wilderness. Nothing but their eager expeta-
tion of finding mines of gold, eould have induced
the Spaniards to penetrate through thewoods and
marshes of America, where, at every ftep, they
observed the extreme difference between the un-
cultivated face of Natuie, and that which it ac-
quires under the forming hand of industry and
art e.

;nwhlole- The labour and operations of man not only im-
fiqnle prove and embellish the earth, but render it more

wholesome, and friendly to life. When any re-
gion lies neglected and destitute of cultivation, the
air flagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters; the surface of the earth,
loaded with rank vegetation, feels not the purify-
ing influence of the fun; the malignity of the
diltempers natural to the climate increases, and new
maladies no lel:s noxious are engendered. Accord-
ingly, all, the provinces of America, when firit difl
covered, Wvere found to be remarkably unhcilthy.
This the Spaniards experienced in every expedition
into the New World, whether de:ineld for con-
quest or settlement. Though by the natural con
liitution of their bodies, their habitual temperance,
and the'perfevering vigour of their minds, they
were as much formed as any people in Europe 1so

* See Note XXXTTI.

aCtive

ative service in a sultry climate, they felt severely B o o K
the fatal and pernicious qualities of those unculti- iv.
vated regions through which they marched, or v-"
where they endeavoured to plant colonies. Great
numbers were cut off by the unknown and violent
diseases with which they were infeced. Such as
survived the deftrucive rage of those maladies,
were not exempted from the noxious etfeds of the
climate. They returned to Europe, according- to
the description of the early Spaniflh historians,
feeble, emaciated, with languid looks, and com-
plexions of such a sickly yellow colour, as indica-
ted the unwholesome temperature of the countries
where they had resided *.

THE uncultivated state of the New World as.- ts animas,

feded not only the temperature of the air, but the
qualities of its productions. The principle of life
seems to have been lcfs active and vigorous there,
than in the ancient continent. Notwitlhftanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its
climates, the different species of animals peculiar
to it are much fewer in proportion, than those of
the other heinifphere. In the islands, there were
only four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On
the continent the variety was greater, and though
the individuals of each kind could not fail of multi-
plying exceedingly, when alniolt uninoleftcd by
men, who were neither so numerous, nor so uni-
ted in society, as to be formidable enemies to the
animal creation, the number of diltinc Ispecics
muit be confidered as extremely finall. Of two
Iiu.idrcd different kinds of animals spread over the
face of the earth, onl,' about one third cxitfed'

*( ;larHila iil. . 20. 22. Oviedo Itifl. lib. ii. c. 13. lib.
v. c. so. P. Martyr, Epilt. 54. D)ccad. p. 176.

S a in

B 0 OK in America, at the time of its discovery *. Nature

w. was not only less prolific in the New World,
but she appears likewise to have been lets vigorous
in her producions. The animals originally belong-
ing to this quarter of the globe appear to be of an
inferior race, neither so robuAt, nor so fierce, as
those of the other continent. America gives birth
to no creature of such bulk as to be compared
with the elephant or rhinoceros, or that equals
the lyon and tyger in strength and ferocityt.
The Tapyr of Brasil, the quadruped of the firll
magnitude in the New World, is not larger than a
calf of fix months old. The Puma and Jraguar,
its fiercest beasts of prey, which the Europeans
have inaccurately denominated lyons and tygers,
possess neither the undaunted courage of the
former, nor the ravenous cruelty of the latter }.
They are inactive and timid, hardly formidable to
man, and often turn their backs upon the leait
appearance of resistance 1'. The fame qualities in
the climate of America which stinted the growth,
and enfeebled the spirit, of its native animals,
have proved pernicious to such as have migrated in-
to it voluntarily from the other continent, or have
been transported thither by the Europeans §. The
bears, the wolves, the deer of America, are not
equal in size to those of the Old World ¶'. Molt
of the domestic animals, with which the Euro-
peans storcd the provinces wherein they fettled, have
degenerated with refpet to bulk or quality,

· Buffon Hiit. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86. t See

NOTE XXXIV. I Buffon Wil. Natur. torn. ix. .
87. MargraviiHift. Nat. Brasil, p. z29. 1 3luflik,n Hill
Natur. i; . 13. 20. Acolla lill. lib. iv. c. 3.. Pifoni
liftl. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib, iv. c. i. lib. x. c. 13.

§ Churchill, v. p. 691. Ovalle IRelat. of Chili Clhurcli, iii.

p . Somniario dc Ovicdo, c. 14---zz. Voyg;e:gc u dIch
Marchais; iii.'2zp. R.iufibn Hill. Natur. ix. 10;
Kalmnrrvels, 1. 20. 0 Biet V\oy. de l'ralnce Ehuiinox, p. 339

in a country whose temperature and foil seem to B o o K
be less favourable to the strength and perfection of IV'
the animal creation *.

THE iame causes which checked the growth Inses and

and the vigour of the more noble animals, were reptiles.
friendly to the propagation and increase of rep-
tiles and infeEts. Though this is not peculiar to
the New World, and those odious tribes, the off-
spring of heat, moisture, and corruption, infest
every part of the torrid zone; they multiply faf-
ter, perhaps, in America, and grow to a more
monstrous bulk. As this country is, on the
whole less cultivated, and less peopled, than the
other quarters of the earth, the active principle of
life waftes its force in productions of this inferior
form. The air is often darkened with clouds of
infects, and the ground covered with shocking and
noxious reptiles. The country around Porto-
Bello swarms with toads in such multitudes, as
hide the surface of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes
and vipers are hardly less numerous. Carthage-
na is infested with numerous flocks of bats, which
annoy not only the cattle but inhabitants t. In
the islands, legions of ants have, at different times,
consumed every vegetable grodudion I, and left
the earth entirely bare, as if it had been burnt
with fire. The damp forefls, and rank foil of the
countries on the banks of the Orinoco and Ma-
ragnon, teem with almost every offcnfive and poi-
forious creature, wl4ich the power of a sultry lun
can quicken into life §.

* See NOTE XXXV. t Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i,

p. 89. Id. p. 1.47. Icrrcra, dec. 1I. li1. iil. c. 3. 19.

1. See NOTE XXXVI. 4 Voyage de Condamine,

P: 167. Gumilla, iii. 12o, &c. Iill. gener. des Voyages,
xi'. 317. Dumont Meinoires fur la Louiliane, i. 1o8. Sorn.
r:ario de Oviedo, c. 52-6z.

B O O K THE birds of the New World are not diPtin,

_v., guifhed by qualities so conspicuous and charater-
Birds. iftical, as tlofe which we have observed in its

quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of man,
and less affected by the changes which industry and
labour make upon the slate of the earth. They
have a greater propensity to migrate from one
country to another, and can gratify this instinct of
their nature without difficulty or danger. Hence the
number of birds common to both continents is much
greater than that of quadrupeds ; and even such as
are peculiar to America nearly resemble those
with which mankind were acquainted in similar
regions of the ancient hemisphere. The Ameri-
can birds of the torrid zone, like those of the fame
climate in Asia and Africa, are decked in plumage,
which dazzles the eye with the vivid beauty of its
colours ; but nature, satisfied with cloathing them
in this gay dress, has denied mofl of them that me-
lody of found, and variety of notes, which catches
and delights the ear. The birds of the temperate
climates, there, in the fame manner as in our con-
tinent, are less fplcndid in their appearance, but,
in compensation for that defet, have all the power
and sweetness of music in their voice. In fonc
dilricts of America, the unwholesome temperature
of the air seems to be unfavourable even to this
part of the creation. The number of birds is 1k ls
than in other countries, and the traveller is struck
with the amazing solitude and silence of its so-
re(ts*. It is remarkable, however, that Americ;,
where the quadrupeds are to dwarfifh and cdaf-
tardly, should produce the Condol, which is in-

~ Bougucr Voy. au Perou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la

Martiniqtic, p. 96. Warren Dcfcript. Surinam. Oiborn's
(2olle't. ii. 1)4. Lettres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlcv. Hilt.
dS la Nouv. F'rance, iii. I 5

titled

-titled to pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in B o o K
bulk, in strength, and in courage *. IV.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as Ameri-'-T"

Soil.

ca, muff of course be extremely various. In each
of its provinces, we llall find some diftinguiihing
peculiarity, the description of which belongs to
those who write their particular hiflory. In gene-
ral, we may observe, that the moisture and cold,
which predominate so remarkably in all parts of
America, must have great irnfluence upon the na-
ture of its foil; countries lying in the fame pa.
rallel with those regions which never feel the ex-
treme rigour of winter in the ancient continent,
are frozen over in America during a great part of
the year. Chilled by this intense cold, the ground
never acquires warmth sufficient to ripen the fruits,
which are found in the corresponding parts of the
other continent. If we would rear in America
the produtions which abound in any particular
diftri& of the world, we must advance several de-
grees nearer to the line than in the other hemif-
phere, as it requires such an increase of heat to
counterbalance the natural frigidity of the foil
and climate t. At the Cape of Good Hope, feve,
ral of theirplants, and fruits peculiar to the coun-
tries within the tropics, are cultivated with fuc-
cess; whereas, at St. Augustine, in Florida, and
Charles-Town, in South-Carolina, though confi-
dcrably nearer to the line, they cannot be brought
to thrive with equal certainty t. But, if allowance
be made for this diversity, the foil of America is
naturally as rich and fertile as in any part of the
earth. As the countrywas thinly inhabited, and by

Voyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine, 17I.

BIfflon Hilt. Nat. xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Marchais, ii,
j2o. t Sec NOTE XXXVII. t See NOTE XXXVIII.

a people

o oo o a people of little industry, who had none of the

.- , domestic animals, which civilized nations rear in

such vast numbers, the earth was not exhausted
by their consumption. The vegetable produ&i-
ons, to which its fertility gave birth, often remain-
ed untouched, and being suffered to corrupt on its
surface, returned with increase into its bosom *
As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nourifhinent from air and water, if they were not
destroyed by man and other animals, they would
render to the earth more, perhaps, than they take
from it, and feed rather than impoverish it. Thus
the unoccupied foil of America, might go on en-
riching for many ages. The vast number as well
as enormous size of the trees in America, indicate,
the extraordinary vigour of the foil in its native
state. When the Europeans first began to culti-
vate the New World, they were aftoniihed at the
luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin mould;
and in several places the ingenuity of the planter is
still employed in diminishing and wafting its fu-
perfluous fertility, in order to bring it down to ;
state fit for useful culture.

How wvas "' HAVING thus surveyed the Itate of the New
iAmerica World at the time of its discovery, and confidered
peopled? the peculiar features and qualities which diftin-

guifi, and charafterife'it, the next inquiry that
merits 'attention' is, How was America peopled ?
By what course did'mankind migrate from the
one continent to the other ? and in what quarter
is it molt probable that a communication was
opened between them?

* Bufuon, Hi-. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. 151.
1- Charlevoix, HIift. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage du

.Des Marchais. iii. 2zg. Lery ap. De Bry, part iii. p. '174
bee NOTE XXXIX.

xWE

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all B o o K

the human race spring from the fame source, and Iv.
that the descendants of one man, under the pro- Notradit
te&ion as well as in obedience to the command onconcern-
of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth. in it a-
But neither the annals nor the traditions of nati- tnherl.ves.
ons reach back to thole remote ages, in which
they took possession of the different countries
where they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this first family, or point out with
certainty the time and manner inwhich they divid-
ed and spread over the face of the globe. Even
among the most enlightened people, the period of
authentic history is extremely short, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is
not surprising, then, that the unlettered inhabi-
tants of America, who have no solicitude about
futurity, and little curiosity concerning what is
past, should be altogether unacquainted with their
own original. The Californians and Efkimaux,
in particular, who occupy those countries in
America which approach nearest to the ancient
continent, are so remarkably rude, that it is al-
together vain to search among them for such in-
formation as might discover the place from
whence they came, or the ancestors of whom
they are descended *. Whatever light has been
thrown on this subjed, is derived, not from the
natives of America, but from the inquisitive ge-
nius of their conquerors.

WHEN the people of Europe unexpecedly dif- v,aro,.

covered aNew World, removed at a vafi dif- theories.
tance from every part of the anticnt continent
which was then known, and filled with inhabi-
tants whose appearance and manners differed re-
markably from the reft of the human Ipecies,
the question concerning their original became

Vcnegas IIif. of California, i. 6o.

naturally

O K naturally an objeat of curiosity and attention.
LNR The theories and speculations of ingenious men

with refpef to this fubje&, would fill many vo-
lumes; but are often so wild and chimerical, that
I should offer an insult to the understanding
of my readers, if I attempted either to enume-
rate or to refute them. Some have prefumptu-
oufly imagined, that the people of America were
not the offspring of the fame common parent
with the reft of mankind, but that they formed a
separate race of men diftinguiflable by peculiar
features in the constitution of their bodies, as well
as in the charaderiftic qualities of their minds.
Others contend, that they are dcfcended froml
some remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of
the earth, who survived the deluge, which swept
away the greatest part of the human species in thle
days of Noah; and preposterously suppose rude,
uncivilized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated
continent, to be the most ancient race of people
on the earth. There is hardly any nation from
the north to the south pole, to which some anti-
quary, in the extravagance of conjeture, has not
ascribed the honour of peopling America. The
Jews, the Canaanites, the Phcenicians, the Car-
thaginians, the Greeks, the Scythians, in antient
times are supposed to have fettled in this weflcrn
world. The Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwe-
gians, the Wellh, the Spaniards, are said to have
fcnt colonies thither in later ages, at different pe-
riod(s, and on various occasions. Zealous advo-
cates fland forth to support the rcfpective claim;
of those people; and though they reft upon no
better foundation than the casual refemblancc of
fOIne customs, or the supposed aflinity between a
few words in their different languages, much eru-
dition and more zeal have been employed, to
little purpose, in defence of the opposite fyflems.
Tlhofe reginnS of conjcaitre and controversy bc-

lolng

.long not to the historian. His is a more limited B o o K
province, confined to what is eftabliflled by cer-

_ _

tain or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I
ihall not venture, in offering a few observations,
which may contribute to throw some light upon
this curious and much agitated question.

i.THE RE are authors who have endeavoured by Ought not

mere conjetures to account for the peopling f founded on
America. Some have supposed that it was origi- mere con-
nally united to the antient continent, and disjoin-eaure'
ed from it by the shock of an earthquake, or the
irruption of a deluge. Others have imagined,
that some vessel being forced from its course by
the violonce of a westerly wind, might be driven
by accident towards the American coast, and have
given a beginning to popula;tn in that desolate
continent %. But with refped to all those systems,
it is vain either to reason or inquire, because it is
impossible to come to any decision, Such events
as they suppose are barely possible, and may have
happened. That they ever did happen, we have
no evidence, either from the clear testimony of
history, or from the obscure intimations of tra-
dition.

2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncer-oron re-

tain than the attempts to discover the original of fcmblance
the Americans, merely by tracing the ref- manners
blance between their manners and those of amy
particular people in the antient continent. If we
suppose two bodies of men, though in the moit
remote regions of the globe, to be placed in a
fate of society similar in its degree of improvc-

* Parsons Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Univcrf.

Iift. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Fcyjoo TI'etro Critico, tom. v. p.
304, &c. AcollaHilt. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. 16, 19.

ment,

B.0 0 K ment, they nmuf feel the fame wants, and exert

lv. the fame' endeavours to supply them. The fame

.objeEts will allure, the fame passions will animate

them, and the fame ideas and sentiments will arise
in their minds. The character and occupations
of the hunter in America mufft be little different
from those of an Asiatic, who depends for sub-
liftence on the chace. A tribe of savages on the
banks of the Danube must nearly resemble one
upon the plains walfed by the Miffifippi. Instead
then of presuming, from this similarity, that there
is any affinity between them, we fiould only con-
clude, that the disposition and manners of men
are formed by their situation, and arise from the
Itate of faciety in which they live. The moment
that begins to vary, the charater of a people muff
change. In proportion as it advances in improve-
inent, their manners refine, their powers and ta-
lents are called forth. In every part of the earth
the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,
and we can trace him in his career from the rude
simplicity of savage life, until he attains the in-
tiultry, the arts, and the elegance of polished so-
city. There is nothing wonderful then in the
iimilitude between the Americans and the bar-
barous nations of our continent. Had Lafitau,
Garcia, and many other authors, attended to this,
they would not have perplexed a fubjeEt which
they pretend to illustrate, by their fruitlcfs endea-
vours to cftablith an affinity between various races
of people in the old and new continents, upon
n;o other evidence than such a resemblance in
their manners as neceflarily arises from the fimila-
rity of their condition. There are, it is true, among
every people tome customs, which, as they do not
flow from any natural want or desire peculiar to their
situation, may be denominated usages of arbitrary
inltitution. If between two nations fcttled in remote

parts

parts of the earth, a perfect agreement with refpeó& B OK
to any of these should be discovered, one might I
be led to' fufpeat that they were con neced by some
affinity. If a nation were found in America that
consecrated the seventh day to religious reft, if in
another the first appearance of a new moon was
celebrated with festivity, we might juffly supp)ose
that the former had derived its knowledge of this
usage of arbitrary institution fiom the Jews, while
the latter might be confidered as nothing more
than an expression of joy natural to man on the
return of the planet which guides and cheers him
in the night. The instances of customs, merely
arbitrary, common to the inhabitants of both he-
mifpheres, are, indeed, so few, and so equivocal,
that no theory concerning the population of the
New World ought to be founded upon them.

3. THE theories which have been formed with orcf rs

respect to the original of the Americans, from ob- siou9rit.
servation of their religious rites and practices, are
no less fanciful, and destitute of solid foundation.
When the religious opinions of any people arc
neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived
from the inftrudions of revelation, they must
needs be wild and extravagant. Barbarous na-
tions are incapable of the former, and have nor
been blessed with the advantages arising riom the
latter. Still, however, the human mind, eve:d
where its operations appear molt: wild and capri-
cious, holds a courfc lb regular, that in every
age and country the dominion of particular palili-
ons will be attended with lirnilar eflch(s. The ls-
vage of Europe or lAericn, when filled with fu.-
perllitious dread of invilible beings, or with in-
,quilitive olicitudc to pcnctrate into the events )o
iluturity, trembles alike witli sc.ar, or glows wii.l
inlpatience. 1 II has recourl to rites and practiccs

('

B o0 K of the fame kind, in order to avert the vengeance

which he supposes to be impending over him, or
to divine the secret which is the object of his cu-
riofity. Accordingly, the ritual of superstition,
in one continent, seems, in manyparticulars, to
be a transcript of that eftablihed in the other, and
both authorise similar infiituticns, sometimes so
frivolous as to excite pity, omnetimes so bloody
and barbarous as to create horror. But without
supposing any consanguinity between such distant
nations, or imagining that their religious cere-
monies were conveyed by tradition from the one
to the other, we may ascribe this uniformity, which
in many instances seems very amazing, to the na-
tural operation of superstition and enthufiafin upon
the weakness of the human mind.

Not peo- 4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle in
pled byany this inquiry, that America was not peopled by any
highly nations of the antient continent, which had made
lized. considerable progress in civilization. The inha-

bitants of the New World were in a slate of foci-
ety so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with
those arts which are the first essays of human in-
genuity in its advance towards improvement.
Even the mot: cultivated nations of America were
strangers to many ofthofefimple inventions, which
were almolt coeval with society in other parts of
the world, and were known in the earlieit periods
of civil life. From this it is manifest, that the
tribes which originally migrated to Amelica,
came off from nations which mufn have been no
less barbarous than their poferity, at the time
when they were firt discovered by the Europeans.
For, although the elegant and refined arts .nay
decline or perish, amidst the violent flocks of those
revolutions and disasters to which nations are expo-
sied, the neceflary arts of life, when once they have
been introduced among any people, are never loni.

Notn

None of the vicissitudes in human affairs affe& B o ocK
there, and they continue to be praaifed as long as 1iv
the race of men exiffts. If ever the use of iron had ''-
been known to the savages in America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they had employed a plough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of there inventions
would have preserved them, and it is impossible
that they should have been abandoned or forgot-
ten. We mayconclude then, that the Americans
sprung from some people, who were themselves in
such an early and unimproved fiage of society, as
to be unacquainted with all the necessary arts
which remained unknown among their posterity.

5. IT appears no less evident, that America was norfiomthe

not peopled by any colony from the more southern foutlhernre-
nations of the ancient continent. None of the ginsf"our
rude tribes fettled in that part of our hemisphere
can be supposed to have visited a country so re-
mote. They possessed neither enterprise, nor inge-
nuity, nor power, that could prompt them to un-
dertake, or enable them to perform, such a distant
voyage. That the more civilized nations in Asia
or Africa are not the progenitors of the Americans
is manifest, not only from the observations which I
have already made concerning their ignorance of
the most simple and necessary arts, but from an
additional circumtfance. Whenever any people
have experienced the advantages which men enjoy,
by their dominion over the inferior animals, they
can neither subsist without the nouriihment which
they afford, nor carry on their operations inde-
pendent of their miniltry and labour. According-
ly, the f-irst care of the Spaniards when they fettled
in America, was to flock it with all the domestic
animals of Europe, and if prior to them, the Tyri-
ans, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any other
polished people, had taken poffeflion of that con-

tinenr,

B °0 K tinent, we should have found there the animals

Iv.
x-vJ peculiar to those regions of the globe where they

were originally feated. In all America, however,
there is not one animal, tame or wild, which pro-
perly belongs to the warm, or even the more tem-
perate countries of the ancient continent. The
camel, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were
as much unknown in America, as the elephant or
the lion. From which it is obvious, that the peo-
ple who first fettled in the western world did not
issue from the countries where those animals
abound, and where men, from having been long
accustomed to their aid, would naturally confider
it, not only as beneficial, but as indispensably ne-
cefiary to the improvement, and even the prefer-
vation, of civil society.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents America is stored, we may conclude that the near-
seem to be
most conti- eft point of contac between the old and new con-
guous to- tinents is towards the northern extremity of both,
wards the
north. and that there the communication was opened,

and the intercourse carried on between them. All
the extensive countries in America which lie within
the tropics, or approach near to them, are filled
with indigenous animals of various kinds, entirely
different from tho`e in the corresponding regions
of the ancient continent. But the northern pro-
vinces of the New World abound with many of
the wild animals which are common in such parts
of our hemifpherc as lie in a similar situation.
The bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer,
the elk, and several other species frequent the so-
rcits of North America, no less than those in the
north of Europe and Asia *. It fiems to be evi-

BufTbn Hilt. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

dent

dent then, that the two continents approach each B O O KI
other in this quarter, and are either united, or so >
nearly adjacent, that these animals might pass
from the one to the other.

7. THE actual vicinity of the two continents is This afcer-

so clearly established by modern discoveries, as "di,'by
removes the chief difficulty with refpeft to the
peopling of America. While those immense re-
gions which stretched eastward from the river
Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or
imperfecily explored, the north east extremities
of our hemisphere were supposed to be so far dif-
tant from any part of the New World, that it was
not easy to conceive how any communication
mfould have been carried on between them. But
the Ruffians, having fubiected the western part of
Siberia to their empire, gradually extended their
knowledge of that vast country, by advancing to-
wards the eafl into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in their excursions as-
ter game, or by soldiers employed in levying the
taxes, and the court of Moscow estimated the
importance of those countries only by the fnall
addition which they made to its revenue. At length,
Peter the Great ascended the Ruffian throne. His
enlightened, comprehensive mind, intent upon
every circumstance that could aggrandize his em-
pire, or render his reign illustrious, discerned con-
tiquences of those discoveries, which had efiaped
the observation of his iygnorant p:e leceflors. He
perceived, that in proportion as the regions of Asia
extended towards the east, they Inult approach
nearer to America; that the coinmunication be-
tween the two continents, which had long been
I'arched for in vain, would probably be found in
tils quarter, and that by opening this intercourse,
oime part of the wealth and conmmerce of the wef-
trrn world mi<;lt be mlade to flow into his domi-

VoL. 1. rT niorls

o
° K nions by a new channel. Such an object suited
1vY, a genius that delighted in grand schemes. Peter

drew up inftruftions with his own hand for prose-
cuting this design, and gave orders for carrying it
into execution *.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employed in this service, had to struggle with so
many difficulties, that their progress was extreme-
ly flow. Encouraged by orne faint traditions
among the people of Siberia, concerning a fuc-
cefsful voyage in the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and forty-eight, round the north-east promon-
tory of Asia, they attempted to follow the fame
course. Vessels were fitted out, wih this view, at
different timess from the rivers Lena and Kolyma;
but in a frozen ocean, which nature seems not to
have destined for navigation, they were exposed to
many disasters, without being able to accomplifli
their purpose. No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formidable Cape ; we
are indebted for what is known of those extreme
regions of Asia, to the discoveries made in excur-
sions by land. In all those provinces, an opinion
prevails, that countries of great extent and fertility
lie at no considerable distance from their own coafs.
These the Ruffians imagined to bepart of America;
and several circumstances concurred not only in
confirming them in this belief, but in persuading
them that some portion of that continent could
not be very remote. Trees of various kinds, un-
known in those naked regions of Asia, are driven
tpon the coast by an eaftcrly wind. By the Iamle
wind, floating ice is brought thither in a few
days; flights of birds arrive annually fiom the

* Muller Voyages et Dccotlvcrtcs par Ic P.Rffcis, tonm. i
p. 4, . 141.

b Sec NOTE XL.

Tlmit

fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among the BOOK
inhabitants, of an intercourse formerly carried on ^1v
with some countries situated to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and com-

paring the position of the countries in Asia which
they had discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Ruffian
court formed a plan, which would have hardly
occurred to any nation leis accustomed to engage
in arduous undertakings, and to contend with great
difficulties. Orders were issued to build two vei-
fels at Ochotz, in the sea of Kamchatka, to fail
on a voyage of discovery. Though that dreary
uncultivated region furnished nothing that could
be of use in conftruding them, but some larch
trees; though not only the iron, the cordage,
the fails, and all the numerous articles requisite
for their equipment, but the provisions for
victualling them, were to be carried through the
immense defarts of Siberia, along rivers of difficult
navigation, and roads almost impassable, the man-
date of the sovereign, and the perseverance of the
people, at last surmounted every obstacle. Two
vessels were finished, and, under the command of ju7n4
the captains Behring and Tfchirikow, failed from
Kamchatka in quest of the New World, in a quar-
ter where it had never been approached. They
fliaped their course towards the east; and tho'
a storm loon separated the vefels, which never re-
joined, and many ditafters besel them, the cx-
pectations from the voyage were not altogether
frultrated. Each of the commanders discovered
land, which to them appeared to be part of the
American continent; and, according to their
observations, it seems to be situated within a few
degrees of the north-west coafl of California.
Each fct some of his people aihore; but in one

T 2 place

nooK place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians ap-
Iv. proached; in another, they carried off those who

r^ landed, and destroyed their boats. The violence

of the weather, and the distress of their crews ob-
liged both to quit this inhospitable coast. In their
return they touched at several islands, which stretch
in a chain from east to weft between the country
which they had discovered and the coast of Asia.
They had rome intercourse with the natives, who
,eemed to them to resemble the North Americans.
They presented to the Ruffians the calumnet, or
pipe of peace, which is a symbol of friendship
universal among the people of North America,
and an usage of arbitrary institution, peculiar to
them.

THE islands of this new Archipelago have been

frequented by the Ruffian hunters since that time;
but the court seemed to have relinquished its
scheme of prosecuting discoveries in this quarter.
It was unexpe&edly resumed in the year one
thousand seven hundred and fixty-eight, and cap-
tain Krenitzin had the command of two finall
vessels fitted out for that purpose. In his voyage
outward he held nearly the fame course with the
former navigators, lie touched at the fame islands,
observed their situations and productions more
"'I carefully, and discovered several new islands, with

which they had not fallen in. Though he did not
proceed so far to the eait as to revisit the country
which Behring and Tfchirikow supposed to be
part of the American continent, yet, by returning
in a course considerably to the north of theirs, he
correced some capital mitfakes into which they
had fallen, and contributed to facilitate the
progrels of future navigators in those teas
f :.

' See NOTE XLI.

T*1U S

THUS the possibility ofa communication between B oV K
the continents in this quarter refts no longer upon c
mere conjecture, but is eftablilhed by undoubted
evidence '. Some tribe, or some families of wan-
dering Tartars, from the restless spirit peculiar to
their race, might migrate to the nearest ifands, and,
rude as their knowledge of navigation then was,
might, bypafling from one to the other, reach at
length the coast of America, and give a beginning
to population in that continent. The distance be-
tween the Marian or Ladrone islands and the near-
eft land in Asia, is greater than that between the
part of America which the Ruffians discovered, and
the coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of
those islands are manifef!ty of Asiatic extrat.
If, notwithflanding their remote situation, we ad-
mit that the Marian islands were peopled from our
continent, distance alone is no reason why we
should hesitate about admitting that the original
of the Americans may be from the fame source.
It is probable that future navigators in those seas,
by fleering farther to the north, may find that the
continent of America approaches till nearer to
Asia. According to the information of the bar-
barous people, who inhabit the country about the
north-east promontory of Asia, the-r lies, off the
coafi, a tinall illand, to which they fail in less than
a day. From that, they can declry a large conti-
nent, which, according to their description, is co-
vered with forests, and polreflcd by people wlhole
language they do not underlland 4. By them they
are flipplied witl the skins of martens, an animal
unknown in the northern parts of Siberia, and
whlich1 is never soutnd but in countries abolunding
with trees. If we could rely on this account, we
might conclude that thc American continent is fc-

* Muller's Vovages, tol. i. 24.8, &C. 267. 276.
I MJullcr's Voy. et I)ccoiiv. i. i66.

'I' paratcd

BOOK parated from ours only by a narrow strait, and all

_Y the difficulties with refpe& to the communication

between them would vanish. Perhaps the merit
of ascertaining this is reserved for the sovereign
now feated on the throne of Peter the Great, who,
by perfecting his plan, may add this iplendid event
to those which already distinguish her reign.

Another IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries,
communi- that an intercourse between our continent and Ame-
cation by
the north rica might be carried on with no leTs facility from
wyeR. the north-weit extremities of Europe. As early
A. D. 830. as the ninth century, the Norwegians discovered

Greenland, and planted colonies there. The com-
munication with that country, after a long inter-
ruption, was renewed in the last century. Some
Lutheran and Moravian miflionaries, prompted
by zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have
ventured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated
region . To them we are indebted for much cu-
rious information with refpe& to its nature and
inhabitants. We learn, that the north-west coast
of Greenland is separated from America by avery
narrow strait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this strait conduts, it is highly probable
that they are united t; that the inhabitants of the
two countries have intercourse with one another;
that the Efquimaux in America perfectly refem-
ble the Greenlanders in their afpe&, dress,
and mode of living; that rome sailors, who had
acquired the knowledge of a few words in the
Greenlandifh language, reported that these were
A.D.1764. understood by the Efquimaux; that, at length,

a Moravian missionary, well acquainted with the
language of Greenland, having visited the coun-
try of the Efquimaux, found, to his aftonifllhnct,

* Crantz Hist. ofGrcecnl. i. 242. 244. Prevot Hill. Gcn
teus Voyages, omn. xv. 1j5, not. (96). t Eggede, p. 2, 3

that

that they spoke the fame language with the B o O K
Greenlanders, and were in every refpeE the fame Iv.
people, and he was accordingly received and en-
tertained by them as a friend and a brother *.

By these decisive fats, not only the confangui-

nity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is efta-
blifhed, but the possibility of peopling America
from the north of Europe is demonfirated. If
the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, when science
had not begun to dawn in the north of Europe,
possessed such naval skill as to open a communica-
tion with Greenland, their ancestors, as much
addiced to roving by sea, as the Tartars are to
wandering by land, might at some more remote
period, accomplish the fame voyage, and fettle a
colony there, whose descendents might. in pro.
grefs of time, migrate into America. But if,
instead of venturing to fail direaly from their
own coast to Greenland, we suppose that the Nor-
wegians held a more cautious course, and ad.
vanced from Shetland to the Fcroe Islands, and
from them to Iceland, in all which they had
planted colonies, their progress may have been
so gradual, that this navigation cannot be confi-
dered as either longer or more hazardous, than
those voyages which that hardy and enterprising
race of men is known to have performed in eve-
ry age.

8. THoUGH it be possible that America may Probably
have received its first inhabitants from our conti- peopled

from the

nent, either by the north-well of Europe or the north-ealt
north-east of Asia, there seems to be good reason
for supposing that the progenitors of all the
American nations, from Cape Horn to the south-
ern confines of Labrador, migrated from the lat-

* Crantz Hilt. ofGreenl. p. 261, z6z.

ter

B o o K ter rather than the former. The Efquimaux are

IV. the only people in America, who, in their aspef

or charater, bear any resemblance to the nor-
thern Europeans. They are manifeily a separate
species of men, diftint from all the nations of
that continent, in language, in disposition, and
in habits of life. Their original, then, may war-
rantably be traced up to that source which I have
pointed out. But, among all the other inhabi-
tants of America, there is such a striking fimili-
tude in the form of their bodies, and the qualities
of their minds, that, notwithstanding the diverfi-
ties occasioned by the influence of climate, or
unequal progress in improvement, we muff pro-
nounce them to be defccnded from one source.
There may be a variety in the slades, but we
can every where trace the fame original colour.
Each tribe has something peculiar which diftin-
guifhes it, but in all of them we discern certain
features common to the whole race. It is re-
markable, that in every peculiarity, whether in
persons or dispositions, which charaderife the
Americans, they have some resemblance to the
rude tribes scattered over the north-east of Asia,
but alnoft none to the nations fettled in the nor-
thern extremities of Europe. We may, therefore,
refer them to the former origin, and conclude
that their Asiatic progenitor, having fettled in
those parts of America, where the Ruffians have
discovered the proximity of the two continents,
spread gradually over its various regions. 'his
account of the progress of population in America,
coincides with the traditions of the Mexicans con-
cerning their own origin, which, imperfect as
they arc, were prelcrvcd with more accuracy,
and merit greater credit, than those of any people
in the New World. According to them, their
ancestors came from a remote country, situated
to the north-cafl of Mexico. They point out their

various

various flations as they advanced from this, into B o o K
the interior provinces, and it is precisely the fame IV.
route which they must have held, if they had
been emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in
describing the appearance of their progenitors,
their manners, and habits of life at that period,
exadtly delineate those of the rude Tartars, from
whom I suppose them to have sprung *

THUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the
history of America. I have venturcd to inquire,
but without presuming to decide. Satisfied witl
offering conjectures, I pretend not to efablifl
any fyftein. When an inveltigation is, fiomn its
nature, so intricate and obscure, that it is imnpof-
fible to arrive at conclusions which arc certain,
there may be some merit in pointing out such as
are probable t.

THE condition and character of the American Condition
nations, at the time when they became known andcLc1alC

tcr of tli

to the Europeans, dcfiervc more attentive conlf- Airii,,
deration, than the inquiry concerning their ori.
ginal. The latter is merely an object of curiosity,
the former is one of the nlolt iinmportant as well
as infirutive rcfearchcs, which can occupy the
philofopler or historian. In order to complete
the history of the humnan mind, and attain to a
perfect knowledge of its nature and operations,
we nmuff contemplate man in all tholfe various li-
tuations wherein h has been placed. We Inuft
follow him in his progrels through the ditlrelnt

* AcofRa Hill. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garcia

Origen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. 'Frquematl Mon;r. Iiu.
Jib. i. c. 2, &c. Botiiri;i Bcnliduci Idea de una Ililt. de La

inmer. Scptentr. c xvii. p. z17.
1 Memoires fur la Louilianc, par Dumont, tom. i. p. 119.

(t.lgCS

o oK i fages of society, as he gradually advances fron
Vx_. the infant state of civil life towards its maturity

and decline. We must observe at each period,
how the faculties of his understanding unfold,
we must attend to the efforts of his active powers,
watch the motions of affeEtion as they rife in his
breast, and mark whither they tend, and with
what ardour they are exerted. The philosophers
and historians of ancient Greece and Rome, our
guides in this as well as every other disquisition,
had only a limited view of this fubjeEt, as they
had hardly any opportunity of surveying man in
his rudest and most early state. In all those re-
gions of the earth with which they were acquaint-
ed, civil society had made considerable advances,
and nations had finished a good part of their ca-
reer before they began to observe them. The
Scythians and Germans, the rudest people of
whom any antient author has transmitted to us an
authentic account, possessed flocks and herds, had
acquired property of various kinds, and, when
compared with mankind in their primitive state,
may be reckoned, to have attained to a great de-
gree of civilization.

Leis im- BUT the difcovcry of the New World enlarged
provedtha of
in any pa:rt the Iphere of contemplation, and presented nations
Jitl.lcearth, to our view, in stages of their progress, much lcts

advanced than those wherein they have been ob.
fcrved in our continent. In America man appear,
under the rudest form in which we can conceiv(
him to subsist. We behold communities jus
beginning to unite, and may examine the senti
ments and actions of human beings in the infanc'
of social life, while they feel but imperfectly th
force of its ties, and have fcarccly relinquithe
their native liberty. That state of primaevt
ftinplicity, which w as known in our contincr
only by the fanciful (dfcription of poets, really e,

iltc

ifted in the other. The greater part of its inha- Bo o K
bitants were strangers to industry and labour, iv.
ignorant of arts, and almost unacquainted with ^^
property, enjoying in common the bleflings which
flowed spontaneously from the bounty of nature.
There were only two nations in this vast conti-
nent which had emerged from this rude itate,
and had made any considerable progress in acquir-
ing the ideas, and adopting the institutions, which
belonged to polilhed societies. Their government
and manners will fall naturally under our review
in relating the discovery and conquest of the Mex-
ican and Peruvian empires; and we shall have
there an opportunity of contemplating the Ame-
ricans in the state of the highest improvement to
which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches flall Ti;s;nqu-

be turned to the finall independent tribes which ry confined
occupied every other part of America. Among t trbhe .d
these, though with some diversity in their charac-
ter, their manners and institutions, the itate of
society was nearly similar, and so extremely rude,
that the denomination of Savage may be applied
to them all. In a general history of America,
it would be highly improper to dcfcribe the con-
dition of each petty community, or to investigate
every minute circumstance which contributes to
form the character of its members. Such an in-
quiry would lead to details of iinmeafurable and
tiresome extent. The qualities belonging to the
people of all the different tribes have such a near
resemblance, that they may be painted with the
fame features. Where any circumstances fccn
to conflitute a diversity in their character and
manners worthy of attention, it will be sufficient
to point there out as they occur, and to inquire
into the catibs of such peculiarities.

IT

1 o o K IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and

iV, authentic information, concerning nations while

Difficulty they remained uncivilized. To discover their true
cfobtainingcharacer under this rude form, and to collect the
informat- features by which they are diftllnguilhed, requires

an obfervcr poffeifed of no less impartiality than
discernment. For, in every stage of society, the
faculties, the sentiments and desires of men are so
accommodated to their own Ifate, that they be-
come standards of excellence to themselves, they
affix the idea of perfetion and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and where-
ever the objects and enjoyments to which they have
been accullomed are wanting, confidently pro-
nounce a people barbarous and miferablc. Hence
the mutual contempt with which the members of
communities, unequal in their degrees of improve-
ment, regard each other. P .'iihed nations, con-
fiious of the advantages which they derive from
their knowledge and arts, are apt to view rude
nations with peculiar scorn, and, in the pride of
luperiority, will hardly allow either their occu-
pations, their feelings, or their pleasures, to be
worthy of men. It has seldom been the lot of
communities, in their early and unpoliihed IRate,
to fall under the obfltrvation of perlbns, endowed
with force of mnind fupcrior to vulgar prejudices,
and capable of contemplating mnan, under what-
ever afpcTd he appears, with a candid and difccrn-
ing eye.

fromnic in- rnl : Spaniards, who firfl visited America, and whio
ppacily of had an opportunity of beholding its various tribes,

i', fob- lwhile entire and unfubdued, were far fromn pofllf-

ing the qualities requisite for observing the firiking
ipecacle prefi;nted to their view. Neither the age
in which they lived, nor the nation to which they be-
longed, had made such progrcfs in true licencc, as

inlpi rca

inspires enlarged and liberal fentirnents. The con- n o O K
querors of the New World were moflly illiterate 'V
adventurers, destitute of all the ideas which should '
have directed them in contemplating objects, so
extremely different from those itli whiclh they
were acquainted. Surrounded contimnually with
danger, or itruggling with hardilhips, they had
little leisure, and lets capacity for any speculative
inquiry. Eager to take poffeiion of a country of
such vast extent and opulence, and happy in find-
ing it occupied by inhabitants Ib incapable to de-
fend it, they hafily pronounced them to be awretch-
ed order of men, formed merely for fcrvitude;
and were more employed in computing the pro-
fits of their labour, than inquiring into the opera-
tions of their minds, or the reasons of their cultoms
and institutions. The persons who penetrated at
subsequent periods into the interior provinces, to
which the knowledge and devastations of the firfl
conquerors did not reach, were generally of a si-
milar characer ; brave and enterprising in an high
degree, but so uninformed as to be little qualified
either for observing or describing uwhat they be-
held.

NoT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of.a-,l tlcir

the Spaniards, rendered their accounts of the pco- tJu(likc;
pie of America extremely dyfcctive. Soon after
they planted colonies in their new conquells, a
difFirencc in opinion arose with rcfpec' to the
treatment of the natives. One party, iblicitous to
render their servitude perpetual, rcprclcinted thllc
as a brutish, obstinate race, incapable cither of ac-
quiring religiou:; knowledge, or of being trained
to the functions of social life. rThe other, full of
pious concern for their conversion, coniitl!ttd
that, thougth rudc and ignorant, they were go1n-
tie aIafiLionate, docile, and ly )proper intlrucliiis
aind regulations might be Iornccd gradually into

goodL

1o o K good Christians and useful citizens. This con-

rv. troverfy, as I have already related, was carried on

with all the warmth which is natural, when atten-
tion to interest on the one hand, and religious zeal
'on the other, animated the disputants. Most of
the laity espoused the former opinion ; all the ec-
clefiaftics were advocates for the latter; and we
shall uniformly find that, accordingly as an author
belonged to either of these parties, he is apt to
magnify the virtues or aggravate the defecs of
the Americans beyond measure. Those repugnant
accounts increase the difficulty of attaining a per-
set knowledge of their characer, and render it
necefiary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanish writers with distrust, and to receive their
information with some allowance.

,d from ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the difcove-
the systems ry of America, before the manners of its inhabi-
Plr6of tants attrated, in any considerable degree, the at-

tention of philosophers. At length, they disco-
vered that the knowledge of their condition and
character might enable them to fill up a confidera-
ble chasm in the history of the human species, and
lead to speculations no less curious than important.
They entered upon this new field of study with
great ardor; but, instead of throwing light upon
the fubjeEt, they have contributed, in some degree,
to involve it in additional obscurity. Too impati-
ent to inquire, they hastened to decide ; and began
to ereEt fyflems, when they should have been
searching for facts on which to establish their foun.
dations. Struck with the appearance of degene-
racy in the human species throughout the New
World, and astonished at beholding a vast conti-
tent occupied by a naked, feeble, and ignorant
race of men, some authors of great name have
maintained, that this part of the globe had but
lately emerged from the sea, and become fit for

thl

the residence of man ; that every thing in it bore B o o K
marks of recent original ; and that its inhabitants, V
lately called into existence, and still at the begin-
ning of their career, were unworthy to be com-
pared with the people of a more ancient and imn-
proved continent*. Others have imagined, that,
under the influence of an unkindly climate, which
checks and enervates the principle of life, man
never attained in America the perfection which be-
longs to his nature, but remained an animal of an
inferior order, defective in the vigour of his bodily
frame, and destitute of sensibility, as well as of
force, in the operations of his mind t. In oppofi-
tion to both these, other philosophers have fuppof-
ed that man arrives at his highest dignity and ex-
cellence long before he reaches a slate of refine-
ment ; and, in the rude finplicity of savage life,
displays an elevation of sentiment, an independence
of mind, and a warmth of attachment, for which
it is vain to search among the members of polished
societies ,. They seem to confider that as the
most perfet state of man which is the least civiliz-
ed. They describe the manners of the rude Ame-
ricans with such rapture, as if they proposed them
for models to the reft of the fpecics. These con-
tradicory theories have been proposed with equal
confidence, and uncommon powers of genius and
eloquence have been exerted in order to clothe
them with an appearance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in rendering

an inquiry into the state of the rude nations in
America intricate and obscure, it is necessary to
carry it on with caution. When guided in our
researches by the intelligent observations of the

* M. de Buflon Hiil. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. . 10 114.
t M. le P. Rcchcrches Philof. fur les Americ. paflim.
* M. Rousseau.

few

B O O x few philosophers who have vilited this part of the

globe, we may venture to decide. When obliged
to have recourse to the superficial remarks of vul-
gar travellers, of sailors, traders, buccaneers, and
miflionaries, we must often pause, and comparing
detached fads, endeavour to discover what they
wanted sagacity to observe. Without indulging
conjecure, or betraying a propensity to either
system, we must fludy with equal care to avoid
the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fu-
percilious contempt for those manners which wc
describe.

Method ob- IN order to condud this inquiry with greater ac-
ervedinthe curacy, it fiould be rendered as limple as poflible.

Man existed as an individual before he became the
member of a community ; and the qualities which
belong to him under his former capacity ihould be
known, before we proceed to examime those which
arise from the latter relation. This is peculiarly
necessary in inveltigating the manners of rude
nations. Their political union is so incomplete,
their civil institutions and regulations so few, so
simple, and of such finall authority, that they ought
to be viewed rather as independent agents than as
members of a regular society. The character of a
savage results almost entirely from his sentiments
or feelings as an individual, and is but little influ-
enced by his imperfc&t subjeCtion to government
and order. I flall condudt my researches con-
cerning the manners of the Americans in this na-
tural order, proceeding gradually from what is
simple to what is more complicated.

I s-AI.l, confider, I. The bodily conflituti-

on of the Americans in tliofe regions now un-
der review. 1I. The qualities of their nuinds.
111. Their doncltic Ilate. IV. Their political tla.r
and iuftitutions. V. Their lfyl tci of war, and public

fccur'ity.

security. VI. The arts with which they were B 0 K
acquainted.- VII. Their religious ideas and infti-
tutions. VIII. Sdch finguilar detached customs as
are not reducible to any of the former heads.
IX. I shall conclude with a general review and
estimate of their virtues and defects..

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans.- Te conft

The human bddy is less asseted by climate than tution of
that of any other animal: Some animials are con- hei bo-
fined to a particular region ds the globe; and cannot
exist beyond it; others, tho' they may be brought
to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to them,
cease to multiply when carried out of that diifri&,
which Nature destined to be their marifion: Even
such as seem capable of being naturalized in various
climates, feel the effete of every remirove from their
proper station, and gradually dwindle and dege-
nerate from the vigour and perfection peculiar to
their species. Man is the only living creature
whose frame is at once so hardy and so flexible,
that he can spread over the whole earth, become
the inhabitant of every region, and thrive and
multiply under every climate. Subje&, however,
to the general law of Nature, the human body
is not intirely exempt from the operation of cli-
mate, and when exposed to the extremes either of
heat or cold, its size or vigour diminilhes.

THE first appearance of the inhabitants of the complex..

New World, filled the discoverers with such afto- °"'o &c
nifhient, that they were apt to imagine them a
race of men different fiom tholei of the other he-
nil1)hcre. Their complexion is ofa reddilh brown;
nearly resembling the colour of copper *. The
hair of their heads is always black, long, coarse,

' Oviedo Sonrlrio, p. 46, D. Life cf Colllimbu ;, c. 24.
Vol., . U and

B 0 K and lank. They have no beard, and every part

iv. of their body is perfectly finooth. Their persons

are of a full size, extremely ftreight, and well pro-
portioned *. Their features are regular, though
often distorted by absurd endeavours to improve
the beauty of their natural form, or to render their
aspea more dreadful to their enemies. In the
o iflards, where four-footed animals were both few
Morefeeble and fnall, and the earth yielded her productions

almost spontaneously, the constitution of the na-
tives, neither braced by the a&ive exercises of the
chace, nor invigorated by the labour of cultivation,
was extremely feeble and lanouid. On the conti-
nent, where the forests abounc with game of vari-
ous kinds, and the chief occupation of many tribes
was to pursue it, their frame acquired greater
firmness. Still, however, the Americans were
more remarkable for agility than strength. They
resembled beasts osprey, rather than animals form-
ed for labour 't. They were not only averse to
toil, but incapable of it; and when rouzed by
force from their native indolence, and compelled
to work, they funk under tasks which the people
of the other continent would have performed with
cafe t. This fceblenefs of the conflitution was
universal among the inhabitants of those regions
in America which we are surveying, and may be
confidered as charal-eriftic of the species there §.

I'HF. beardle's countenance and finooth skin of

the American lfems to indicate a defec of vi-
gouer, occasioned by some vice in his frame. He
is dcllitute of one sign of manhood and offftrengthl.

* Sce NOTE XLII. - See NOTE XLJII.
t Ovieto Sori. p. 51, C. Voy. le Corrcal, ii. 138. W;-
fc;'s Dcfcription, p. 131.

B C. Ias Cafs nBrcv Relac. p. 4. Taurquem. Monar. i.

.Co. Ovicdo Somnaio. p. Ili,. lib.

1i. ci. 6. Heiircrer,
dc. xI. lib. ix. c. 55. Simon, p. 41.

Tills

This peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the B o K
New World are difringuifled from the people of
all other nations, cannot be attributed, as some
travellers have fippofed, to their mode of subsist-
ence, For though the food of many Americans
be so extremely insipid, that they are altogether
unacquainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in
other parts of the earth have subsisted on aliments
equally simple without this mark of degradation,
or any apparent symptom of a diminution in their
vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads us Iers

e p-

to suspect that there is tome natural debility in tite.
their frame, the finallnefs of their appetite for
food has been mentioned by many authors as a
confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity
of food which men consume varies according
to the temperature of the climate in which
they live, the degree of activity which they ex-
ert, and the natural vigour of their constitutions.
Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pass their days in indolence and
ease, they require less nouriflnment than the ac-
ftive inhabitants of temperate or cold countries.
But neither the warmth of their climate, nor
their extreme laziness, will account for the un-
common defect of appetite among the Americans.
The Spaniards were astonished upon oblkrving
this, not only in the islands, but in several parts of.
the continent. The conftitutionMal temperance
of the natives far exceeded, in their opinion,
the abstinence of the most mortified hermits t;
while, on the other hand, the appetite of the
Spaniards appeared to the Americans infatiablv
voracious; and they affirmed, that one Spaniard

* Charley. Hill. de Nouv, Fr. ill. 310.
t Ramufio, iii. 304, F. 306, A. Simon Conquifta, &c.
P1 29. lakluyt, ili. 468. 5oS

U 3 devoured

BO OK devoured more food in a day than was sufficient
,.-- for ten Americans *
Less vehe- A proof of some feebleness in their frame still
^ence of more striking, is the insensibility of the Americans

to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.
That pafflon which was destined to perpetuate life,
to be the bond of social union, and the source
of tenderness and joy, is the most ardent in the
human breast; and though the perils and hard-
flips of the savage ifate, though excessive fa-
tiogue, on fonme occasions, and the difficulty at
all times of procuring subsistence, may seem to be
adverse to this passion, and to have a tendency to
abate its vigour, yet the rudest nations in every
other part of the globe seem to feel its influence
more powerfully than the inhabitants of the New
World, The negro glows with all the warmth of
desire natural to his climate; and the most unculti-
vated Asiatics discover that sensibility, which, from
their situation, we should expe&t them to have felt.
But the Americans are in an amazing degree,
ftirangers to the force of this firif inftinC of nature.
In every part of the New World the natives treat
their *t men with coldness and indifference. They
are neither the objeEts of that tender attachment
which takes place in civilized society, nor of that
ardent desire conspicuous among rude nations.
Even in climates where this passion usually ac-
quires its greatest vigour, the savage of America
views his female with disdain, as an animal of a
less noble species. He is at no pains to win her
favour by the afliduity of courtlhip, and still less
solicitous to preserve it by indulgence t and gentle-

*' errera, dec. r. lib. ii. c, t6.
1 l Hennepin Mccurs de Sauvages, 32, &c. Rochfort Hit.

dcs Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii. 141. Ra-
mufio, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defcr. del, Gran Chaco, 71.
Falkner's Defer. of Patagon,p.' 125. Lettero di P. Cataneo
ap. Muratori 1. 3. Chritlhan. Fclice, i. 305.

ners.

ness. Miflionaries themselves, notwithstanding the B 0 0 K
aufferity of monaffic ideas, cannot refrain from , ..,j
expressing their aftoniihment at the dilpafilonate
coldness of the American young men in their inter-
course with the other sex *. Nor is this reserve to
be ascribed to any opinion which they entertain
with refpe&t to the merit of female chaffity. That
is an idea too refined for a savage, and suggested
by a delicacy of sentiment and affection to which
he is a stranger.

BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily Reetions

or mental qualities of particular races of men, withrefpec
there is not a more common or more seducing er- to thlee.
ror, than that of ascribing to a single cause, thole
characteriitic peculiarities, which are the effect of
the combined operation of many causes. The
climate and foil of America differ, in io many re-
fpefts, from those of the other hemisphere, and this
difference is so obvious and striking, that philofo-
phers of great eminence have laid hold on this as
sufficient to account for what is peculiar in the
constitution of its inhabitants. They reft on phy-.
fical causes alone, and confider the feeble frame
and languid desire of the Americans, as confequen-
ces of the temperament of that portion of the globe
which they inhabit. But the influences of politi-
cal and moral causes ought not to have been
overlooked. These operate with no less effect
than that on which they reft as a full expla.
nation of the singular appearances which have
been mentioned. Wherever the stare of society
is such as to create many wants and tdefires, which
cannot be fatisfled without regular exertions of in-
dultry, the body accustomed to labour becomes

* Chanvalon. p. 5 . Lettr. Edif. tom. xxiv. 318. T'crtre,
ii, 377. Vcnegaf i. 8,. Rib;us Jl-ilt delos Triumnf. p. II.

robull

B o q K robust and patient of fatigue. In a more simple

Iv. ifate, where the demands of men are so few and
^ £so moderate, that they may be gratified, almost

without any effort, by the spontaneous produdi-
Ons of nature, the powers of the body are not
called forth, nor can they attain their proper
strength. The natives of Chili and of north-Ame-
rica, the two temperate regions in the New World,
who live by hunting, may be deemed an adive
and vigorous race, when compared witth the in-
habitants of the isles, or of those parts of the
continent where hardly any labour is requisite to
procure subsistence. The exertions of a hunter
are not, however, so regular, or so continued, as
those of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs, his
strength is on the whole interior. If another di-
reetion were given to the active powers of man in
the New World, and his force augmented by
exercise, he might acquire a degree of vigour
which he does not in his present state possess.
The truth of this is confirmed by experience.
Wherever the Americans have been gradually
accuftonmed to hard labour, their constitutions be-
come robuil, and they have been found capable
of perforning such taflks, as seemed not only tc
exceed the powers of such a feeble frame as has
been deemed peculiar to their country, but to
equal any effort of the natives, either of Africa or
of Europe *.

TImE fame reasoning will apply to what has

been obfcrvcd concerning their slender demand
for food. As a proof that this should be alcribcd,
as mluch to their extreme indolence, and ofter
.otal want of occupation, as to any thing peculiar

*Sec NOTE XLIV.

in

in the physical ftruture of their bodies, it has BOK
been observed, that in those districts, where the !v'
people of America are obliged to exert any un-
usual effort of acivity, in order to procure sub-
fitence, or wherever they are employed in severe
labour, their appetite is not inferior to that of
other men, and, in some places, it has struck
observers as remarkably voracious *.

THE operation of political and moral causes is

still more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a state of high
civilization, this passion inflamed by reltraint, re-
fined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a
simple instinct of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardour of desire, and the most tender emotions
of which our frame is susceptible, soothe and agi-
tate the foul. This description, however, applies
only to those, who, by their situation, are ex-
empted from the cares and labours of life. Among
persons of inferior order, who are doomed by
their condition to incefrant toil, the dominion
of this paflion is less violent, and their solicitude
to procure subsistence, and to provide for the firfl
demand of nature, leaves little leifpre for attend-
ing to its second call. But if the nature of the
intercourse between the fcxes varies so much in
persons of different rank in polished societies, the
condition of man, while he remains uncivilized,
must occasion a variation still more apparent. We
may well suppose, that amidlt the hardfilips, the
dangers, and the fiinplicity of savage life, where
I'bfiltence is always precarious, and often scanty,
where men arc almolt continually engaged in the
pursuit of Fir enemies, or in guarding against
their attacks, and where neither dress nor relfrve
are employed as arts of fmclale allurement, that

* Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 137. Lifilau, i. 515. Ovallc
Church, iii. 81. MLuitori, 1. 295.

thle

Bo o Kthe attention of the Americans to their women

Iv. would be extremely feeble, without imputing this
.~"'W solely to apy physical defea or degradation in

their framn.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tries of America, where, from the fertility of the
foil, the mildness of the climate, or bome farther
advances which the natives have made in im-'
provement; the means of subsistence are more
abundant, and the hardfsips of savage life, are
less severely felt,' the animal passion of the sexes
becomes more ardent. Striking examples of
this occur among some tribes feated on the banks
of great rivers well flored with food, among others
wvho are masters of hunting-grounds abounding so
much with game, that they have a regular and plen.
tiful supply of nouriflhment with little labour. The
superior degree of security and affluence which
they enjoy, is followed by their natural effects.
The paflions implanted in the human'frame by
the- hand of nature :cquirel additional force;
new taftes and desire' are formed; the women,
as they'are; more valued and adniired, become
more'attentive to:drefs and ornament; the men,
beginning'to feel how mnuch'of their own happi-
ness: depends upon them, no 'longer disdain the
arts of 'winning their 'favour and affecion. The
intercourse; of-the fcxes' becomes very different
from that which' takes'place among their rudcr
countrynen; and as hardl any refiraint is im-
pofed'on the gratification of dcfire, either by re
ligion,' or" laws, or 'decency, the dissolution of
their manners i. exceflive *. '

~eo,,iof ' NOTWITHSTANDINoG the feeble make of the
,hem do-
forme.. Anerticans, 'lmoft none of them are cdformed,

or mutilated;'or defeEive in any of their senses.
All travellers have been struck with this circumi

* Biet. 389. Charlev. iii. . 23 PDitont Mem. fur Loui-

\iane, i. IS .:.... . ... .fance,
: ,. ·siq~ance,

stance, and have celebrated the uniform symmetry B O K
Pnd perfection of their external figure, Some.
authors search for the cause of this appearance in
their physical condition. As the parents are not
exhausted or over-fatigued with hard labour,
they suppose that their children are born vigo.
rous and found. They imagine, that in the li.
berty of savage life, the human body, naked and
unconfined from its earliest age, preserves its na-
tural form; and that all its limbs and members
acquire a juster proportion, than when fettered
with artificial restraints, which flint its growth,
and distort its shape*. Something, without
doubt, may be ascribed to the operation of these
causes; but'the true reasons of this apparent ad-
vantage, which is common to all savage nations,
lie deeper, and are closely interwoven with the
nature and genius of that state. The infancy of
man is'fo long and so helpless, that it is extreme-
ly difficult to rear children among rude nations.
Their' means of subsistence are not only fcancy,
but precarious. Such as live by hunting muff
range over extensive countries, and lhift often
from place to place, The care of children, as
well as every other laborious talk, is devolved up-
on the women. The distresses and hardlhips of
the savage life, which are often 'uch as can hard-
ly be supported by persons in full vigour, must be
fatal to those of more tender age. Afraid of un-
dertaking a task so laborious, and of such long
duration, the women in some parts of America,
extinguish the first sparks of that life which they
are unable to cherifi, and by the use of certain
herbs procure frequent abortions js. Sensible that
only flout and vwell-follrmed chilrcen have force
of conflitution to firuggle through such an hard

*Pifo. p. 6. 1 Ellis's Vovage to I-IulHon's Bay, 198.
lerrera, dcc. 7. lib, ix, c. 4.

infancy,

.B o
o K infancy, other nations abandon or destroy flch

1 of their progeny as appear feeble or defetive, as
unworthy of attention'*. Even when they endea-
vour, to rear all their children without diffintion,
so great a proportion of the whole number pe-
rifles under the rigorous treatment which muff
be their lot in the savage lsate, that few of those
who laboured under any original frailty attain the
age of manhood f. Thus, in polished societies,
where the means of subsistence are secured with
certainty, and acquired with ease; where the ta-
lents of the mind are often of more importance
than the powers of the body; children are pre-
served notwithstanding their deserts or deformi-
ty, and grow up to be useful citizens. In rude
nations, such persons are either cut off as soon as
they are born, or becoming a burden to them-
selves and to the community, cannot long protrac
their lives. *But in those provinces of the New
World where, by the eftabliflment of the Euro-
peans, more regular provision has been made for
the subsistence of the inhabitants, and they are
restrained from laying violent hands on their chil-
dren, the Americans are so far from being emi-
nent for any superior perfedion in their form, that
one should rather fufpet some peculiar imbecilli.
ty in the race, from the extraordinary number of
individuals who are deformed, dwarfifli, mutilat-
ed, blind, or deaf .

tniformity HOWEVER feeble the constitution of the Ame-
,f thecira- ricans may be, it is remarkable, that there is lets

lenc. variety in the human form throughout the Ne\v

World, than in the antient continent. When Co-
lumbus and the other discoverers first vifted the di-

r Gumilla Hillt ii. 234.. Tccho's Hill. of Paraguav, &c
Churchill's Collce.' vi. lo8.

·t Creuxii Hill. Canlad, p. 57.
1 Voyage dc Ulloa, i. 23zi7

fcrclt

ferent countries of America which lie within the B o o K
torrid zone, they naturally expeEed to find people of IV.
the fame complexion with those in the correspond- Y
ing regions of the other hemisphere. To their
amazement, however, they discovered that Ame-
rica contained no negroes *; and the cause of this
singular appearance became as much the objec of
curiosity, as the faE itself was of wonder. In
what part or membrane of the body that hu-
mour resides which tinges the complexion of the
negroe with a deep black, it is the business of ana-
tomifts to inquire and describe. The powerful
operation of heat appears manifeflly to be the cause
which produces this striking variety in the human
jpccies. All Europe, almost the whole of Asia,
and the temperate parts of Africa, are occupied
by men of a fair complexion. All the torrid zone -
in Africa, some of the warmer regior.s adjacent to
it, and a few countries in Asia are filled with peo-
ple of a deep black colour. If we trace the nati-
ons of our continent, making our progress from
cold and temperate countries towards those parts
which are exposed to the influence of vehement
and unremitting heat, we shall find, that the ex-
treme whiteness of their klin soon begins to diri-
nih ; that its colour deepens gradually as we ad-
vance ; and after paring through all the successive
gradations of slade terminates in an uniform un-
varying black. But in America, where the agency
of heat is checked and abated by various causes,
which I have already explained, the climate seems
to be deffitute of that force which produces such
wonderful effeEts on the human frame. The co-
lour of the natives of the torrid zone, in America,
can hardly be said to be of a deeper hue than that
of the people in the more temperate parts of their
continent. Accurate obfcrvers, who had an op,
portunity of viewing the Americans in very differ,

P. Martyr. dec. p. 71.

Cnt

B o O ent climates, and in countries far removed from

iv. each other, have been struck with the amazing si-
'"~'Y milarity of their figure and aspea *.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in fashioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that
were current in the ancient continent, have been
revived with refped to the New World, and Ame.
rica too has been peopled with human beings of
monstrous and fantastic appearance. The inha.
bitants of certain provinces were described to be
pigmies of three feet high; those of others to be
giants of an enormous size. Some travellers pub.
lifhed accounts of a people with only one eye,
others pretended to have discovered men without
heads, whose eyes and mouths were planted in
their breasts, The variety of Nature in her pro.
dutions is, indeed, so great, that it is presumptuous
to set bounds to her fertility, and to reject indif.
criminately every relation that is not perfectly con.
sonant to our own limited.obfervation and experi-
ence. But the other extreme, of yielding an
hasty assent, on the slightest evidence, to whatever
has the appearance of being strange and marvel-
lous, is no less unbecoming a philosophical inquir-
er, as, in every period, men are more apt to be be-
trayed into error, by their weakness in believing
too much,'than by their arrogance in believing too
little. In proportion as science extends, and na-
ture is examined' with a discerning eye, the won-
ders that amused ages of ignorance disappear. Tlhe
tales of credulous travellers concerning America
fre forgotten; the monsters which they describe
have been searched for in vain; and those provin.

See NOTE XLV.

c s

ces where they pretend to have found inhabitants B o o K
of singular forms, are now known to be poffefled iv.
by people no wife different from the other Ames
ricans I.

THOUc+I these relations may, without difcuffior

be rejected as fabulous, there are other accounts
offuch varieties in the human species in some parts
of the New World, which reft upon better evi-
dence, and merit more attentive examination.
This variety has been particularly observed in three
different diftrids. The first of these is situated in
the isthmus of Darien, near the centre of America.
Lionel Wafer, a traveller possessed of more curio-
fity and intelligence than we flould have expected
to find in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered
there a small but singular race of men. They are
of low fsature, according to his description, of a
feeble make, incapable of enduring fatigute.
Their colour is a dead milk white; not refem-
bling that of fair people among Europeans, but
without any tincture of a blufl or sanguine cornm
plexion. Their skin is covered with a fine hairy
down of a chalky white, the hair of their heads,
their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are of the fame
hue. Their eyes are of a singular form, and so
weak, that they can hardly bear the light of the
fun ; but they fee clearly by moon-light, and are
most ative and gay in the night --. No race fimi-
lar to this has been discovered in any other part of
America. Cortes, indeed, found some persons
exactly resembling the white people of Datien,
among the rare and monstrous animals which
Montezuma had collected . But as the power
of the Mexican empire extended to the provinces
bordering on the isthmus of Darien, they were pro-

* Sec NOTE XLVI. t1 Wafer Defcript. of Ill1.

ap. Dampicr, iii. p. 346. :t Cortes ap. Ramus. iii. p.
241. E.

bal)lv

B o o K bably brought from thence. Singular as the ape

Iv. pearance of those people may be, they cannot be

confidered as conifituting a diffin& species. Among
the negroes of Africa, as well as the natives of
the Indian islands, nature sometimes produces a
small number of individuals, with all the charac-
teriftic features and qualities of white people of
Darien. The former are called Albinos by the
Portuguese, the latter Kackerlakes by the Dutch.
In Darien the parents of those Whitcs are of the
some colour with the other natives of the country;
and this observation applies equally to the anoma-
lous progeny of the negroes and Indians. The
fame mother who produces some children of a co-
lour that does not belong to the race, brings forth
the reft of the complexion peculiar to her country *.
One conclusion may then be formed with respect
to the people described by Wafer, the Albinos and
the Kackerlakes; they are a degenerated breed,
not a separate class of men; and from some disease
or defed of their parents, the peculiar colour and
debility which mark their degradation is tranfinit-
ted to them. As a decisive proof of this, it has
been observed, that neither the white people of
Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa, propagate their
race: their children are of the colour and tempe-
rament peculiar to the natives of their refpccive
countries t.

THEI second diftrit that is occupied by inhabi-

tants differing in appearance from the other peol)pc
of America, is situated in a high northern latitude,
extending from the coast of Labrador towards tlhe
pole, as far as the country is habitable. The peo-
ple scattered over those dreary regions, are known
to the Europeans by the name of Efquimaux. Th y
themselves, with that idea of their own fiiperiority,

* Margrav. Hill. Rcr Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.
tWaser, p. 348. Demlcnct; Hifi. de l'Airiquc, ii. 234.
Rccherch, Philof. fur les Amer. ii. i. &c.

which

which consoles the rudest and most wretched na- B o OK
tions, assume the name of Keralit or Men. They Iv.
are of a middle size and robust, with heads of a
disproportioned bulk, and feet as remarkably smalL
Their complexion, though swarthy, by being con-
tinually exposed to the rigour of a cold climate,
inclines to the European white, rather than to the
copper colour of America, and the men have
beards which are sometimes bushy and long *.
From these marks of distinction, as well as from
one still less equivocal, the affinity of their lan-
guage to that of the Greenlanders, which I have
already mentioned, we may conclude, with some
degree of confidence, that the Efquimaux are a
race different from the ret of the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concern-

ing the inhabitants of the third diftrit, situated at
the southern extremity of America. These are the
famous Patagonians, who, during two centuries
and a half, have afforded a fubjeft of controversy
to the learned, and an object of wonder to the vul-
gar. They are supposed to be one of the wander-
ing tribes, which occupy the vafi, but least known
region of America, which extends from the river
De la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their pro.
per station is in that part of the interior country,
which lies on the banks of the river Negro ; but
in the hunting season they often roam as far as the
straits which separate Terra del Fuego from the
main-land. The first accounts of this people
were brought to Europe by the companions of
Magellan -, who described them as a gigantic
race above eight feet high, and of ftrcngth in pro-,

* Ellis Voy. to Hudf. Bay, p. 131, 139. De la Pothcric,

tor. i. p. 70. Wales Journ. of a Voy. to Churchill River.
Phil. 'I'ran. vol. Ix. 109.

t I'alkncr's Dcfcription of Patagonia, p. 0oz.

portion

X o o x portion to their enormous size. Among several

Iv. tribes of-Animals, a disparity in bulk, as confide-
'YrJ rable, may be observed. Sdme large breeds of

horses and dogs exceed the more diminutive races
in stature and strength as far as the Patagonian is
supposed to rife above the usual standard of thd
human body. But animals attain the highest per-
fetion of their species, only in mild climates, or
where they find the most nutritive food in great-
eft abundance. It is not then in the uncultivated
waste of the Magellanic regions, and among a tribe
of unprovident savages,' that we should expet to
find man, possessing the highest honours of his
race, and distinguished by a superiority offize and
vigour, far beyond what he has reached in any
other part of the earth. The most explicit and
unexceptionable evidence is requisite, in order to
establish a fad, repugnant to those general princi.
ples and laws, which seem to effect the human
frame in every other instance, and to decide with
refpe& to its nature and qualities. Such evidence
has not hitherto been produced. Though several
persons, to whose testimony great refpet is due,
have visited this part of America, since the time oi
Magellan, and have had interviews with the na-
tives; though some have affirmed, that such as
they saw were of gigantic stature, and others have
formed the fame conclusion from measuring theit
foottReps or the skeletons of their dead ; yet their
accounts vary from each other in so many essential
pointE, and are mingled with so many circum-
stances manifestly false or fabulous, as detraCt
much from their credit. On the other hand4
some navigators, and those among the nolt
eminent of their order for dlfcerninielt and accu-
racy, have asserted that the natives of Patagonia,
with whom they had intercourfii though stout

* Se NOTE XLVII

and

and well made, are not of such extraordinary fizeB 0 0 K
as to be distinguished from the reft of the haman IV.
species. The existence of this gigantic race of 'v=
men, seems, then, to be one of those points in na-
tural hiffory, with refpet to which a cautions in-
quirer will hesitate, and will chufe to suspend his
assent until more complete evidence shall decide,
whether he ought to admit a fadt, seemingly incon-
fiftent with what reason and experience have dilco-
vered concerning the flrudure and condition of
man, in all the various situations in which he has
been observed.

IN order to form a complete idea with refpea to Their fae

the constitution of the inhabitants of this and the°f health
other hemisphere, we should attend not only to the
make and vigour of their bodies, but confider what
degree of health they enjoy, and to what period of
longevity they ufially arrive. In the simplicity of
the savage state, when man is not oppressed with
labour, or enervated by luxury, or disquieted with
care, we are apt to imagine that his life will flow on
almost untroubled by disease or suffering, until his
days be terminated in extreme old age, by tie gra-
dual decays of nature. We find, accordingly,
among the Americans, as well as among other rude
people, perrons, whose decrepit and shrivelled form
seems to indicate an extraordinary length of life.
But as most of them are unacquainted with the art
of numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what
is pals, as they are improvident for what is to come,
it is impolnible to ascertain their age with any de-
gree of precision*. It is evident, that the period
of their longevity muff vary considerably, accord-
ing to the diversity of climates, and their different

* Ulloa, Notic. Americ. 323. Bancroft Nat. Hilt. of Gui-
ana, 334.

VOL. I. X modes

B o o K modes of fubfitence. They seem, however, to be

IV. every where exempt from many of the distempers
' -J which afflict polished nations. None of the mala-

dies, which are the immediate offspring of luxury
or sloth, ever visited them; and they have no names
in their languages by which to ditlinguifh this nu-
merous train of adventitious evils.
Difecfs. BUT, whatever be the situation in which man is

placed, he is born to susser; and his diseases, in the
savage state, though fewer in number, are, like those
of the animals whom he nearly resembles in his
mode of life, more violent, and more fatal. If
luxury engenders and nourishes diflempers of one
specious, the rigour and diitreffes of savage life bring
on those of another. As men, in this state, are
wonderfully improvident, and their means of subsist-
ence precarious, they often pass from extreme want
to exuberant plenty, according to the vicillitudcs
of fortune in the chace, or to the variety in the pro-
dueions of the seasons. Their inconsiderate glut-
tony in the one situation, and their revere abstinence
in the other, are equally pernicious. For, though
the human constitution may be accustomed by ha.
bit, like that of animals of prey, to tolerate long
famine, and then to gorge voraciously, it is not a
little affected by such sudden and violent tranfi-
tions. The strength and vigour of savages are, at
fbone seasons, impaired by what they fiuffer from
scarcity of food : at others, they are aflicted witll
diitrders arising from indigestion and tfipeifluity of
gross aliment. These last are so common, that
they may be confidered as the unavoidable conle-
quence of their mode of fubfiftilig, and cut oftfcol-
liderable numbers in the prime of life. They ;re
likewise extremely futjedt to con fum ptions, to

plcuretic,

pleuretic, asthmatic, and paralytic disorders *,B o 0 K
brought on by the immoderate hardships and fa- IV.
tigue which they endure in hunting and in war; or'-,"
owing to the inclemency of the seasons to which
they are continually exposed. In the savage state,
hardships and fatigue violently aflault the conftitu-
tion. In polished Societies, intemperance under-
mines it. It is not easy to determine which of them
operates with most fatal effect, or tends most to
abridge human life. The influence of the former
is certainly most extensive. The pernicious confe-
quences of luxury reach only a few members in any
community, the distresses of savage life are felt by
all. As far as I can judge, after very minute in-
quiry, the general period of human life is shorter
among savages, than in well-regulaited and indus-
trious societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with

which, in this life, offended Heaven chastens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. By communicating it
to their conquerors, they have not only amply a-
venged their own wrongs, but by adding this cala-
mity to those which formerly embittered human
life, they have, perhaps, more than counterbalanced
all the benefits which Europe has derived from the
discovery of the New World. This distemper,
from the country in which it first raged, or from
the people by whom it was supposed to have been
spread over Europe, has been sometimes called the
Neapolitan, and sometimes the French Difeate.
At its first appearance, the infection was ob ma-

* Charley. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. Dc la Pothe-
rle, ii. 37.

X 2 lignant,

BOO K lignant, its symptoms so violent, its operation so

IV. rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the efforts of medi-
V"'"cal skill. Aftonilhment and terror accompanied

this unknown affliction in its progress, and men
began to dread the extinction of the human race
by such a cruel visitation. Experience, and the
ingenuity of physicians gradually discovered reme-
dies of such virtue as to cure or mitigate the evil.
During the course of two centuries and a half, its
virulence seems to have abated considerably. At
length, in the fame manner with the leprosy, which
raged in Europe for some centuries, it may waste its
force and difippear; and in some happier age, this
wefRern infetion, like that from the East, may be
known only by description *.

Power and II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pe-
qualities of ~.
thei' min&.cuar in the bodily constitution of the Americans,

our attention is naturally turned towards the powers
and qualities of their minds. As the individual ad-
vances from the ignorance and imbecillity of the
infant Rfate, to vigour and maturity of understand-
ing, something finmilar to this may be observed in
the progress of the fir cies. With respect to it, too,
there is a period of infancy, during which several
powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all are
feeble and defective in their operation. In ;he ear-
ly ages of society, while the condition of man is
simple and rude, his reason is but little excriledi,
and his desires move within a very narrow Illhere.
Hence arise two remarkable characteristics of the
human mind, in this ifate. Its intellcdiual powers
are extremely limited; its emotions and eff.rts are
few and languid. Both these diftindtiuns are con-

See NOTE XLVIII.

fpicuoui

fpicuous among the rudest and most unimproved oft O O K
the American tribes, and constitute a friking part IV.
in their description. '
i

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpe-lntelleaual

culative reasoning or research, is altogether un-fcyulited'
known in the rude Rtate of society, and never be-
comes the occupation or amusement of the human
faculties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty, the means of subsistence,
as well as the pofeflion of leisure and tranquillity.
The thoughts and attention of a savage are con-
fined within the small circle of objects, immediate-
ly conducive to his preservation or enjoyment.
Every thing beyond that, escapes his observation,
or is perfectly indifferent to him. Like a mere
animal, what is before his eyes interests and affects
him; what is out of fight, or at a distance, makes
no imprefion *. There are several people in Ame-
rica whose limited understandings seem not to be
capable of forming an arrangement for futurity;
neither their solicitude nor their foresight extend so
far. They follow blindly the impulse of the ap-
petite which they feel, but are entirely regardless
of distant consequences, and even of those removed
in the least degree from immediate apprchenfion.
While they highly prize filch things as serve pre-
sent use, or minister to present enjoyment, they set
no vaiue upon those which are not the object of
some immediate want t. When, on the approach
of the evening, a Caribbee feels himself diipofed to
go to reft, no consideration will tempt him to fell
his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he is
alllying out to the business or pastime of the day,

* Ulloa Noticias Americ. 222. t Venegas

HiR. of Calif. i. 66. Scpp, Church Coil. v. 693. Borde
peer. des CarTiblcs, p. 16. Ellis Voy. 194.

he

B 0 O K he will part with it for the flighteRt toy that catches

IV. his fancy *. At the close of winter, while the im-
/"' presSion of what he has suffered from the rigour

of the climate is fresh in the mind of the North
American, he sets himself with vigour to prepare
materials for erecting a comfortable hut to protect
him against the inclemency of the succeeding season;
but as soon as the weather becomes mild, he for-
gets what is palt, abandons his work, and never
thinks of it more, until the return of cold compels
him, when too late, to resume it t.

IF in concerns the moll interesting, and seem-

ingly the most simple, the reason of man, while
rude and deftitnte of culture, differs so little from
the thoughtless levity of children, or the improvi-
dent initinCt of animals, its exertions in other di-
rections cannot be very considerable. The objects
towards which reason turns, and the disquisitions
in which it engages, must depend upon the ftRte
in which man is placed, and are fuggefled by his
neceflities and desires. I)ifiuifitions, which ap-
pear the most necessary and important to men in
one Rate of society, never occur to those in ano-
ther. Among civilized nations, arithmetic or the
art of numbering, is deemed an essential and ele-
mentary science, and in our continent, the inven
tion and use of it reaches back to a period to remote
as is beyond the knowledge of history. But among
savages, who have no property to efiimate, nu
hoarded treasures to count, no variety of objects
or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic
is a superfluous and useless art. Accordingly,
among tome tribes in America, it seems to be lquite
unknown. There are many who cannot recko'

* Labat. Voyages, ii. 114, l 5. Tertre, ii. 385.
*f Adair Hilt. of Amer. Indians, 417.

sarthe

farther than three; and have no denomination toB 0 0 K
diffinguifh any number above it . Several can IV
proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. Vhen
they would convey an idea of any number beyond
these, they point to the hair of their head, intimat-
ing that it is equal to them, or with wonder de-
clare it to be so great that it cannot be reckoned t.
Not.only the Americans, but all nations, wl!ile ex-
tremely rude, seem to be unacquainted with the
art of computation 1:. As soon, however, as they
acquire such acquaintance or conneaion with a va-
riety of objeO.ts, that there is frequent occasion to
combine or divide them, their knowledge of num-
bers increases, so that the fRate of this art among
any people may be confidered as one ifandard, by
which to estimate the degree of their improvement.
The Iroquois, in North America, as they are much
more civilized than the rude inhabitants of Br;tfil,
Paraguay, or Guiana, have likewise made greater
advances in this respect; though even their ariih-
metic does not extend beyond a thousand, as in
their petty tranfil.ions they have no occasion for
any higher number i. The Cherokee, a less con-
fiderable nation on the fame continent, can reckon
only as far as a hundred, and to that extent have
names for the several numbers; the smaller tribes
in their neighbourhood can rile no higher than
ten 11.

IN other refpe(ls, the exercise of the underhtand-No abfraa

ing among rude nations is fti!l more limited. Theidea"
first ideas of every human being mull be such as

* Condam. p. 67. Stadius up. de Bry, ix. 12. Lery.

ibid 251 . ict. 362. Lettr. Edif. z3. 214. t Duniont
l.ouis . iS7. 1 Hcrrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 3. Iiet. 396.
Borde 6. 1: This is the cafe with tie Greenlanders,
Crantz. i. 225. andi with the Kamnchlatlkdales, M. l'AhlbC
Chappe, iii. 17. § Charlcv. Nouv. France, iii.
402. 1| Adair Hill. of Amer. Indians, 77. See
NOTE XLIX.

he

B Q 0 K he leceives by the senses. But, in the mind of

IV. man, while in the savage Rfate, there seem to be
v'"hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue.

The objects around him are presented to his eye.
Such as may be fubl'ervient to his use, or can gra-
tify any of his appetites, attract his notice; he views
the reft without curiosity or attention. Satisfied
with confidering them under that simple mode, in
which they appear to him, as separate and detached,
he neither combines them so as to form general
clafes, nor contemplates their qualities apart, nor
bestows a thought upon the operations of his own
mind concerning them. Thus, he is unacquainted
with all the ideas which have been denominated
universal, abjfrat7, or of refletion. The range of
his understanding rnuft, of course, be very con-
fined, and his reasoning powers be employed mere-
ly on what is sensible. This is so remarkably the
cafe with the ruder nations of America, that their
languages, (as we (hall afterwards find) have not a
word to express any thing but what is material or
corporeal. Tim2e, space, fubflance, and a thousand
other terms which represent abstract and universal
ideas, are altogether unknown to them *. A naked
savage, cowering near the fire in his miserable cab-
bin, or stretched under a few branches which afford
him a temporary shelter, has as little inclination as
capacity for useless speculation. His thoughts ex-
tend not beyond what relates to animal life; and
when they are not directed towards some of its
concerns, his mind is totally inactive. In situations
where no extraordinary effort, either of ingenuity
or labour is requisite, in order to satisfy the
simple demands of nature, the powers of the
mind are so seldom roulcd to any exertion, that
the rational faculties continue almot dormant and

t Condam. p. 54.

ulnex-

unexercifed. The numerous tribes scattered overB 0 O K
the rich plains of South-America, the inhabitants IV.
of Come of the islands, and of several fertile plains'- v'
on the continent, come under this description.
Their vacant countenance, their staring unexpref-
five eye, their lifeless inattention, and total ignor-
ance of fubjeds, which seem to be the firit which
should occupy the thoughts of rational beings,
made filch impression upon the Spaniards, when
they fir-st beheld those rude people, that they con-
fidtred them as animals of an inferior order, and
could not believe that they belonged to the human
species *. It required the authority of a papal
bull to counteract this opinion, and to convince
them that the Americans were capable of the func-
tions, and inticled to the privileges of humanity f.
Since that time, persons more enlightened and im-
partial than the discoverers or conquerors of Ame-
rica, have had an opportunity of contemplating
the most ravage of its inhabitants, and they have
been aflonifhed and humbled, with observing how
nearly man, in this condition, approaches to the
brutecreation. But in feverer climates,where subsist-
ence cannot be procured with the fame ease, where
men must unite more closely, and at with greater
concert, necefity calls forth their talents, and (har-
pens their invention, so that the intelligent powers
are more exercised and improved. The North-
Americans and natives of Chili, who inhabit the
temperate regions in the two great diftrics of
America, are people of cultivated and inlarged un-
dertlandings, when viewed in comparison with
rome of those feated in the islands, or on the banks
f0 the Maragnon and Orinoco. Their occupations
are more various, their system of policy, as well as
of war, more complex, their arts more numerous.

H* errera, dec. 2. lib. ii, c. 15.
Tor quem. Mon. Ind. iii. 198,

But,

B 0 0 K But, even among them, the intellectual powers are

IV. extremely limited in their operations, and unless
w""when turned directly to those objects which interest

a savage, are held in no estimation. Both the
North-Americans and Chilefe, when notengiged
in some of the funLtions belonging to a warrior or
hunter, loiter away their time in thoughtless indo-
lence, unacquainted with any other fibject worthy
of their attention, or capable of occupy ing their
minds *. If even among them, reason is so much
circumferibed in its exertions, and never arrives,
in its highest attainments, at the knowledge of
those general principles and maxims, which serve
as the foundation of science, we may conclude, that
the intellectual powers of man in the savage state
are destitute of their proper object, and cannor
acquire any considerable degree of vigour and en-
largement.

Ative es- FROM the fame causes, the active efforts of tlc
mind few, mind are few, and, on most occasions, languid. If
and languid. we examine into the motives which rouze men tr,

activity in civilized life, and prompt them to per-
severe in fatiguing exertions of their ingenuity o!
firength, we Ihall find that they arise chiefly froim
acquired wants and appetites. These are nnmer-
ous and importunate, they keep the mind in per-
petual agitation, and, in order to gratify then,
invention mufft be always on the firetch, and in--
dufiry muff be incessantly employed. But tli:
defrc-s ot simple nature are few, and where a ;a-
vourable climate yields almost spontaneously what
filffices them, they fiarcely tir the foul, or excite
any violent emotion. Hence the people of fever:i
tribes in America wafe their life in a listless i3clci-
lence. To be free from occupation, Icers to 1)
all the enjoyment towards which they aspire. Thce

* Laritau, ii. 2.

Vii;

will continue whole days firetched out in theirB OOK
hammocs, or feated on the earth, in perfect idleness, IV.
without changing their posture, or raising their v--
eyes from the ground, or uttering a single word *.

SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither improvi.

the hope of future good, nor the apprehension ofdcnt.
future evil, can surmount it. They appear equally
indifferent to both, discovering little solicitude, and
taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to secure
the other. The cravings of hunger may rouse
them; but as they devour, with little diftinrtion,
whatever will appease its inflinctive demands, the
exertions which there occasion are of short dura-
tion. Destitute of ardour, as well as variety of
desire, they feel not the force of those powerful
springs which give vigour to the movements of the
mind, and urge the patient hand of industry to
persevere in its efforts. Man, in some parts of
America, appears in a form so rude, that we can
discover no effects of his activity, and the princi-
ple of understanding which should direct it, seems
hardly to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he
has no fixed residence; he has erected no habita-
tion to shelter him from the inclemency of the
weather; he has taken no measures for securing a
certain subsistence; he neither sows nor reaps; but
roams about as led in search of the plants and
fruits which the earth brings forth in fucceflion;
and in quest of the game which he kills in the
forests, or of the filh which he catches in the
rivers.

THIS deCcription, however, applies only to fomesome va;:

tribes. Man cannot continue long in this state of 'y 'wit,
feeble and uninformed infancy. He was made forthcl.
ndluflry and action, and the powers of his nature,
M Bouguer Voy. au Perou, o.2, Bordc, I5.

B O O K as well as the necessity of his condition, urge him

_I. to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly, among most
c"-v"of the American nations, especially those feated in

rigorous climates, some efforts are employed, and
some previous precautions are taken, for securing
fibfiftence. The career of regular industry is be-
gun, and the laborious arm has made the first
essays of its power. Still, however, the improvi-
dent and slothful genius of the savage state predo-
minates. Even among those more improved
tribes, labour is deemed ignominious and degrad-
ing. It is only to work of a certain kind that a
man will deign to put his hand. The greater part
is devolved entirely upon the women. One half of
the community remains inactive, while the other
is opprefTed with the multitude and variety of its
occupations. Thus their ind4ftry is partial, and
the foresight which regulates it, is no less limited.
A remarkable instance of this occurs in the chief
arrangement with refpet to their manner of living.
They depend for their fubfifience, during one part
of the year, on fishing; during another, on hunt-
ing; during a third, on the produce of their agri-
culture. Though experience has taught them
to foresee the return of those various seasons,
and to make some provision for their re-
fpeftive exigencies, thec' either want sagacity
to proportion this provision to their consumption,
or are so incapable of any command over
their appetites, that, from their inconsiderate waste,
they often feel the calamities of famine as severely
as the rudest of the savage tribes. What they
susser one year does not augment their industry,
or render them more provident to prevent fimi-
lar difirefi-s *. This inconsiderate thoughtleffiefs
about futurity, the effect of ignorance and the

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lettr. Edit. 2. 2 29. Defcript.
of N. France, Osborn's Colluft. ii, 880. Dela Potherie, ii. 63.

cau fe

cause of sloth, accompanies and characterizes man B O O K
in every stage of savage life"; and by a caprici- IV.
ous singularity in his operations, he is then least
solicitous about supplying his wants, when the means
of satisfying them are molf precarious, and pro-
cured with the greatest difficultyt.

III. AFTER viewing the bodily constitution ofeir foci'l

the Americans, and contemplating the powers of
their minds, we are led, in the natural order of in-
quiry, toconfider them as united together in society.
Hitherto our researches have been confined to the
operations of underfianding refpedeing thermelves,
as individuals, now they will extend to the degree
of their sensibility and affection towards their fpe-
cies.

THE domestic state is the firfl and most fimpleDomenic

form of human association. The union of the sexes, unio"'
among different animals, is of longer or shorter
duration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
rearing their offspring. Among those tribes where
the season of infancy is short, and the young Loon
acquire the vigour or agility, no permanent union
is formed. Nature commits the care of training up
the offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
ness, without any other alliftance, is equal to the
talk. But where the slate of infancy is long and
lielplefs, and the jint afliduity of both parents is
requisite in tending their feeble brood, there a more
intimate connection takes place, and continues un-
til the purpole of nature be accomplished, and the
new race grow up to full maturity. As the infan-
cy of man is more feeble and helpless than that of
any other animal, and he is dependent, during a
much longer period, on the care and foresight of his

' Bancroft's Nat. HIilt. of Guiana, 326. 333.
t See NOTE L.

parents,

B O O K parents, the union between husband and wife came

IV. early to be confidered, not only as a solemn, but
..v -z'as a permanent contract. A general slate of pro-

mifcuous intercourse between the sexes never exist-
ed but in the imagination of poets. In the infancy
of foceity, when men, destitute of arts and indus-
try, lead a hard precarious life, the rearing of their
progeny demands the attention and efforts of both
parents; and if their union had not been formed
and continued with this view, the race could not
have been preserved. Accordingly, in America,
even among the rudest tribes, a regular union be-
tween husband and wife was universal, and the
rights of marriage were understood and recognized.
In those diftrias where subsistence was scanty, and
the difficulty of maintaining a family was great, the
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer or
more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring food
concurred with the influence of climate, in in-
ducing the inhabitants to increase the number of
their wives *. In some countries the marriage union
fibfifted during life; in others, the impatience of
the Americans under restraint of any species, to-
gether with their: natural levity and caprice, promtp-
cd them to difblve it on very flight pretexts, and
often without assigning any cause t.

Conliition of Bu T whether they confidered the obligation of this
'oen=. contract as perpetual, or only temporary, the condi-

tion of women was equally humiliating and mifera-
ble. Whether man has been improved by the pro-
grefs of arts and civilization in society, is a queflion,
which, in the wantonness of disputation, has been
agitated among philosophers. That women are in-
debted to the refinements of polished manners ifr

* Lettr. Edif. 23. 318. Lafitau Mocurs, i. 554. Le'y
ap de Bry, iii. 234. Journal Grillet ct Bechanmel, p. 88.

'1- Lafitau, i. 580. Joutcl Journ. -Hifor. 345. Lozano

Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hlennepin Moeurs des Sauva-
gcs, p. 30. 33.

a happy

a happy change in their state, is a point which can B o O K
admit of no doubt To despise and to degrade the IV.
female sex, is the charaCteristic of the savage itate '--
in every part of the globe. Man, proud of excel-
ling in Itrengh and in courage, the chief marks of
pre-eminence among rude people, treats woman, as
an inferior, with dildain. The Americans, perhaps
from that coldness and insensibility which has been
confidered as peculiar to their constitution, add ne-
glect and harshness to contempt. The mofi intel-
ligent travellers have been firuck with this inatten-
tion of the Americans to their women. It is not,
as I have already observed, by a fiudied display of
tenderness and attachment, that the American en-
deavours to gain the heart of the woman whom he
wilhes to marry. Marraige itself, instead of be-
ing an union of affection, and interest between
equals, becomes, among them, the unnatural con-
jun-tion of a master with his slave. It is the ob-
servation of an author, whose opinions are defer-
vedly of great weight, that wherever wives are
purchascd, their condition is extremely depressed *.
They become the property and the haves of those
who buy them. In \vhatever part of the globe this
custom prevails, the observation holds. In coun-
tries where refinement has made Come progress,
women, excluded from society, and fiut up in fe-
questered apartments, are kept under the vigilant
guard of their maftcrs. In ruder nations, they are
degraded to the meanest functions. Among many
people of America the marriage-contract is proper-
ly a purchale. The man buys his wife of her pa-
rents. Though unacquainted with the use of mo-
ney, or with such commercial trantadtions as take
place in more improved society, lie knows how to
give an equivalent for ally object which lie desires
;o pofl:fs. Iin 1o)1 places the fititor devotes his

k Sv'tchlcs o I-ilt, of 'M n1, i 184.

frvrice

B O O K service for a certain time to the parents of the maid

IV. whom he courts; in others, he hunts for them oc-
v'" "cafionally, or assists in cultivating their fields, and

forming their canoes; in others, he offers presents of
such things as are deemed most valuable on account
of their usefulness or rarity *. In return for there, he
receives his wife; and this circumstance, added to
the low eitimation of women among savages, leads
him to confider her as a female servant whom he has
acquired, and whom he has a title to treat as an in-
ferior. In all unpolifhed nations, it is true, the
funtions in domestic oeconomry, which fall natural-
ly to the share of women, are so many, that they
are fuibjected to hard labour, and muff bear more
than their full portion of the common burden. But
in America their condition is so peculiarly grievous,
and their depression so complete, that servitude is
a name too mild to describe their wretched state.
A wife, among most tribes, is no better than a
beast of burden, destined to every office of labour
and fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in
sloth, or spend it in amusement, the women are
condemned to incessant toil. Tasks are imposed
upon them without pity, and services are received
wvithout complacence or gratitude. Every cir-
cumftance reminds women of this mortifying in-
feriority. They muff approach their lords with re-
verence; they must regard them as more exalted
beings, and are not permitted to eat in their pre-
fence ::. There arediftriss in America where this do-
minion is lo grievous, and so sensibly felt that Come
women, in a wild emotion of maternal tenderness,

* Lnfitau Moeurs &c. i. 560. &c. Charlev. iii. 285, &c.

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumont, ii. 156. t Ttrtic,
ii. 382. Borde Relat. des Mocurs des Caraibcs, p. zl. Bict,
j357. Condaniine, p. 11o. Ferniin. i. 79.

t Gumilla, i 153. Barrcrc, 164. Labati Voy. ii. 78.
Chaunalon, 51. 'Iertre, ii. 300.

have

have destroyed their female children in their infan-B 0 O K
cy, in order to deliver them from that intolerable IV.
bondage to which they knew they were doomed *. -
Thus the first institution of social life is perverted.
That irate of domestic union towards which nature
leads the human species, in order to soften the heart
to gentleness and humanity, is rendered so unequal,
as to establish a cruel distinCtion between the fixes,
which forms the one to be harsh and unfeeling, and
humbles the other to servility and subjection.

IT is owing, perhaps, in rome measure, to thisTheir wo-

state of deprellion, that women in rude nations are ""ennotP
far from being prolific t. The vigour of their
conifitution is exhausted by excefive fatigue, and
the wants and distresses of savage life are so nu-
merous, as to force them to take various precau-
tions in order to prevent too rapid an increase of
their progeny. Among wandering tribes, or such
as depend chiefly upon hunting for subsistence, the
mother cannot attempt to rear a second child, un-
til the first has attained such a degree of vigour as
to be in some measure independent of her care.
From this motive, it is the univerlsal pradtice of the
American women to nurse their children during
several years ; and as they seldom marry early,
the period of their fertility is over, before they can
finish the long but necefairy attendance upon two
or three fuccellive children §. Among some of the
least polished tribes, whole induflry and foresight
does not extend so far as to make any regular pro-
vision for their own fubfitlenlce, it is a maxim not
to burden themselves with rearing more than two
children 11 ; and no Lilch numerous families, as are

*Gumilla, ii. 233. 238. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.

I Lafitau, i. 59o. ChallevoiK, iii. 304. t Herrera,
dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4. § Charlcv. iii. 303. Duinont
Mem. fur Louifiane, ii. 270. Denys H-ill. Natur. de I'Ame-
rique, &c. ii. 365. Chailev. Hist. de Pa'ag. ii. 422.

11 'echo's Account of Par:agtay, &c. CLhurch. Collect. vi.
Io8. Lett. Edif 24. 2oo. Lozano Defcr. 92.

VOL. 1. Y frequent

B O O K frequent in civilized societies, are to be found among

Iv. men in this fate* . When twins are born, one of
' -"'them commonly is abandoned, because the mother

is not equal to the talk of educating both t. When
a mother dies while she is nursing a child, all hope
of preserving its life fails, and it is buried together
with her in the fame grave §. As the parents are
frequently exposed to want by their own improvi-
dent indolence, the difficulty of sustaining their
children becomes Co great, that it is not uncom-
mon to abandon or destroy them U. Thus their
experience of the difficulty of training up an infant
to maturity, amidst the hardships of avage life,
often stifles the voice of nature among the Ameri-
cans, and suppresses the strong emotions of paren-
tal tenderness.

Parental as- BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants
feaiion, adof America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in affection and
attachment to their offspring. They feel the pow-
er of this inftint in its full force, and as long as
their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no peo-
ple exceed them in tenderness and care :. But in
rude nations, the dependence of children upon their
parents is of shorter continuance than in polished so-
cieties. When men mufft be trained to the various
functions of civil life by previous discipline and
education, when the knowledge of abstruse sciences
muff be taught, and dexterity in intricate arts must
be acquired before a young man is prepared to be-

* Maccleur's Journal, 63. + Lettr. Edif. x. 200

See NOTE LI. § Charlev. iii. 368. Lett. Edit.
x. 200. P. Mclch. Hernandcz Memor. tie Cheriqui. Colbert,
Collea. Orig. Pap. i. II Vencgas Hilt. of Cil-
liforn. i. 82, t Gumilla, i. 211. Biet. 390

gill

gin his career of action, the attentive feelings of aB o o K
parent are not confined to theyearsof infancy, but IV.
extend to the establishment of his child in the'-v" '
world. Even then his solicitude does not termi-
nate. His protection may Rfill be requisite, and his
wisdom and experience flill prove useful guides.
Thus a permanent connection is formed; parental
tenderness is exercised, and filial refped returned,
throughout the whole course of life. But in the
simplicity of the ravage slate, the affection of pa-
rents, like the inftindive fondness of animals, ceases
almost entirely as soon as their offspring attain ma-
turity. Little inftrudion fits them for that mode
of life to which they are defined. The parents,
as if their duty were accomplished, when they have
conducted their children through the helpless years
of infancy, leave them afterwards at entire liberty.
They seldom advise or admonish, tney never chide
or chastise them. They susser them to be ablolute
matters of their own actions . In an American
hut, a father, a mother, and their posterity, live
together like persons assembled by accident, with-
out teeming to feel the obligation of the duties mu-
tually arising from this connedion t. As filial love
is not cherished by the continuance of attention
or good offices, the recollection of benefits received
in early infancy is too faint to excite it. Conscious
of their own liberty, and impatient of reflraint, the
youth of America are accustomed to act as if they
were totally independent. Their parents are not
objects of greater regard than other persons. They
treat them always with neglect, and often with
such harshness and insolence, as to fill thofi
who have been witnesses of their conduct with

* Charley. iii. 272. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. 212. La-

fitau, i. 602. Creuxi, Hist. Canad. p. 71. Sei nndez, Re-
lac. Hist. de los Chequit. 33. 1 Chailev. -lilt.
N, Fr. iii. 273.

Y 2 horror.

B O O K horror * Thus the ideas which seem to be natu-

IV. ral to man in his savage ifate, as they result from
"'--his circumstances and condition in that period of

his progress, affect the two capital relations in do-
meffic life. They render the union between hus-
band and wife unequal. They shorten the dura-
tion, and weaken the force of the connection be-
tween parents and children.

lolitical in- IV. FROM the domestic fiate of the Americans,
itution," the transition is natural to the consideration of their

civil government and political institutions. In
every inquiry concerning the operations of men
when united together in society, the first objet of
attention should be their mode of subsistence. Ac-
cordingly as that varies, their laws and policy must
be different. 1 he institutions suited to the ideas
and exigencies of tribes, which subsist chiefly by
fishing or hunting, and which have hardly formed
a conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which must take
place when the earth is cultivated with regular in-
duftry, and a right of property, not only in its pro-
ductions, but in the foil itself, is completely atcer-
tained.

Mode of ALL the people of America, now under review,
ublllnce. belong to the former clats. But though they may

all be comprehended under the general denomina-
tion of savage, the advances which they had made
in the art of procuring to themlelves a certain and
plentiful fubfiffence, were very unequal. On the
vlt plains of South America, man appears in one

* Gunilla, i. 212. Tcrtrc, ii. 376. Chailev. Hist. leN.

Prnacc, iii 3C9. L M9arlev. lift. de Ptarag. i. 1i 5. L .ezano,
Dl)Ilcip. del Granid Chaco, p. 68. ioo, ,oi. Fcrne.nd. Rl-
:lac. hifo,. tie los Citiquit. qz6.

of

of the rudest states in which he has been ever ob-B 0 O K
served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes de- IV.
pend entirely upon the bounty of nature for Tub-"'"~
fiftence. They discover no solicitude, they em-
ploy little foresight, they scarcely exert any indus-
try, to secure what is necessary for their support.
The Topayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros of Tierra-
Firme, the Cig'nuas, the Moxos, and (everal other
people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which cafada
bread is made, is an art too intricate for their in-
genuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence. The
roots which the earth produces spontaneously, the
fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather in
the woods, together with lizards and other reptiles,
which the heat engenders in a fat foil, moiitened
by frequent rains, supply them with food during
some part of the year *. At other times they Cub- By sising,
fils by filhing; and nature seems to have indulged
the laziness of the people, by the liberality with
which (he ministers, in this way, to their wants.
The vast rivers of South America abound with an
infinite variety of the molf delicate filh. The
lakes and marshes, formed by the annual overflow-
ing of the waters, are filled with all the different
species, where they remain shut up, as in natural
reservoirs, for the use of the inhabitants. They
lwarm in such shoals, that in some places they are
catched without art or industry t. In others, the
natives have discovered a method of infecting the
water with thejuice of certain plants, by which the

* Nicuhioff. Hit. of liraill. Church Col. ii. 134. Siinon

Conquill tie Tierra Firnie, p. 166. T'echo, Account of
P.raguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edift . 34. 84. o.
190. Lozano, Detcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 81. Ribas,
Piltor. de los itiunfos, &c. p. 7. 1 See NOTE LIl.

fifl

B O o K fish are so intoxicated, that they float on the fur-

IV. face, and are taken with the hand *. Some tribes
'v--'"-have ingenuity enough to preserve them without

salt, by drying or smoking them upon hurdles over
a flow fire t. The prolific quality of the rivers in
South-America induces many of the natives to re-
fort to their banks, and to depend almost entirely
for nourishment on what their waters supply with
such profusion t. In this part of the globe, hunt-
ing seems not to have been the first employment
of men, or the first effort of their invention and
labour to obtain food. They were fishers before
they became hunters; and as the occupations of
the former do not call for equal exertions of acti-
vity, or talents, with those of the latter, people in
that itate appear to poflefs neither the fame degree
of enterprise, nor of ingenuity. The petty nations
adjacent to the Maragnon and Orinoco, are mani-
feftly the most inactive and least intelligent of all
the Americans.
By hunting. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can

sustain themselves in this manner. The greater
part of the American nations, dispersed over the
forefis with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though these forests, especially in ihe southern con-
tinent of America, are stored plentifully with
game §, considerable efforts of activity and inge-
nuity are requisite in pursuit of it. Necelfity in-
cited them to the one, and taught them the other.
Hunting became their principal occupation; and as
it called forth itrenuous exertions of courage, of
force, and of invention, it was deemed a fundtion

* See NOTE LIII. f Condam. 159. Gu-

milla, ii. 37. Lettr. Edif. 14. 199. 23. 328. Acugna, Rclai.
de la Riv. des Amaz. 138. * Bariere, Rclat. dc
Fr. Equin. p. 155. 5 P. Martyr. Decad. p. 324.
Gumilla, ii. 4, &c. Acugna, i. 156.

no

no leTs honourable than necessary. This wasBOOK
peculiar to the men. They were trained to it IV.
from their earliest youth. A bold and dextrousv""
hunter ranked next in fame to the distinguished
warrior, and an alliance with the former is often
courted in preference to one with the larter*.
Hardly any device, which the ingenuity of man
has discovered for ensnaring or destroying wild ani-
mals, was unknown to the Americans. While en-
gaged in this favourite exercise, they shake off the
indolence peculiar to their nature, the latent powers
and vigour of their minds are routed, and they be-
come active, persevering, and indefatigable. llheir
sagacity in finding their prey, and their address in
killing it, are equal. Their reason and their sensEs,
being constantly direEted towards this one object,
the former displays such fertility of invention, and
the latter acquire such a degree of acuteness, as ap-
pear almost incredible. They discern the foot-
fleps of a wild beast, which escape every other eye,
and can follow them with certainty through the
pathless forest. If they attack their game openly,
their arrow seldom errs from the mark t ; f they
endeavour to circumvent it by art, it is almost im-
poilible to avoid their toils. Among several tribes,
their young men were not permitted to marry, un-
til they had given such proofs of their skill in hunt-
ing as put it beyond doubt that they were capable
of providing for a family. Their ingenuity always
on the firetch, and sharpened by emulation, as
well as neceflity, has ltruck out many inventions,
which greatly facilitate success in the chafe. The
mori singular of these is the discovery of a poison,
in which th'y dip the arrows employed in hunting.
The slightest wound with those envenomed shafts

* Charlv. I-Iitoire de la N. France, iii. 1 5.
t+ iet Voy. de France Equin. 3 5 7. Davies' Dircov. of the
River of Atmaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287,

is

B O O K is mortal. If they only pierce the ikin, the blood

IV. fixes and congeals in a moment, and the firongeft
"-"'animal fall motionless to the ground. Nor does

this poison, notwithstanding its violence and sub-
tlety, inset the flesh of the animal which it kills.
That may be eaten with perfect safety, and retains
its native relish and qualities. All the nations along
the Maragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with
this composition, the chief ingredient in which is
the juice extracted from the root of the curare, a
species of withe *. In other parts of America, they
employ the juice of the manchenille for the fame
purpose, and it operates with a no less fatal adivi-
ty. To people possesed of those secrets, the bow
is a more deftrruAive weapon than the muflet, and
in their skilful hands, does great execution among
the birds and beasts which abound in the forests of
America.
By Agricul- Bur the life of a hunter gradually leads man to

a state more advanced. The chafe, even where
prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain main-
tenance, and at Iome seasons it must be flufpended
altogether. If a ravage trusts to his bow alone
for food, he and his family will often be reduced
to extreme dittrefs §. Hardly any region of the
earth furnishes man spontaneously with what his
wants require, in the mildest climates, and most
fertile foils, his own industry and forefiglt muti
be exerted, in some degree, to secure a regular
supply of food. Their experience of this fur-
mounts the abhorrence of labotlr natural to
savage nations, and compels them to have rt-
courie to culture, as subsidiary to hunting. In
particular situations some iniall tribes may sublist

* Gumilla, ii. i, &c. Condain. 20. Rccherch. Plii
of. ii. 239. Bancroft Nat. Hitl. of Guiana, 281, &i.

§ See NOTE LIV.

by,

by fishing, independent of any production of the B O K
earth, railed by their own industry. But through- Iv.
out all America, we scarcely meet with any nation '.-
of hunters, which does not practise rome species of
cultivation.

THEIR agriculture, however, is neither extensive The vrious

nor laborious. As game and fish are their princi-fu, '.
pal food, all they aim at by cultivation, is to fup-ture.
ply any occasional defed of these. In the southern
continent of America, the natives confined their
industry to rearing a few plants, which, in a rich
foil and warm climate, were easily trained to ma-
turity. The chief of there is Maize, well known
in Europe by the name of Turkey or Indian wheat,
a grain extremely prolific, of simple culture,
agreeable to the taste, and affording a strong
hearty nourishment. The second is the manioc,
which grows to the size of a large shrub, or fiall
tree, and produces roots somewhat resembling
parsnips, After carefully squeezing out the juice,
these roots are grated down to a fine powder, and
formed into thin cakes, called Caffada bread,
which, though insipid to the taste, proves no con-
temptible food *. As the juice of the manioc is a
deadly poison, rome authors have celebrated the
ingenuity of the Americans, in converting a noxi-
ous plant into wholetome nourishment. But it
should rather be confidered as one of the desperate
expedients for procuring fubfiltence, to which ne-
ceflity reduces rude nations; or, perhaps, men
were led to the use of it by a progreis, in which
there is nothing marvellous. One species of ma-
nioc is altogether free of any poisonous quality, and
may be eaten without any preparation but that of
roadting it in the embers. This it is probable, was

* Sloane HIift. of Jam. Introd. p. 18. Labat. i. 394. Acolla

Hid. Ind. Occid. Natur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ulloa, i. 62. Aublet
Meim. fur le Magnioc. Hit. des Plantes, tonl ii. p. 65, &c.

firil

B O O Kfirft used by the Americans as food; and neceflity

IV. having gradually taught them the art of separating
-"Y - its pernicious juice from the other species, they

have by experience found it to be the most prolific
as well as the most nourishing plant of the two *.
The third is the plaintain, which though it rites to
the height of a tree, is of such quick growth, that
in less than a year it rewards the indufiry of the
cultivator with its fruit. This, when roasted, sip-
plies the place of bread, and is both palatable and
nourishing t. The fourth is the potatoe, whose
culture and qualities are too well known to need
any description. The fifth ispimento, a small tree,
yielding a strong aromatic spice. The Americans,
who, like other inhabitants of warm climates, de-
light in whatever is hot and of poignant flavour,
deem this f:afonii;g a neceffarv of life, and mingle
it copioully with every kind of food they take §.

SUCH are the various productions, which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting
tribes on the continent of America, and with a mo-
derate exertion of adtive and provident induftrv,
there might have yielded a full supply to the wants
of a numerous people. Blt men accultomed to
the free and vagrant life of hunters, are incapable
of regular application to labour; and confider
agriculture as a secondary and inferior occupation.
Accordingly the provision for fubfiltence, arising
from cultivation, was so limited and scanty among
the Americans, that, upon any accidental failure
of their usual f'ccefs in hunting, they were often
reduced to extreme difirets.

* Martyr decad. 301. Labat. 1.4. Gumilla, iii. 19z.
Machuca Milic Indiana, 164. See NOTE LV.

+ Sec NOTE LVI. § Gumilla, iii, 171. Acolta,lib.
iv . 20.

I N

IN the islands, the mode of subsisting was con- B O O K

fiderably different. None of the large animals Iv.
which abound on the continent were known there. '- '
Only four species of quadrupeds, betides a kind
of small dumb dog, existed in the islands, the big-
gest of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit *.
To hunt fiTch diminutive prey, was an occupation
which required no effort either of activity or cou-
rage. The chief employment of a hunter in the
isles was to kill birds, which on the continent are
deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the pur-
suit of boys t. This want of animals, as well
as their peculiar situation, led the islanders to
depend principally upon fishing for their fuib-
fiftence :. Their rivers, and the sea with
which they are surrounded, supplied them with
this species of food. At rome particular seasons,
turtle, crabs; and other shell-fish, abounded in
such numbers, that they could support themselves
with a facility in which their indolence delighted §.
At other times, they ate lizards, and various rep-
tiles of odious formsll. To fishing, the inhabi-
tants of the island added rome degree of agricul-
ture. Maize If, manioc, and other plants, were
cultivated in the fame manner as on the continent.
But all the fruits of their indultry, 'together with Their agri-
what their foil and climate produced fpontane- u"lture'ry
oufly, afforded them but a scanty maintenance.
Though their demands for food were very sparing,
they hardly raised what was sufficient for their own
consumption. If a few Spaniards fettled in any
diftridt, fiIch a fnall addition, of fiupernumerary
mouths soon exhaustcd their scanty stores, and
brought on a famine.

Oviedo, lib. xii. in proem. + Ribas Hill. de los

triumph. p. 13. De la Potheric, ii. 33. iii. 20. t Ovi-
cdo, lib. xiii. c. i. Gomara Hill. Gener. c. 28, § Go-
nlara Hil. Gener. c. 9. Labat, ii. 221, &c. 11 Oviedo,
lib.xiiic. . T3 Sec NOTE LVII.

Two

B O O K Two circurnfances, common to all the savage

IV. nations of America, concurred with those which I

t"v' lhave already mentioned, not only in rendering
Two c~ufcs
otits im- their agriculture imperfect, but in circumscribing
rprfetion. their power in all their operations. They had no

tame animals; and they were unacquainted-with
the use of metals.

The want 1 other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest
lol"' ""' fIate appears as lord of the creation, giving law to

various tribes of animals, which he has tamed and
reduced to subjection. The Tartar follows his
prey on the horse which he has reared ; or tends
his numerous herds, which furnish him both with
food and clothing; the Arab has rendered the ca-
mel docile, and avails himself of its persevering
firength; the Laplandcr has formed the rein-deer
to be subservient to his will; and even the peo-
ple of Kamchatka have trained their dogs to la-
bour. This command over the inferior creatures
is one of the noblest prerogatives of man, and
among the greatest efforts of his wisdom and
power. Without this, his dominion is incomplete.
He is a monarch, who has no fubjets ; a master,
without servants, and must perform every opera-
tion by the strength of his own arm. Such wva
the condition of all the rude nations in America.
Their reason was To little improved, or their union
so incomplete, that they seem not to have been
conscious of the superiority of their nature, and
suffered all the animal creation to retain its liberty,
without cfiablining their own authority over any
one fpccics. Most of the animals, indeed, which
have b'trn renerecd domestic in our continent, do
not exist in the New Werld; but tlofe pecu-
liar to it are reither so fierce, nor so formid-
able, as to have exempted ther from servitude.
There are some animals of the slime fpeci,:s
in both continents. But the rein-deer, which

Ilaros

has been tamed and broken to the yoke in theB 0O K
one hemisphere, runs wild in the other. The bi- IV.
son of America is manifestly of the fame fpeciesv-"v
with the horned cattle of the other hemifihere *.
These, even among the rud:ft nations in our con-
tinent, have been rendered domestic; and in con-
sequence of his dominion over them, man can accom-
plifh works of labour with greater facility, and has
made a vast addition to his means of fubliitence.
Theinhabitants of many regions in the New World,
where the bison abounds, might have derived tile
fame advantages from it. It is not of a nature so
indoci'e, but that it might have been trained to be
as subservient to man as our cattle t. But a fa-
vage, in that uncultivated fate wherein the Ameri-
cans were discovered, is the enemy of the other
animals, not their liperior. He waltes and de-
ifroys, but knows not how to multiply or to go-
vern them i.

THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftintion

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men:
above such as continue rude. The greatefi opera-
tions of man in changing and improving the face
of nature, as well as his mors coniiderable efforts ill
cultivaing the earth, are accomplished by means of
the aid which he receives from the animals whom he
has tamed and employs in labour. It is by their
flrength that he subdues the flubborn si il, and con-
vertsthe defertormarll intoa fiuitful field. But nan,
in his civilized state, is so accultorned to the service of
the dornmiic animals, that he seldom rcfle*s upon
the vait benefits which he derives from it. If we
were to suppose him, cven when most improved,

* Buffon, Artic. bfon. * Nouv. Decouvcrte per
tHelnpin, p. 192. Kalm. i. 207. } BufFon Iill:. Nal.
ix. 85 li .

I hll .

P ilol: et Polil. des Etablifiin. des Europ. d(anb
les dcux liidcs, vi. 364,

to

B O O K to be deprived, of their useful ministry, his em-

IV. pire over nature muff in some measure cease, and
v'"' he would remain a feeble animal, at a loss how to

subsist, and incapable of attempting such arduous
undertakings as their assistance enables him to exe-
cute with ease.

Wantofthe IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion of
,ilful me-man over the animal creation, or his acquiring the

use of metals, has contributed most to extend his
power. The ara of this important discovery is
unknown, and in our hemisphere very remote. It
is only by tradition, or digging up some rude in-
ftrurents of our forefathers, that we learn that
mankind were originally unacquainted with the ufeof
metals, and endeavoured to supply the want of them
by employing flints, shells, bones, and other hard
substances, for the fame purposes which metals
serve among polished nations. Nature completes
the formation of some metals. Gold, silver, and
copper, are found in their perfect fiate, in the clefts
of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or the channels
of rivers. These were accordingly the metals first
known, and first applied to use. But iron, the most
serviceable of all, and to which man is most indebt-
ed, is never discovered in its perfect form; its gross
and stubborn ore muff feel twice the force of fire,
and go through two laborious processes, before it
becomes fit for use. Man was long acquainted
with the other metals, before he acquired the art
of fabricating iron, or attained such ingenuity as to
perfect an invention, to which he is indebted for
tholle initruments wherewith he subdues the earth,
and commands all its inhabitants. But in this, as
well as in many other refpeds, the inferiority'of
the Americans was conspicuous. All the fiavage
tribes, scattered over the continent and islands,

were

were totally unacquainted with the metals which B O O K
the foil produces in great abundance, if we ex- IV.
cept some trifling quantity of gold, which they'"-v'"
picked up in the torrents that descended from
their mountains, and formed into ornaments.
Their devices. to supply this want of the service-
able metals, were extremely rude and aukward.
The most simple operation was to them an under-
taking of immense difficulty and labour. To
fell a tree with no other inftrunents than hat-
chets of stone, was employment for a month*.
To form a canoe into shape, and to hollow it, con-
fulmed years; and it fiequently began to rot before
they were able to finish it t. Their operations in
agriculture were equally flow and defective. In a
country covered with woods of the hardest timber,
the clearing of a finall field destined for culture re-
quired the united assorts of a tribe, and was a work
of much time and great toil. This was the business of
the men, and their indolence was satisfied with per-
forming it in a very slovenly manner. The labour
of cultivation was left to the women, who after dig-
ging, or rather flirring the field, with wooden mat-
tocks, and stakes hardened in the fire, sowed or
planted it; but were more indebted for the increase
to the fertility of the foil, than to their own rude
ind ulry t.

AGRICULTURE, even when the firength of man

is seconded by that of the animals which he has sub-
jeded to the yoke, and his power augmented by the
use of the various inifruments with which the dif-
covery of metals has furnished him, is fill a work
of great labour, and it is with the sweat of his brow
that he renders the earth fertile. It is not wonderful,
llen, that people deifitute of both these advantages

* Gurilla, iii. 196. - Borde Relat, dcs Caraibes, p. 2z.
t Gunlilla, iii. 166, &c. Lettr. Edif. xii. 0o.

flioull

B O O K should have made so little progress in cultivation,

IV. that they must be confidered as depending for sub-
v'r fiftence on fishing and hunting, rather than on the

fruits of their own labour.

Politicalin- FROM this description of the mode of fibfifting
Ritutlons a- t
ritng from among the rude American tribes, the form and
this tlatc. genius of their political institutions may be deduced,

and we are enabled to trace various circumitances
of diftinAion between them and more civilized
nations.

i. Divided I. THEY were divided into finall independent
into imaii communities. While hunting is the chief source
immun. of fubfillence, a vait extent of territory is requisite

for supporting a small number of people. In pro-
portion as men multiply and unite, the wild ani-
mals," on which they pray, diminish, or fly at a
greater distance from the haunts of their enemy.
The increase of a society in this state is limited by
its own nature, and the members of it must either
dirperfe, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon Iome better method of procuring food, than
by hunting. Beasts of prey are by nature solitary
and unsocial, they go not forth to thelchafe in herds,
but delight in those recesses of the forest where they
can roam and destroy undiflurbed. A nation of hun-
ters resembles them, both in occupation and in
genius. They cannot form into large communi-
ties, because it would be impoflible to find lub-
filtence, and they must drive to a difiance every ri-
val who may encroach on tliofe domains, which
they confider as ther own. 1 his was the f-ate
of all the American tribes, the numbers in each were
{inall, though scattered over vast countries; they
were far removed from one another, and etnagced

I111

in perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip *. In America,B O 0 K
the word nation is not of the fame import as in IV.
other parts of the globe. It is applied to small so-
cieties, not exceeding, perhaps, two or three hun-
dred persons, but occupying provinces larger than
some kingdoms in Europe. The country of Gui-
ana, though of larger extent than the kingdom of
France, and divided among a great number of na-
tions, did not contain above twenty-five thousand
inhabitants +. In the provinc s which border on
the Orinoco, one may travel several hundred miles
in different directions, without finding a single hut,
or observing the footsteps of a human creature .
In North-America, where the climate is more ri-
gorous, and the foil less fertile, the desolation is
still greater. There, vai: journeys of some hun-
dred leagues have been made through uninhabited
plains and forefis §. As long as hunting continues
to be the chief employment of man to which he
trusts for subsistence, he can hardly be said to have
occupied the earth 11.

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting areunacquaint.
strangers to the idea of property. As the animalse with the

idea of pro-

on which the hunter feeds are not bred under hisperty.
infpedfion, nor nourished by his care, he can claim
no right to them, while they run wild in the forest.
Where game is so plentiful that it may be catched
with little trouble, men never dream of appropri-
ating what is of small value, or of easy acquisition.
Where it is to rare, that the labour or danger of
the chafe requires the united efforts of a t ibe, or

* Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59, 62. Fernandez,
Relac. Hilt. de los Chiquit. 162. t Voyages de
Marchais, iv. 353. : Gumilla, ii. oi.

§ M. Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 179.
Boflu, Travels through Louisiana, i. I i . See NOTE LVIII.

1I See NOTE LIX.
VOL. 1. Z village,

B O O K village, what is killed is a common olock, belong.-

Iv. ing equally to all, who by their skill or their cou-
Vr'arage, have contributed to the success of the excur-

sion. The forest, or hunting grounds, are deemed
the property of the tribe, from which it has a title
to exclude every rival nation. But no individual
arrogates a right to any distriCt of these, in prefer-
ence to his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to
all; and thither, as to a general and undivided
store, all repair in quest of sustenance. The fame
principles, by which they regulate their chief occu-
pation, extend to that which is subordinate. Even
agriculture has not introduced among them a com-
plete idea of property. As the men hunt, the wo-
men labour together, and after they have hfared
the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy the harvefl in
common *. Among some tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public gra-
nary, and divided among them, at stated times ac-
cording to their wants t. Among others, though
they lay up separate stores, they do not acquire
such an exclusive right of property, that they can
enjoy superfluity, while those around them luffer
want t. Thus the diftinEtions arising from the in-
equality of poffeflions are unknown. The terms
rich or poor enter not into their language, and be-
ing firangers to property, they are unacquainted
with that, which is the great objeE of laws and po-
licy, as well as the chief motive which induced
mankind to establish the various arrangements of
regular government §.

Hifh enle 3. PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sens of
aid jndCpenf equality and independence. Wherever the idea
dcncc. of property is not etlablifhed, there can be n(

* Dr. Ferguson's Elay, 125 t Guimilla, i. 265
Brickell, -lift. of N. Carol. 327. Sec NOTE LX.

t Dcnys, Hill. Natur. ii. 39z, 393. § P. Mla

tyr, Decad. p. 45. Vencg. H-itt, of Califurn. i. 66. Lcj
Navi,. in Brasil, c. 17.

disiAlti"

diftination among men, but what arises from per- B O O K
fonal qualities. These can be conspicuous only on IV.
such occasions as call them forth into exertion. In 'v
times of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wis-
dom and experience of age are consulted, and pre-
scribe the measures which ought to be pursued.
When they take the field against the enemies of
their country, the warrior of moit approved cou-
rage leads the youth to the combat *. If they go
forth in a body to the chafe, the most expert and
adventurous hunter is foremnft, and di;-ecs their
motions. But during seasons of tranquillity and in-
action, when there is no occasion to difplav those
talents, all pre-eminence ceases. Eveiy circum-
stance indicates, that all the members of the conm-
munity are on a level. They are clothed in ihe
fame simple garb. They feed on the fame plain
fare. Their houses and furniture are exactly inmi-
lar. No diftintion can arise from the inequality
of poifefions. Whatever forms dependence on
one part, or constitutes superiority on the other,
is unknown. All are freemen, all feel themselves
to be such, and assert with firmness the rights
which belong to that condition t. This senti-
ment of independence is imprinted so deeply in
their nature, that no change of condition can era-
dicate it and bend their minds to servitude. Ac-
customed to be absolute masters of their own con-
dudt, they disdain to execute the orders of another,
and having never known control, will not fubinit
to correction -. Many of the Americans, when
they found that they were treated as ilaves by
Spaniards, died of grief; many destroyed them-
selves in despair §.

* Acofia, Hist. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hilt. Brasil, lib. ii.

c: 13. De Bry, iii. p. I o. Biet, 361. -t Labat.
vi. i24. Brickell. Hilt. of Carol. 310.

:. See NOTE LXI. § Ovicdo, lib iii. c. 6.

P 97. Vega, Conquill. te la Florida, i. 30. ii. .46. La-
bat. ii. 138. Benzo H-lilf Nov. Orb. lib. iv . zc.

Z 2 4. AMONG

BOOK 4. AMONG people in this state, governmeni can

IV. aflume little authority, and the sense of civil fuib-

Set"e ordination mufl remain very imperfect. While
ordination the idea of property is unknown, or incompletely
imperfect conceived, and the spontaneous productions of ;he

earth, as well as the fruits of ilduftry, are confi-
dered as belonging to the public flock, there can
hardly be any (ich subjet of difference or discus-
sion among the members of the fame community,
as will require the hand of authority to interlpufein
order to adjust it. Where the right of separate and
exclusive poffetlion is not introduced, the great ob-
jec of law and jurifdiEtion does not exist. When
called into the field, either in their own defence, or
to invade the territories of their enemies, when en-
gaged in the toil and dangers of the chafe, the
members of a tribe perceive that they are part of a
political body. They are conscious of their own
connection with the companions in conjunction
with whom they aft; and they follow and reve-
rence such as excel in conduct and valour But
during the intervals between such common efforts,
they are scarcely conscious of the ties of political
union *. No visible form of government is eta-
blifhed. The names of mnagirate and subjed are
not in tife. Every one seems to enjoy his natural
indpendence almost entire. If a scheme of public
utility be proposed, the members of the communi-
ty are left at liberty to chute whether they will allift
or not in carrying it into execution. No ftatite
imposes any service as a duty, no compulsory laws
oblige them to perform it. All their resolutions
are voluntary, and flow from the impulse of their
own minds t. The firfl ftep towards eftablifhigi

* Lozano, Defcr. del Grand Chaco, 93. Melendcz Te-
foros Verdaderos, ii. z3. See NOTE LXLI.

t Charlcv. Hiit. France, iii. 266. 268.

a public

a publicjurifdidion has not been taken in those rude B O K
societies. The right of revenge is left in piivate Iv.
hands *: If violence is committed, or blood is shed, C
the community does not assume the power either of
infliiting or of moderating the punishment. It be-
longs to the family and friends of the person in-
jured or slain to revenge the wrong, or to accept
of the reparation offered by the aggreflbr. If the
elders interpose, it is to advise, not to decide, and
it is seldom their councils are lflened to; for
as it is deemed pusillanimous to susser an offender
to escape with impunity, resentment is implacable
and everlasting t. The objec of government
among savages is rather foreign than domestic.
They do not aim at maintaining interior order and
police by public regulations, or the exertions of any
permanent authority, but labour to preserve such
union among the members of their tribe, that they
may watch the motions of their enemies, and aft
against them with concert and vigour.

SUCH was the form of political order established To what

among the greater part of the American nations. descrptihof
In this state were most of the tribes, spread overapply.
the vast provinces extending eastward of the Mifli-
flippi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence to the
confines of Florida. In a similar condition were
the people of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, and
several tribes in Paraguay and Guiana, and in the
countries which stretch from the mouth of the Ori-
noco to the peninsula of Yucatan. Among such
an infinite number of petty associations, there may
be peculiarities which constitute a diflinction, and
mark the various degrees of their civilization and

Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8. j- Charlcv.

ill N. France, iii. 271, 272. Lafit. i. 486. Caflani Hist
Olc Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 226.

improve-

B O O K improvement. But an attempt to trace and enu-

IV. merate these would be vain, as they have not been
- "-observed by persons, capable of discerning the mi-

nute and delicate circumstances, which serve to dif-
criminate nations resembling one another in their
general character and features. The description
which I have given will apply, with little variation,
to the policy of every people in America, which to
fishing and hunting had added some degree of agri-
culture.

RUDE and imperfect as those institutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trusted for fibfiftence entirely to fish-
ing and hunting without any species of cultivation,
the union was so incomplete, and their sense of mu-
tual dependence so feeble, that hardly any appear-
ance of government or order can be discerned in
their proceedings. Their wants are few, their ob-
jects of purfbit simple, they form into separate
tribes, and a&t together, from intinct, habit, or
conveniency, rather than from any formal concert
and association. To this class belong the Califor-
niars, several of the small nations in the extenlive
country of Paraguay, some of the people on the
banks of the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magda-
lene, in the new kingdom of Granada -.

Sonie irre- BUT though among there Lift-mentioned tribes
"`ra='.- there was hardly any shadow of pr i:unar sovernme; t,

and even among those which I firfl: dclribcl, its
authority is slender and confined wvithin narro\v
bounds, there were some places in America wlll ic

* Vcnegas, i. 68. Lcttr. Edif. ii. 176. 'l'cclio. llil f

Pirag Chutrchil, vi. 78. lift. Gen. dcs \Vy:g'
liv. 7'.

it was carried far beyond the degree which seems Bo o K
natural to rude nations. In surveying the political IV.
operations of man, either in his savage or civilized ''
slate, we discover singular and excentric inftitu-
tions, which flart as it were from their flation, and
fly off o wide that we labour in vain to bring them
within the general laws of any fyfrem, or to ac-
count for them by those principles which influence
other communities in a similar situation. Some in-
larnces of this occur among those people of Ame-
rica, whom I have included under the common de-
nomination of savage. These are so curious and
important that I shall describe them, and attempt
to explain their origin.

IN the New World, as well as in other parts of Particularly

the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to be"h to.me of
the favourite feat of fieedom and independence. regions.
There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigo-
rous. Conscious of their own dignity, and capa-
ble of the greatest efforts in asserting it, men as-
pire to indpendence, and their stubborn spirits
stoop with reluctance to the yoke of servitude. In
warmer climates, by whose influence the whole
frame is so much enervated, that present plealilre
is the ftpreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoy-
ment, men acquiesce, almost without a struggle,
in the dominion of a superior. Accordingly, if we
proceed from north to south along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of those veiled
with authority gradually increasing, and the spirit
of the people becoming more tame and pallive.
In Florida, the authority of the sachems, caziques,
or chiefs, was not only permanent, but hereditary.
They were diftinguifled by peculiar ornaments,
they enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds, and
were treated by their fubjeds with that reve-
rence, which people accustomed to fubjecdion,

pay

B O O K to a malter *. Amrong the nation of the Natchez,

IV. situated on the banks of the Milliffippi, a difference
,-o," of rank took place, with which the northern tribes
Amon.Z the
Hatchez. were altogether unacquainted. Some families were

reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary dignity.
The body of the people was confidered as vile,
and formed only for ftibjeetion. This distinction
was marked by appellations which intimated the
high elevation of the one slate, and the ignomini-
ous deprellion of the other. The former were called
Refpetable; the latter, the Stinkards. ' he great
Chief, in whom the supreme authority was vcfted,
is reputed to be a being of superior nature, the
brother of the Sun, the sole object of their worship.
They approach him with religious veneration, and
honour him as the representative of their deity.
His will is a law, to which all fibbmit with implicit
obedience. The lives of his fubjeds are so abfo-
lutely at his disposal, that if any one has incurred
his displeasure, he comes with profound humility
and offers him his head. Nor does their dominion
end with their lives; their principal officers, their
favourite wives, together with many domestics of
inferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that
they may be attended in the next world by the
fame persons who served them in this; and ilclh is
the reverence in which they are held, that thole
victims welcome death with exultation, deeming it
a recompence of their fidelity and a mark of dif-
tincEion, to be feleted to accompany their de-
ceased master t. Thus a perfect dcfpotifm, with
its full train of fuperfiition, arrogance and cruelty,
is eflablifhed among the Natchcz, and by a singular

* Cardenas y Cano Enfuyo Chrinol. a la Hid. de Florida,

p. 46. Le Moyne de Morgues Jeones Floridae. Ap. de Bry.
p. 1. 4, &c. Charlev. Hilt. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

1 Dumont Memoir Hist. fur Louifiane, i. 175. Charlev.
ilt. N. France, iii. 4t9. &c. Lettr. Edif. zo. io6. It 1.

fatality,

fatality, that people has tafted of the worst cala-B 0 o K
mities incident to polished nations, though they IV.
themselves are not far advanced beyond the tribes '
around them in civility and improvement. In
Hispaniola, Cuba, and the larger islands, theirnr he
caziques or chiefs possessed extensive power. The ans'
dignity was transmitted by hereditary right from
father to son. Its honours and prerogatives were
considerable. Their subjects paid great refpedt to
the ciziques, and executed their orders without
hesitation or reserve *. They were diflinguifhed
by peculiar ornaments, and in order to preserve or
augment the veneration of the people, they had
the address to call in the aid of fiperflition to up-
hold their authority. They delivered their man-
dates as the oracles of heaven, and pretended to
possess the power of regulating the seasons, and of
dispensing rain or funihine, according as their sub-
jeets flood in need of them.

IN some parts of the continent, the power of the in Bogota.

caziques seems to have been as extensive as in the
isles. In Bogota, which is now a province of the
New kingdom of Granada, there was fettled a
nation, more considerable in number, and more
improved in the various arts of life, than any peo-
ple in America except the Mexicans and Peruvi-
ans. They subsisted chiefly by agriculture. The
idea of property was introduced among them, and
its rights secured by laws, handed down by tradi-
tion, and observed with great care t. They lived
in large towns. They were clothed in a decent
manner, and their houses may be termed com-
modious, when compared with those of the peo-

* Herrara, dec. i. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. c. 44. p. 88. Life

of Columb. ch. 32. t Piedrahita Hil. de las conquill.
lde N. reyno de Gran. p. 46.

pie

B 0 0 Kple around them. The effects of this uncommon

IV. civilization were conspicuous. Government had

'- affumeda regular form. A jurifdiEtion was efta-

blifhed, which took cognizance of different crimes,
and punished them with rigour. A diffinction
of ranks was known; their chief, to whom the
Spaniards gave the title of monarch, and who
merited that name on account of his splendor
as well as power, reigned with absolute authority.
He was attended by officers of various conditions;
he never appeared in public without a numerous
retinue; he was carried in a fort of palanquin with
much pomp, and harbingers went before him to
sweep the road and strew it with flowers. This
uncommon pomp was supported by presents or
taxes received from his filbjeats, to whom their
prince was such an object of veneration, that none
of them presumed to look him directly in the face,
or ever approach him but with an averted counte-
nance *. There were other tribes on the fame con-
tinent, among which, though far less advanced
than the people of Bogota in their progress towards
refinement, the freedom and independence, natural
to man in his savage state, was much abridged,
and their caziques had assumed extensive authority.

Causes of IT is not easy to point out the circumstances, or
hose irregu- to di(cover the cauies which contributed to intro-
lar appear.
anc.s. duce and eftablilh among each of those people a

form of government so different from that of the
tribes around them, and so repugnant to the genius
of rude nations. If the persons who had an op-
portunity of observing them, in their original
slate, had been more attentive and more dilcern-

* -Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. z. lib. v. c. 56. Picdrahita,
c 5. p. 25, &c. Gomara Hilt. c. 72.

ing,

ing, we might have received information from BOO K
them sufficient to guide us in this inquiry. If the IV.
transaCtions of people, unacquainted with the use """v
of letters, were not involved in impenetrable ob-
fcurity, we might have derived some information
from that source. But as nothing fatisfatory can
be gathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-
niards, or from their own traditions, we must have
recourse to conjectures, in order to explain the
irregular appearances in the political state of the
people whom 1 have mentioned. As all those
tribes which had loft their native liberty and inde-
pendence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in
countries approaching to it, the climate may be
fippofed to have had some influence in forming
their minds to that servitude, which seems to be the
deftlny of man in those regions of the globe. But
though the influence of climate, more powerful
than that of any other natural cause, is not to be
overlooked; that alone cannot be admitted as a
solution of the point in queflion. The operations
of men are so complex, that we must not attribute
the form which they assume, to the force of a tin-
gle principle or cause. Although despotism be
confined in America to the Torrid Zone, and to
the warm regions bordering upon it, I have alrea-
dy observed that these countries contain various
tribes, some of which possess an high degree of
freedom, and others are altogether unacquainted
with the reflraints of government. The indolence
and timidity peculiar to the inhabitants of the
islands, rendered them To incapable of the senti-
ments or efforts neceflary for maintaining indepen-
dence, that thtre is no occasion to fcarch for any
other cause of their tame fubmillion to the will of a
superior. he ftbjcdtion of the Natchez, and of
the people of Bogota, seems to have been the con-

fecuencc

B O O K sequence of a difference in their slate from that of

IV. the other Americans. They were fettled nations,

etrefiding constantly in one place. Hunting was not
the chief occupation of the former, and the latter
seem hardly to have trusted to it for any part of
their fibhfiftence. Both had made such progress in
agriculture and arts, that the idea of property was
introduced in obme degree in the one community,
and fully eftablilled in the other. Among p:ople
in this state, avarice and ambition have acquired
objedts, and have begun to exert their power;
views of interef allure the selfish; the desire of
pre-eminence excites the enterprising; dominion
is courted by both; and pailions unknown to man
in his savage state prompt the interested and ambi-
tious to encroach on the rights of their fellow-
citizens. Motives, with which rude nations are
equally unacquainted, induce the people to fubrit
tamely to the usurped authority of their filperiors.
But even among nations in this itate, the spirit of
fubjeas could not have been rendered so obSequi-
ous, or the power of rulers so unbounded, with-
out the intervention of fuperttition. By its fatal
influence, the human mind, in every stage of its
progress, is depressed, and its native vigour and
independence subdued. Whoever can acquire the
direction of this formidable engine, is secure of do-
minion over his species. Unfortunately for the
people whose inltitutions are the subject of inquiry,
this power was in the hands of thtir chiefs. The
caziques of the isles could put what responses they
pleated into the mouths of their Cemis or gods;
and it was by their interposition, and in their
name, that they imposed any tribute or bur-
(en on their people *. The great chief of
the Natchez was the principal minifler as well
as the representative of the Sun, their deity.

* llurrra, dec. . lib. iii. c. 3.

The

The refpet which the people of Bogota paid to B 0 0 K
their monarchs, was infrpred by religion, and the IV.
heir apparent of the kingdom was educated in the '
innermost recess of their principal temple, under
such austere diicipline, and wirh such peculiar
rights, as tended to fill his rubjeats with high fen-
timents concerning the sanCtity of his character,
and the dignity of his tlation *. Thus fupeiftition,
which, in the rudest period of )ciety, is either al-
together unknown, or watl:es its force in childish
urmeaning practices, had acquired such an ascend-
ant over those people of America, who had made
some little progress towards refinement, that it be-
came the cheif initrument of bending their minds to
an untimely servitude, and subjected ;hem, in the
beginning of their political career, to a despotism
hardly I,-s rigorous, than that which awaits nati-
ons in the laR ltage of their corruption and decline.

V. AFTP R examining the political institutions ofTheir art of

the rude nations in America, the next obj>Et of at- w"'
tention is their art of war, or their provision for
public security and defence. The small tribes dif-
perfed over America are not only independent and
unconnected, but engaged in perpetual hostilities
with one and another t. Though tdrangers to the
idea of separate property veiled in any individual,
the rudest of the American nations are well ac-
quainted with the rights of each community to its
own domains. This right they hold to be perfect
and exclusive, entitling the poffelTor to oppose the
encroachment of neighbouring tribes. As it is of
the utmost consequence to prevent them from de-
stroying or diflurbing the game in their hunting
grounds, they guard this national property with a
jealous attention. But as their territories are ex-

* Piedrahita, p. 27.
1 Ribas Hi.., de los triuinp p. 9.

tensive,

B O O K tensive, and the boundaries of them not exaftly

IV. ascertained, innumerable subjects of dispute arise,
r^cvl3 which seldom terminate without bloodshed. Even

in this simple and primitive state of society, inte-
reft is a source of discord, and often prompts
savage tribes to take arms, in order to repel or
punish such as encroach on the forefis or plains,
to which they trust for subsistence.

Their mo- BUT interest is not either the most frequent or
tives for en-
gagingill the most powerfil motive of the incessant hoftili-
W,.r. ties amor!g rude nations. These muff be imputed

to the pailion of revenge, which rages with such
violence in the breast of savages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be confidered as the distinguishing
charaaeriftic of men in their uncivilized state.
Circumstances of powerful influence, both in the
interior government of rude tribes, and in their
external operations against foreign enemies, con-
cur in cherilhing and adding strength to a pafion
fatal to the general tranquillity. When the right
of addrelling his own wrongs is left in the hands
of every individual, injuries are felt with exquisite
sensibility, and vengeance exercised with unrelent-
ing rancour. No time can obliterate the memory
of an offence, and it is seldom that it can he ex-

Prom the plated but by the blood of the offender. In car-
lpirit of tying on their public wais, savage nations are in-
vcteancc. fluenced by the fatme ideas, and animated wtlh

the -fanme spirit, as in prosicuting private venge-
ance. In small communities, every man is touch-
ed with the injury or affront offered to the body
of which he is a member, as if it were a perlonal
attack upon his own honour or hlacty. The desire
of revenge is communicated froin breaf to brealt,
and soon kindles into rage. As feeble societies c;an
t:ke the field only in finall palties, each warrior
is conscious of the importance of his own arm, and
feels that to it is committed a considerable portion

of

of the pu!blic vengeance. War, which between ex- B O O K
er five kingdoms is carried on with little animofi- iV.
ty, is prosecuted by frnall tribes with all the rancour _
of a private quarrel. The resentment of nations
is as implacable as that of individuals. It may be Hence the
diflembled or filppreffed, but is never extinguish- o:r'
ed; and often, when least expeted or dreaded, it
bursts out with redoubled fury *. XVhen polished
nations have obtained the glory of victory, or have
acquired an addition of territory, they may termi-
nat. a wvar with honour. But savages are not fa-
tisfied until they extirpate the community, which
is the ohjedt of their rage. They fight not to con-
quer, but to destroy. If they engage in hostilities,
it is with the resolution never to fee the face of the
enemy in peace, but to prosecute the quarrel with
immortal enmity t. The desire of vengeance is
the first, and almost the only principle, which a
savage instils into the minds of his children $.
This grows up with him as he advances in life;
and as his attention is directed to few objets, it
acquires a degree of force unknown among men
whose paflions are diflipated and weakened by the
variety of their occupations and pursuits. The
desire of vengeance, which takes pofteflion of the
heart of savages, resembles the infl-indive rage of
an animal, rather than the passion of a man. It
turns, with undifcerning fury, even against inani-
mate objects. If hurt accidentally by a stone, they
often seize it in a transport of anger, and endea-
vour to wreak their vengeance upon it § If struck

* Boucher I-ill. Nat. de N. France, p 93. Charlev. Hist.

de N. France, iii. 215, 25 . Lery ap De Bry, iii. 204. Crcux.
Hill. Canad. p. 72. Lozano Dcfcr. dcl Gran Chaco, y;.
Henncp. Mocurs des Sauv. 40. - Cllarlev. Hill. N. Fr.
iii. 251. (olden, i. o08. ii. 126. Barrerc, p. 170, 173.

.t Charltv. N. Flr. iii. 326. Lcry ip De Bry, iii. 236.

Lozano I-ilt. de Parag i. 144. § Lcry ap Dc Biy,
iii. 190.

with

00 K with a.i arrow in battle, they will tear it from the
IV. wound, break and bite it with their teeth, and dash
'"'V"'it on the ground *. With refpet to their enemies,

the rage of vengeance knows no bounds. When
under the dominion of this paflion, man becomes
the most cruel of all animals. He neither pities,
nor forgives, nor spares.

THE force of this paflion is so well underRfood

by the Americans themselves, that they always ap-
ply to it, in order to excite their people to take
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze
their youth from sloth, if a chief wishes to allure a
band of warriors to follow him in invading an ene-
my's country, the molt persuasive topics of their
martial eloquence are drawn from revenge. " The
bones of our countrymen," fay they, " lie unco-
vered; their bloody bed has not been washed clean.
Their fpiiits cry againit us ; they muff be appeaf-
ed. Let us go and devour the people by whom
they were slain. Sit no longer inactive upon your
mats; lift the hatchet, console the spirits of the
dead, and tell them that they {hall be avenged t."

and their ANIM ATED with such exhortations, the youth
crePtuity. snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise the

song of war, and burn with impatience to erbrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Pri-
vate chiefs often assemble small parties, and invade
a hostile tribe, without consulting the rulers of
the community. A single warrior, prompted by
caprice or revenge, will take the field alone, and
march several hundred miles, to surprise and cut
offa diraggling enemy 1. The exploits of a noted

Lery ap De Biy, iii. zo8. Herrcra, dec, . lib. vi. c. 8.

t Charlev. ilift. N. Fr. iii. z16, 217. Lery ap De Bry,
iii. zo04. See NOTE LXIII.

warrior,

warrior, in such solitary excursions, often form theB 0 0 K
chief part of the history of an American campaign *; IV
and their elders connive at such irregular sallies, as
they tend to cherish a martial spirit, and accultom
their people to enterprise and danger t. But when
a war is national, and undertaken by public au-
thority, the deliberations are formal and flow.
The elders assemble, they deliver their opinions in
solemn speeches, they weigh with maturity the na-
ture of the enterprise, and balance its beneficial or
disadvantageous consequences with no inconfidera-
ble portion of political discernment and sagacity.
Their priests and soothsayers are consulted, and
Sometimes they ask the advice even of their wo-
men t. If the determination be for war, they pre-
pare for it with much ceremony. A leader offers
to conduct the expedition, and is ac cpted. But
no man is constrained to follow him; the refolu-
tion of the community to com;mence hostilities im-
poses no obligation upon any member to take part
in the war. Each individual is still master of his
own conduet, and his engagement in the service is
perfectly voluntary §.

THE maxims by which they regulate their milli- MeorcAr-
tary operations, though extremely different from''",','
those which take place amrong more civilized and
populous nations, are well suited to their own poli-
tical state, and the nature of the country in which
they act. They never take the field in numerous
bodies, as it would requirc a greater effort of fore-
flght and indufiry, than is usual among lvalges, to
provide for their fuibfiftence, during a nmarch of
Imne hundred miles throuth yldreary forfdls, or

* See NOTE LXIV. -- lil-fu, i. 1.1o. Lcry

ap DlC I', 2155. fHenilepin MM.urs tdcs Sauv. 41. Lalitalu,
ii. 169. :1: Clarllev. -lilt. N. Fr. iii. 21q.
268. Iliet, 367, 380. § Charlcv. llill. N.
l'1. 217, zi8.

VOL 1. A a duiing

B O O K during a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.

IV. Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or
'r"'military stores. Each warrior, besides his arms,

carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize,
and with these is completely equipped for any ser-
vice. While at a distance from the enemies fron-
tier, they disperse through the woods and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the
fish which they catch. As they approach'nearer to
the territories of the nation, which they intend to
attack, they collec& their troops, and advance with
greater caution. Even then they proceed wholly by
itratagem and ambuscade. They place not their
glory in attacking their enemies with open force.
To surprise and destroy is the greatest merit of a
commander, and the highest pride of his followers.
War and hunting are their only occupations, and
they conduct both with the fame spirit and the fame
arts. They follow the track of their enemies
through the forest. They endeavour to discover
their haunts, they lurk in some thicket near to
these, and with the patience of a sportsman lying
in wait for game, will continue in their station day
after day, until they can rush upon their prey when
mnoi secure, and least able to resist them. If they
meet no straggling party of the enemy, they ad-
vance towards their villages, but with fich folici-
tude to conceal their approach, that they often
creep on their hands and feet through the woods,
and paint their Ikins of the fame colour with the
withered leaves, in order to avoid detection *. '
so fortunate as to remain unobserved, they set on
fire their huts in the dead of night, and massacre
the inhabitants, as they fly naked and defencclels
from the flames. If they hope to effed a retreat
without being pursued, they carry off ibme priloners,

* Challev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Hennep. Mhiurl
de Sauv. p. 59.

whom

whom they reserve for a more dreadful fate. But if, B O O K
notwithstanding all their address and precautions IV.
they find that their motions are discovered, that -v'
the enemy has taken the alarm, and is prepared to
oppose them, they usually deem it most prudent
to retire. They regard it as extreme folly to meet
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equal terms,
or to give battle in an open field. The most dif-
tinguifhed success is a disgrace to a leader, if pur-
chased with any considerable loss of his followers * »
and they never boast of a victory if stained with the
blood of their own countrymen t. To fall in bat-
tie, instead of being reckoned an honourable death,
is a misfortune which fubjedts the memory of a
warrior to the imputation of ralhnefs or impru-
dence $.

THIS fyrfem of war was universal in America,Nnt owing

and the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed throught!l '"''1
all its different regions and climates, dilplay more
craft than boldness in carrying on their hostilities.
Struck with this conduEt, so opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and daflardly Ipirit pe-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion §. But when we re-
flet that many of there tribes, on occasions which
call for extraordinary efforts, not only defend Ihem-
selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their en-
emies with the most daring courage, and that they
possess fortitude of mind superior to the sense of
danger or the fear of death, we i.,uf ascribe their
habitual caution to some other cause than conflitu-
tional timidity ii. The number of men in each tribe

* See NOTE LXV. M- Charlev, Hil. N. Fr.

iii 238. 307. Bict. 381. Lafitau Mcurs des Sauv. ii. 248.

t Charlev. iii. 376. See NOTE LXVI. j Re-

cherchcs Philof. fur les Americ. i, 1 i a. Voyage tie March.
iv. 410. 1 Lafitau Mcurs de Sauv, ii. 248, 249. Charlev.
N, Fr. iii. 307.

A a is

B O o K is so small, the difficulty of rearing new members,

IV. amidst the hardships and dangers of savage life, so
'~~^great, that the life of a citizen is extremely pre-

cious, and the preservation of it becomes a capital
object in their policy. Had the point of honour
been the fame among the feeble American tribes,
as among the powerfil nations of Europe, had they
been taught, in contempt of danger and death, to
court fame or vitory, they must have been ruined
by maxims, so ill adapted to their condition. But
wherever their communties are more populous, fb
that they can a&t with considerable force, and can
fiftain the loss of Pevcial of their members, without
being sensibly weakened, the military operations
of the Americans more nearly resemble those of
other nations. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes
fituat-d on the banks of the river de la Plata, often
take the field in Luch numerous bodies, as delerve
the name of armnies *. They defy their enemi-s
to the combat, engage in regular battles, and main-
tain the conflict with that delperate ferocity, which
is natural to men, who have no idea of war but
that of exterminating their enemies, and who never
give or take quarter t. In thle powerful empirl s
ol- Mexico and IPeru, great armies were assembled,
frequent battles were fought, and the theory as
well as practice of war were different frim w)l:t
to(.k place in t lce e etty societies which afiimc the
name of nations.

ll,,,, .l ,ii BuT though vigilince and attention arc the qua-

(',i,,r ,. .-d lties chiei fl re(quisite, where the object of war is to
1 'Inc. deceive and to (Lrprile; and though the Americans,

when acting finiglly, ditillny an amazing degrec o,
address in concealing their own motions, and (lif
covering thiof( of an enemy, yet it is renarkl;!l

* Pabii \Vcil. D)clcrip. lnii; l ap dc lIry, vii. 1. 42.
- Sec NOTE LXVII.

t'12 t,

that, when they take the field in parties, they can B o o K
seldom be brought to observe the precautions mofi IV.
essential to their own security. Such is the dificul- '-
ty of accustoming savages to subordination, or to
aft in concert; such is their impatience under re-
firaint, and such is their caprice and prefilmption,
that it is rarely they can be brought to conform
themselves to the counsels and directions of their
leaders. They never ilation centilels around the
place where they reft at night, and after marchinpg
some hundred miles to surprise an e-nemy, are often
surprised themselves, and cut off, \vhile iunk in as
profound sleep as if they were not within reach of
danger '.

IF notwithitanding this negligence and security,

which often frustrate their most artful schemes,
they catch the enemy unprepared, they rush upon
them with the utm!ost ferocity, and tearing off the
scalps of all those who fall victims to their rage t,
they carry home those strange trophies in triumph.
These they preserve as monuments, not only of
their own prowess, but of the vengeance which their
arm has inflicted upon the people who were objedts
of public resentment t. They are fLilll more soli-
citous to seize prisoners. During their retre, if
they hope to affect it unmolefled, t!hee are com-
monly exempt from any insult, and treated with
Ibme degree of humanity, though guarded with the
most firict attention.

BUT after this temporary suspension, their rageTrritic.,

rekindles with new fury. As soon as they ap-° oi"'s'0;
prochl their own frontiers, some of their number
are dispatchcd to inform their countrymen with
eli'pedc to the success of tile expedition. Then the
l'riloners begin to feel the wretchedness of their

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237. Lcttr. lLiif. 17. o38.

*:. 3b 0. . l.afi. MI iurs, ii. 247. Lahontan, ii. 176.
t See NOTE L 1XVIII. 1 a lfitau Mcuus, ii. 25S5.

condition.

B 0 OK condition. The women of the village, together

Iv. with the youth who have not attained to the age of
~"''"'bearing arms, assemble, and forming themselves

into two lines, through which the prisoners must
pass, beat and brnife them with flicks and flones
in a cruel manner *. After this first gratification
of their rage against their enemies, follow lamenta-
tions for the lots of such of their own countrymen
as have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and acions which seem to express the utmost
anguifhl of grief. But in a moment, upon a signal
given, their tears cease, they pass, with a sudden
and unaccountable transition, from the depths of
sorrow to transports of joy, and begin to celebrate
their viEtory with all the wild exultation of a barba-
rous triumph t. The fate of the prisoners remains
still undecided. The old men deliberate concern-
ing it. Some are de ftined to be tortured to death,
in order to satiate the revenge of the conquerors;
some to replace the members which the communi-
ty has loft in that or former wars. They who are
relerved for this milder fate, are led to the huts of
those whose friends have been killed. The women
meet them at the door, and if they receive tliem,
their sufferings are at an end. They are adopted
into the family, and, according to their phrase,
are feated upon the mat of the deceased. They as-
fume his name, they hold the fame rank, are treat-
ed henceforward with all the tenderness due to a
father, a brother, a husband, or a friend. But if,
either from caprice, or an unrelenting dedire of re-
vcnge, the women of any family refuse to accept of
the prisoner who is offered to them, his doom is
fixed. No power can then save him from torture
and death.

rheir in;cf- WHILE their lot is in suspense, the prisoners
ference cthcnthemfelves appear altogether unconcerned about
fate. * Lahontan, ii. 184. Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. ii. g41'

,afitau Mcl.urs, ii. 261..

Wt1,

what may befal them. They talk, they eat, B 0 0K
they sleep, as if they were perfectly at ease, Iv.
and no danger impending. When the fatal'-'-
sentence 'is intimated to them, they receive it
with an unaltered countenance, raise their death-and forti-
forg, and prepare to fiffer like men. Their con-"dtou^nde
.uerors assemble as to a solemn festival, reolved to
put their courage to the utmofl proof. A scene en-
sues, the bare description of which is enough to chill
the heart with horror, wherever men have been ac-
customed, by milder inititutions, to respect their
species, and to melt into tenderness at the fight of
human sufferings. The prisoners are tied naked to
a stake, but so as to be at liberty to move around
it. All who are present, men, women, and chil-
dren, ruth upon them like furies. Every species
of torture is applied that the rancour of revenge
can invent. Some burn their limbs with red-hot
irons, some mangle their bodies with knives, others
tear their flesh from their bones, pluck out their
nails by the roots, and rend and twist their sinews.
They vie with one another in refinements of tor-
ture. Nothing sets bounds to their rage, but the
dread of abridging the duration of their vengeance
by hastening the death of the sufferers: and fich is
their cruel ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoid-
ing industriously to hurt any vital part, they often
prolong this scene of anguish for several days. In
spite of all that they fufffer, the victims continue to
chant their death-fong with a firm voice, they boafr
of their own exploits, they infilt their tormentors
for their want of (kill in avenging their friends and
relations, they warn them of the vengeance whichl
awaits them, on account of their death, and excite
their ferocity by the most provoking reproaches
and threats. To display undaunted fortitude in
such dreadful situations is the noblest triumph of a
warrior. To avoid the trial by a voluntary death,
or to (hrink under it, is deemed infamous and

cowardly.

BO O K cowa'dly. If any one betray symptoms of timi-

IV. dity, they often dispatch him at once with con-
'v--te mpt, as unworthy of being treated like a man *.

Animated with those ideas, they endure without a
groan, wh;t it seems almost impoflible that human
nature should sustain. They appear to be not on-
ly insensible of pain, but to court it. " Forbear,
said an aged chief of the Iroquois, when his intillts
had provoked one of his tormentors to wound hin
with a knife, forbear these fiabs of your knife, and
rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your allies,
from beyond the sea, may learn by my example to lfif-
ser like men i-." This magnanimity, of which there
are frequent instances among the American warriors,
instead of exciting admiration, or calling forth l)ym-
pathy, exaiperates the fierce spirits of their tortu-
rers to frelh a&s of cruelty t. Weary at length of
contending with men, whose constancy of mind
they cannot vanquish, some chief in a rage, puts a
period to their fuifferings, by dispatching them with
his dagger or club §.

Sn.netimPs THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded lb oe
p,'ion.'r.r no Ie(s fiocking. As it is impoftiblt to appeals the

fell spirit of revenge \l1hich racs in the lhart ofa
savage, this frequently prompts the Americans to
devour tho(e unhappy pcrfo(:s, Xwvo hlv lc bc-
the viAims of their cruelty. In the ancient w(cild,
tradition has preserved the memory of barba-
rous nations of canibals, \\h!]o fed on inluman flk-f.
But in every part of the New World, llh're
were people to whom this cufRolm' was f ni-

* De la Pothcrie, ii. 237 iii. 48. - (' tltiJ!
Hill. of l'ive Nations, i. zoo. t Voyages dc Jahlirti. i ;6.

§ Charlv. 1-ill N. Fr. iii. 243, . !c. S-; . I '';u,

Ma:urs ii. z65. Creuxij, I-lift. Cal ,i. p. ' ;- li' : p
Mcnursds ds Sptv. p. 64, &c. Lahloni i. zj3,&c. 'cL-
tie, ii. 405. De la Puthcrie, ii. 22, &c.

Ir'.

liar. It prevailed in the southern continent*,B OO K
in several of the islands t, and in various districts Iv.
of North-America t. Even in those parts, where''-"
circumstances, with which we are unacquainted,
had in a great meafiure abolished this practice, it
seems to have been so well known, that it is incor-
porated into the idiom of their languige. Among
the Iroquois, the phrase by, which they express
their resolution of making war against an enemy
is, " Let us go and eat that nation." If they soli-
cit the aid of a neighbouri; g tribe, they invite it
to " eat broth made of the flelh of their ene-
mies §." Nor, was the practice peculiar to rude
unpolifhed tribes, the principle from wvilch it took
rifC, is so deeply rooted in the minds of th-!^Ame-
ricans, that it subsisted in Mexico, one of the ci-
vilized empires in the New \World, and relics of
it may be discovered aniong the more mild ilhabi-
ta!ns of Peru. It was not icarcityof food, as fonme
authors imagine, and the importunate cravings of
hunger, that forced the Americans to those horrid
repaits on their fellow-creatures. Human fleth was
never uCed as common food in any country, and
the various relations concerning people, v.ho
reckoned it among the statcd means of -ilbfiftelce,
flow from tlle cr,-dulity andl mifnlkles of travellers.
The rancour of revenge first prompted m-n to
this 'barbarous action [. The fiercest tribes de-
voured none but plilfners taken in war, or such as
they regarded as enemies ¶. Women and children

* Stadius ap de Bry, iii. 123. Lery, ibid. 210. Biet, 384.

Lettr. Edif. 21. 341. Pilo, 8. Condamn. 8 p. 97. Ribas,
I-il. de los T'riuiiipl. 473. f Life o' Coluiib. 529.
Ma.rt. D . Di iec 05.

p. i. Dumont, Miciii.

i'. '5. Charlcv. Hilt. N PS. J 259 ii. 4. .
ii . . De la

ttsri'e li iii. o . LhaIrlcv Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209.

.L r. Edit. 23. p. 277. D la 'otlhelie, ii. 298. See NO'I',
I ,X. ] 1 3ict, 3Y,. I3lnico, i onvcrfion de Piritu,
p. :!:. I;:lncloft, Nali. Iill. of (uiinla, pI. 2z9, &c.

i[ Sec NOT' LXX.

v lio

B O O Kwho were not the objects of enmity, if not cut off

IV. in the fury of their first inroad into an hostile
'-v'r country, seldom iuffered by the deliberate effects

of their revenge *.

THE people of South America gratify their re-

venge in a manner somewhat different, but with
no less unrelenting rancour. Their prisoners, after
meeting at their first entrance with the fame rough
reception as among the North-Americans t, are
not only exempt from injury, but treated with the
greatest kindness. They are feasted and carefied,
and rome beautiful young women are appointed to
attend and solace them. It is not easy to account
for this part of their conduct, unless we impute it
to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem
fludious to attach their prisoners to life, by supply-
ing them with every enjoyment that can render it
agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed. On a
day appointed, the viEtorious tribe assembles, the
captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he
views the preparations for the sacrifice with as
much indifference, as if he himself were not the
viaim, and meeting his fate with undaunted firm-
ness, is dispatched with a single blow. The mo-
ment he falls, the women seize the body, and
dress it for the feast. They besmear their children
with the blood, in order to kindle in their bosoms
a hatred of their enemies, which is never extin-
guifled, and all join in feeding upon the fleflh
with amazing greediness and exultation $. To
devour the body of a slaughtered enemy, they
deem the moit complete and exquisite gratifica-
tion of revenge. Wherever this prac ice prevails,

* Biet, 382. Bandini, Vitadi Americo, 84. Tertrc, 405.

Fcrmin, Defcrip. de Surin. i. 54. + Stadius ap de
Bry, iii. p. 40. 123. $ Stadius ap de Bry, iii. 1 g,
&c. Lery, ibid. z2o.

captives

captives never escape death, but they are not tor-B o o K
tured with the fame cruelty as among the tribes IV.
which are less accustomed to such horrid '-
feasts 0.

As the constancy of every American warrior

may be put to such revere proof, the great object
of education and discipline in the New World is
to form the mind to sustain it. When nations
carry on war with open force, defy their enemies
to the combat, and vanquilh them by the fuperi-
ority of their flill or courage, soldiers are trained
to be adtive, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
America, where the genius and maxims of war
are extremely different, paflive fortitude is the qua-
lity in highest eflimation. Accordingly, it is early
the study of the Americans to acquire a talent,
which will enable them to behave like men, when
their resolution shall be put to the proof. As the
youth of other nations exercise themselves in feats
of aftivity and force, those of America vie with
one another in exhibitions of their patience under
sufferings. They harden their nerves by those
voluntary trials, and gradually accustom themselves
to endure the sharpest pain, without complaining.
A boy and girl will bind their naked arms toge-
ther, and place a burning coal between them, in
order to try who firfl discovers such impatience as
to shake it offt, All the trials, customary in
America, whlen a youth is admitted into the class
of warriors, or when a warrior is promoted to the
dignity of captain or chief, are accommodated
to this idea of manliness. They are not displays
of valour, but of patience; they are not exhibiti-
ons of their ability to offend, but of their capacity
to susser. Among the tribes on the banks of the
Orinoco, if a warrior alpires to the rank of cap-

$ See NOTE LXXI. l' Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 307.

tain,

B o o Ktain, his probation begins with a long fast, more

IV. rigid than any ever observed by the moss abftemi-
*--9 ous hermit. ' At the close of this, the chiefs affenm-

ble, each gives him three lashes with a large whip,
applied so vigorously, that his body is almost
flayed, and if he betrays the lealf symptom of im-
patience or even sensibility, he is disgraced for
ever, and rejected as unworthy of the honour.
After some interval, the constancy of the candi-
date is proved by a more excruciating trial. -le
is laid in a hammoc with his hands bound fast, an
innumerable multitude of venomous ants, whose
bite occasions exquisite pain, and produces a vio-
lent inflammation, are thrown upon him. The
judges of his merit fland around the hammoc, and,
while tlefe cruel infects faflen upon the moss fen-
fible parts of his body, a sigh, a groan, an invo-
luntary motion expressive of what he suffers, would
exclude him from the dignity which he is ambiti-
ous to obtain. Even after this evidence of his for-
titude, it is not deemed to be completely afcer-
tained, but muff stand another test more dreadful
than any he has hitherto undergone. He is again
fuifpended in his hammoc, and covered with leaves
of the palmetto. A fire of stinking herbs is kin-
dled underneath, Co as he may feel its heat, and
be involved in fimoke. Though scorched and al-
motr suffocated, he must continue to endure with
the fame patient insensibility. Many perish in this
rude essay of their firmness and courage, but fibch
as go through it with applause, receive the ensigns
of their new dignity with much solemnity, and
are cver after regarded as leaders of approved relb-
lution, whose behaviour, in the moiu trying fituati-
ins, will do honour to their country *. In North-

Gunilla, ii. 286, &c. I3ict, 376, &c.

America,

America, the previous trial of a warrior is neither B o K
so formal, nor so revere. Though even there, be- IV.
fore a youth is permitted to bear arms, his patience
and fortitude are proved by blows, by fire, and by
insults, more intolerable to a haughty spirit than
both ':

THE amzing fteadiners with which the Ameri-

cans endure the moll exquisite torments, has en-
duced tome authors to suppose that, from the pecu-
liar feeblencefs of their frame, their sensibility is not
so acute as that of other people; as women,
and persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be
less affeteed with pain than robust men, whose
nerves are more firmly braced. But the confiitu-
tion of the Americans is not so different, in its tex-
ture, from that of the reft of the human `pecies,
as to account for this diversity in their behaviour.
It flows from a principle of honour, infiilled early
and cultivated with such care, as to inspire man
in his rudest slate with an heroic magnanimity, to
which philosophy hath endeavoured, in vain, to
form him, when more highly improved and polish-
ed. This invincible confi-ancy he has been taught
to confider as the chief diftindion of man, and the
highest attainment of a warrior. The ideas which
influence his conduct, and the pailions which take
pofelfion of his heart, are few. They operate of
course with more decilive effec, than when the
mind is crowded with a multiplicity of objects, or
diftracded by the variety of its purftlits; and when
every motive that eperates with force on the mind
of a savage, prompts them to fiflfer xs ith dignity,
they will bear what mighlt seem to bc impollible
for human patience to tflfiain. But wherever the

* Clhar!v. ] lil N. Si. i. 219.

fortitude

B O O K fortitude of the Americans is not routed to exertion

IV. by their ideas of honour, their feelings of pain are
v- the fame with those of the reft of mankind *. Nor

is that patience under sufferings for which the
Americans have been so justly celebrated an univer-
fal attainment. The constancy of many of the
vicims is overcome by the agonies of torture.
Their weakness and lamentations complete the
triumph of their enemies, and reflect disgrace upon
their country. t

Wafted by TIE perpetual hostilities carried on among the
their perpe- American tribes are producive of very fatal effeEts.

As their imperfet industry does not supply them
with any superfluous itore of provisions, even in
seasons of tranquillity, when the irruption of an
enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or disturbs
them in their hunting excursions, such a calamity
reduces a community, naturally unprovident and
destitute of resources, to extreme want. All the
people of the district that is invaded, are frequently
forced to take refuge in woods or mountains,
which can afford them no subsistence, and where
many of them perish. Notwithstanding their ex-
ceflive caution in conducting their military opera-
tions, and the solicitude of every leader to preserve
the lives of his followers, as they seldom enjoy any
intervals of peace, the loss of men among the
Americans is considerable in proportion to the de-
gree of population. Thus famine and the sword
combine in thinning their numbers. All their
tribes are feeble, and many which were once power-
ful have gradually wafted away and at last difap-

* See NOTE LXXII.
t Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 248. 385. De la Pothcrie,
ili. 48.

peared.

peared. Nothing now remains of several nations, B O K
which were once considerable, but the name. * IV.

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there areRecruittheir

tribes which endeavour to recruit their national domb,'p'" r
force when exhausted, by adopting prisoners taken blners.
in war, and by this expedient prevent their total
extinction. The practice, however, is not uni-
verfally received. Resentment operates more
powerfully among savages, than considerations of
policy. Far the greater part of their captives was
antiently sacrificed to their vengeance, and it is only
since their numbers began to decline fast, that
they have adopted milder maxims. But such as
they do naturaiize, renounce for ever their native
tribe, and assume the manners as well as palfions of
the people by whom they are adopted T-, so en-
tirely, that they often join them in their expeditions
against their own countrymen. Such a sudden
transition, and so repugnant to one of the moif
powerful inftindls implanted by nature, would ap-
pear strange among any people; but, among the
members of finall communities, where national
enmity is violent and deep-rooted, it is more unac-
countable. It seems however, to reffilt naturally
from the principles upon which war is carried on in
America. When nations aim at exterminating
their enemies, no exchange of prisoners can ever
take place. From the moment one is made a
prisoner, his country and his friends confider him
as dead §. He has incurred indelible disgrace by
suffering himfelfto be surprised or to be taken by an
enemy; and were he to return home, after finch a

* Charlev. Hidf. N. Fr. iii. 202, 203. 429. Guniilla, ii.
227, &C.

f Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lafit. ii. 308.
§ See NOTIL LXXIII.

Slain

BO K stain upon his honour, his nearest relations would

Iv. not receive, or even acknowledge that they knew
-'"'-'him *. Some tribes were flill more rigid, and if a

prisoner returned, the infamy which he had brought
on his country was expiated, by putting him in-
ftantly to death t. As the unfortunate captive is
thus an out-cast from his own country, and the ties
which bound him to it are irreparably broken, he
feels less relucdance in forminga new connection with
people, who, as an evidence of their friendly senti-
menis, not only deliver him fromn a cruel death,
but offer to admit him to all the lights of a fellow-
citizen. The perseed similarity of manners among
iavage nations facilitates and completes the union,
and induces a captive to transfer not only his alle-
giance, but his affetion, to the community into
the bosom of which he is received.

Thicrin fr BUT thotugh war be the chief occupation of
io poiiied men in their rude slate, and to excel in it, their
aiion?,. highefl diflin(lion and pride, their inferiority is al-

ways mani'(flt whc-n they engage in competition
with polilled nations. Destitute of that foresight
which discerns and provides for remote events,
firangers to the union and mutual confidence re-
quifitc in forming any extensive plan of operations,
and incapable of the hibordiniat'in no less requifile
inl carrlyin into execution fluch plans, savage na-
tions may afionifh a dil'ciplil ,t enemy by their
valour, but feldomn prove feormidable to him by
their condurt, alnd whenever the contefl is of long
Lo(ltiniiuance, mufi: yitld to filperior art§. The
em pires of Peru and Mexico, though their progrcls
in civiliz;Itin, when mcaniured by the Luropean ol

* Lahont. ii. 18g. . 186 . I leircra, dec. 3. lib. ivy . . 6.
p. 17 3. , Sec NOTE I,XXIV.

art
i'ii

Asiatic standards, was inconsiderable, acquired such B O O K
an ascendency over the rude tribes around them, IV.
that they fubjeted most of them with great facili-"'
ty to their power. When the people of Europe
6ver-ran the various provinces of America, this fu-
periority was frill more conspicuous. Neither the
courage nor number of the natives could repel a
handful of invaders. The alienation and enmity,
prevalent among barbarians, prevented them from
uniting in any common scheme of defence, and
while each tribe fought separately, all were sub-
dued.

VI. TiE arts of rude nations unacquaintedTheir arts.

with the use of metals, hardly merit any attention
on their own account, but are worthy of some no-
tice, as far as they serve to display the genius and
manners of a' people. The first distress a savage Dress and
must feel, will arise from the manner in which his ornaments.
body is affected, by the heat, or cold, or moiflure
of the climate under which he lives; and his firfl
care will be, to provide some covering for his own
defence. In the warmer and more mild climates
of America, none of the rude tribes were clothed.
To most of them Nature had not even fuggefred
any idea of impropriety in being altogether unco-
vered *. As under a mild climate there was little
need of any defence from the injuries of the air,
and their extreme indolence shunned every species
of labour to which it was not urged by absolute ne-
ceflity, all the inhabitants of the ifes, and a confi-
derable part of the people on the continent, re-
mained in this state of naked filnplicity. Others
were satisfied with some flight covering, such as
decency required. But though naked, they were
not unadorned. They dressed their hair in many
different forms. They fastened bits of gold, or

* Lery Navigat. ap de Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 24. Vencgas His. of Californ. p. 70.

VOL. I. B b flells,

B 0 0 K shells, or shining tfones, in their ears, their noses,

IV. and cheeks *. They stained their ikins with a
~ great variety of figures ; and they spent much time,

and submitted to great pain, in ornamenting their
persons in this fantastic manner. Vanity, however,
which finds endless occupation for its ingenuity and
invention, in nations where dress has become a com-
plex and intricate art, is circumscribed within so
narrow bounds, and confined to so few articles
among naked savages, that they are not satisfied
with those imple decorations, and have a wonder-
ful propensity to alter the natural form of their bo-
dies. This pratice was universal among the rudefl
of the American tribes. Their operations for that
purpose begin as soon as an infant is born. By
compressing the bones of the skull, while still soft
and flexible, some flatten the crown of their heads;
tome squeeze them into the fhippe of a cone ; others
mould them as much as poflible into a square
figure t-; and they often endanger the lives of
their posterity by their violent and absurd efforts
to derange the plan of Nature, or to improve upon
her designs. But in all their attempts either to a-
dorn or to new-model their persons, it seems to
have been leTs the objedt of the Americans to pleaft,
or to appear beautiful, than to give an air of dig-
nity and terror to their afpeEt. Their attention to
dress had more reference to war than to gallantly.
The difference in rank and eflimation between the
two sexes was so grcat, as extinguishcd, in fLme
measure, their solicitude to appear mutually amia-
ble. The man deemed it beneath him to adorn his
person, for the fake of one on whom lie was ac-

Lery ap. de Bry. iii. 16;. Lcttr. Edifiantes, 20. 223.

t Ovicdo Hill. lib. iii . c. 5 Ulloa, i. 329. Voy.Iaged

Labat. ii. 72. (Ch'lalcvoix, iii. 323. Gumnilla, i. 1(7, &c-
Acugna Rclat. de la Riv. dcs Ainaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Vov.
to Carolill.a, p. 33.

cufi'omed

customed to look down as a slave. It was when B O O K
the warrior had in view to enter the council of his IV.
nation, or take the field againit its enemics, that "'
he affuimed his choicest ornaments, and decked his
person with the nicest care *. The decorations of
the women were few and firple; whatever was
precious or splendid was reserved for the men.
In several tribes the women were obliged to spend
a considerable part of their time every day in adorn-
ing and painting their husbands, and could beflow lit-
tle attention upon ornamenting themlelves. Among
a race of men so haughty as to .lefpife, or so cold
as to neglect them, the women naturally became
careless and slovenly, and the love of finery and
Ihow, which has been deemed their Favourite pas-
sion, was confined chiefly to the other sex t. To
deck his person was the diftinftion of a warrior, as
well as one of his most serious occupations t. In
one part of their drels, which, at firll fight, appears
the most singular aid capricious, the Americans
have discovered conlidelrable figacity in prnviding
against the chief inconvcniencies of th ir climate,
which is often flltry and moist to excess. All the
the different tribes, which remain unclothcd, are
acciftomeed to anoint lnnd rub their bodies with tihe
grease of animals, with viscous gutms, and with
oils of different kinds. By this they cleckl that pro-
fuse perlpiration, which, in the to, rid zone, \v'a.tes
the igourof the fr.ame, and abridges the pci icd of
human liCe. By this too they provide a defence
ngainrt the extreme moiflire daring the rainy 1ca-
lon §. They likewise, at certain ltcabns, temper
paint of diffcrelnt colours with tli,)fc undtuous lub-

* Wafer's Voyage, p. 14z. Lcry ap. de 3ry, iii. 167.

Charlev. H-lit. N. 'Fran iii .

iii. 22z . t Chaillv.

Hist. de la Nouv. F;lance, iii. 278. 327. Lafitia , ii. S,,.
Kalnl's Voyage, iii. ~ . Lery ap. dc Bry, iii. 1i19, 17, .
Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hiill. de los triiumphl . c. i47 .
t Sec NO'TE LXXV. § Scc NOTE LXX.\;

B b 2,' itL:ces,

B o K flances, and bedaub themselves plentifully with

IV. that composition. Sheathed with this impene-
t' "'trable varnish, their' Ikins are not only proteEted

from the penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all
the innumerable tribes of infeds have an antipathy
to the smell or taste of that mixture, they are deli-
vered from their tea2ing persecution, which, amidst
forefls and marshes, especially in the warmer re-
gions,. must have been altogether intolerable in
their irate of nakedness *.
Habitalions. THE next obje&t to dress that will engage the at-

tention of a savage, is to prepare some habitation
that may afford him shelter by day and a retreat at
night. Whatever is connected with his ideas of
personal dignity, whatever bears any reference to
his military charafter, the savage warrior deems an
object of importance. Whatever relates only to
peaceable and inactive life, he views with perfet
indifference. Hence, though finically attentive to
dress, he is little solicitous about the elegance or dif-
position of his habitation. Savage nations far fiom
that state of improvement, in which the mode of
living is confidered as a mark of diftintion, and
unacquainted with those wants, which require a
variety of accommodation, regulate the conftruc-
tion of their houses according to their limited ideas
.of neceflity. Some of the American tribes were bo
extremely rude, and had advanced so little beyond
the primeval simplicity of nature, that they had no
houses at all. During the day, they take fheltcr from
the scorching rays of the fult under th;ck trees; at
night they form a shed with their branches and
leaves t. In the rainy season they retire into covers,
formed by the hand of nature, or hollowed out by
their own indufiry :. Others who have no fixed a-
bode, and roam through the forests in quest of game,

* Labat, ii. 73. Gunmilla, i. 19o. 202. Bancroft Nat.
I:il. of Guiana, 8,, 280. 1 See NOTE LXXViI

t Lettrcs L.dii. vV. 273. Venegas Hist. of Calitbr. i.

76. Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Clnco, p. 55. Lettres Ed.il
ii. 176. Gumilla, i. 83. BIrancroft Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 277.

fnjourn

sojourn in temporary huts,'which they eret with BO OK
little labour, and abandon without any concern. IV.
The inhabitants of those vast plains, which are de- '''
luged by the overflowing of the rivers during the
heavy rains that fall periodically between the tropics,
raise houses upon piles fafiened in the ground, or
place them among the boughs of trees, and are thus
safe amidst that wide extended inundation which
surrounds them *. Such were thefirft e:ffys of the
rudest Americans towards providing theminelves
with habitations. But even among tribes which
were more improved, and whose residence was be-
come altogether fixed, the itructure of their houses
was extremely mean and simple. They were wretch-
ed huts, sometimes of an oblong, and sometimes
of a circular form, intended merely for fhclter,
with no view to elegance and little attention to
conveniency. The doors were so low, that it was
necessary to bend, or to creep on the hands and
feet in order to enter them. They were without
windows, and had a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow travel-
lers in other minute circumstances of their defcrip-
tion, is not not only beneath the dignity of hiflory,
but would be foreign to the object of my researches.
One circumstance merits attention, as it is lingular,
and illustrates the chara&ter of the people. Some of
their houses were so large as to contain accommo-
dation for fourscore or a hundred persons. These
were built for the reception of different families,
which dwelt together under the fame roof t, and
often around a common fire, without separate apart-
ments, or any kind of screen or partition between
the Spaces which they respeCtively occupied. As
soon as men have acquired diitinCt ideas of proper-
ty; or when they are so much attached to their
females, as to watch them with care and jealousy;

* Gumilla, i. 225. IIerrcra, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 6. Ovicdo
Sommar, p. 53. C. qs See NOTE LXXVIII.

families

B o O I families of course divide and fettle in separate lou-

IV. fes, where they can secure and guard whatever
^th ethey with to preserve. This singular mode of ha-

bitation may therefore be confidcred not only as
the effee of that community of goods which sub-
sifted anong tlh several people in America, but as
a proof of inattention and indifference towards their
women. If they had not been accustomed to per-
set equality, such an arrangement could not have
taken place. If their sensibility had been apt to
have taken alarm, they would not have trusttd the
virtue of their women amidst the temptations and
opportunities of such a promi cuous intercourse. At
the fame time, the perpetual concord, which reigns
in habitations where so many families are crowded
together, is surprising, and affords a striking evi-
dence that they must be people of either a very gen-
tle, or of a very phlegmatic temper, who, in such
a situation, are unacquainted with animosity,
brawling, and discord. -
Their arms. AFTER making some provision for his dress and

habitation, a savage will perceive the nece!lity )j
preparing proper arms with which to aflEnlt or rc-
pel an enemy. This, accordingly has early cxcr-

'ifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-

tions. The first offensive weapons were doub.ll;
such as chance presented, and the firit efforts of irt
to improve upon these, were extremely aukw'yrd
and simple. Clubs made of some heavy wood,
flakes hardened in the fire, lances whose heads
were armed with flint or the bones of some animal,
are weapons known to the rudest nations. All
thele, however, were of use only in close encoun-

*ourn. de Grillet & Becha mel dans la Goyane, p. 65. La-

titaU Mceurs, ii 4. Torqueni. Monarq. i. 247. Journal Hlit.
ie Joutel, 217. I.ery Hist. Brazil, ap. de Bry, iii. 238.
Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco. 67.

ter.

ter. But men wished to annoy their enemies whileB o 0 K
at a distance, and the bow and arrow is the most IV.
early invention for this purpose. This weapon is in --
the hands of people, whose advances in improve-
ment are extremely inconsiderable, and is familiar
to the inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It
is remarkable, however, that some tribes in Ame-
rica were so deftirute of art and ingenuity, that
they had not attained to the discovery of this fim-
pie invention *, and seem to have been unacquaint-
ed with the use of any millive weapon. The fling,
thoughl in its conflrudtion not more complex than
the bow, and among many nations of equal antiqui-
ty, was little known to the People of North Ame-
rica t, or the islands, but appears to have been
used by a few tribes in the southern continent t.
The people in ibme provinces of Chili, and those
of Patagonia, towards the southern extremity of
America, use a weapon peculiar to themselves.
They fasten flones about the size of a sift to each
end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and
swinging these round their heads, throw thlini with
such dexterity that they seldom miss the obj-E at
which they aim §.

AMrNG people who had hardly any occiupitrion Thllir L.-

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their in-rl.
vention l, as well as indufiry, were naturally di-
redted towards these objeds. With retpedt to every
thing else, their wants and desires were so limited,
that their invention was not upon the (tretch. As
their food and habitations were perfedly simple,
their domestic utensils were few and rude. Some
of the southern tribes had diCcovered the art of
forming vessels of earthen ware, and baking them

* Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Reyno, 9, Iz. 1- Naufi.

de Als. Nun Cabeca de vaca, c. x. p. 1. . Picdrah.
p. 16. Sec NOTE LXXIX. § Ovall's Relation
of Chili. Church. Colledt. iii. 82z. alkncr's Dcfcrip. ot Pa-
tagon, p. 130. || See NOTE LXXX.

in

B 0 0 K in the fun, so as they could endure the fire. In

IV. North America, they hollowed a piece of hard

Dressing wood into the form ofa kettle, and filling it with
their food. water, brought it to boil by throwing red-hot stones

into it *, These vessels they used in preparing part
of their provisions; and this may be confidered as a
ftep towards refinement and luxury, for men in
their rudest state were not acquainted with any
method of drelfng their victuals, but by roartinc
them on the fire ; and among several tribes in
America, this is the only species of cookery yet

ConRruction known t. But the master-piece of art, among the
ns theirc savages of America, is the construction of their

canoes. An Eikimaux, shut up in his boat of
whale-bone, covered with the fIins of feals, can
brave that iformy ocean, on which the barrenness
of his country compels him to depend for the chief
part of his subsistence :. The people of Canada
venture upon their rivers and lakes in boats made
of the bark of trees, and fo.light that two men can
carry them wherever shallows or cataracts obftructl
the navigation 11. In these frail veffela they under-
take and accompliih long voyages §. The inha-
bitants of the iles and of the southern continent
form their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large
tree, with infiilite labour, and though in appear-
ance extremely aukward and unwieldy, they pad-
dle and steer them with fuich dexterity, that Euro-
peans well acquainted with all the improvements
in the science of navigation, have been astonished
at the rapidity of their motion, and the quiclnesc
of their evolutions. Their pirogtes, or war-boats,
are so large as to carry forty or fifty men; their

* Charlev. Hill. of N. Fr. iii. 332. + See NOTE

LXXXI. $ Ellis Voy. 133. ISee NOTiL LXXXII.
Ltfitau Mccurs, &c, ii. 213,

canoes

canoes employed in fishing and in short voyages B o o K
are less capacious *. The form as well as materials IV.
of all there various species of veCfels is well adapted -
to the service for which they are destined; and
the more minutely they are examined, the me-
chanifm of their ftrudure, as well as neatness of
their fabric, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards induffry amongL nlel,,i.'

the Americans, one striking quality in their cha- vithi which
rafter is conspicuous. They apply to work with- th'y PYbl
out ardour, carry it on with little activity, and,
like children, are easily diverted fiom it. Even in
operations which seem the most interesting, and
where the mofft powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid lift-
leflnefs. Their work advances under their hand
with such slowness, that an eye-witness compares
it to the imperceptible progress of vegetation t.
They will spend so many years in forming a canoe,
that it often begins to rot with age before they
finish it. They will fiiffer one part of a roof to
decay and perish, before they complete the
other t. The slightest manual operation consumes
a vast length of time, and what in polished nati-
ons would hardly be an effort of indufiry, is among
savages an arduous undertaking. This slowness of
the Americans in executing works of every kind
may be imputed to va ious causes. Among fa-
vages, who do not depend for subsistence upon the
efforts of regular indufiry, time is of so little im-
porrance, that they set no value upon it; and pro-
vided they can finish a design, they never regard
how long they iae employed about it. The tools
which they employ are so aukward and defelive,
that every work in which they engage must necef-
farily be tedious. The hand of the most induftri-

* Labat Voyages, ii. 9, &c. 131. .' Gumilla, ii. 297.
$ BordL ReKlat. les Caraibes, p. 2z.

onls

BOOK ous and skilful artist, were it furifihed with no

IV. better instrument than a stone hatchet, a shell, or
'-"' tthe bone of some animal, could hardly perfelt the

most simple work. It is by length of labour, that
he must endeavour to supply his defect of power.
But, above all, the cold phlegmatic temper pecu-
liar to the Americans renders their operations lan-
guid. It is almnoft impoflible to rouze them from
that habitual indolence in which they are ftnk ;
and urnlcfs when engaged in war or hunting, they
seem incapable of exerting any vigorous effort.
Their ardour of application is not so great as to
call forth that inventive spirit which suggests expe-
dients for facilitating and abridging labour. They
will return to a task day after day, but all their
methods of executing it are tedious and operose *.
Even since the Europeans have communicated to
them the knowledge of their instruments, and
taught them to imitate their arts, the peculiar
genius of the Americans is conspicuous in all
their attempts. They may be patient and affi-
duous in labour, they can copy with a servile and
minute accuracy, but discover little invention, and
no talents for dispatch. In fpiteof inftrutdionl and
example, the spirit of the race predominates; their
motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to urge
them to quicken their pace. Among the Spaniards
in America, the work of an Indian is a phiafe by
which they describe any thing, in the execution
of which an immense time has been employed, and
much labour wafted -t,

Theirreli- VII. No circumstance refpeeing rude nations
gsio .has been the object of greater curiosity than their

religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been so imperfectly understood, or rcprefentcd

* See NOTE'l LXXXIII. Voyage de Ulloa, i. 335.
Lettr. Edif. &c. 15. 348.

with

with so little fidelity. Priests and miflionaries are B 0 0 K
the persons who have had the best opportunities of IV.
carrying on this inquiry, among the most uncivi- p,.ar
lized of the American tribes. Their minds en- difficulties
grofted by the doEtrines of their own religion, and quityl" in
habituated to its institutions, are apt to discover
Something that resemble those objects of their ve-
neration, in the opinions and rites of every people.
Whatever they contemplate, they view through
one medium, and draw and accommodate it to
their own fyllem. They fludy to reconcile the
institutions, which fall under their observation, to
their own creed, not to explain them according to
the rude notions of the people themselves. They
ascribe to them ideas which they are incapable of
forming, and suppose them to be acquainted with
principles and facts, which it is impoflible that they
Ihould know. Hence, even among the most bar-
barous nations in America, some missionaries have
been induced to believe, that they had discovered
traces, no leTs diftinat than amazing, of their ac-
quaintance with the sublime mysteries and peculiar
institutions of Chriffianity. From their own in-
terpretation of certain expreflions and ceremonies,
they concluded that there people had rome know-
ledge of the doctrine of the Trinity, of the incarna-
tion of the Son of God, of his expiatory sacrifice,
of the virtue of the cross, and of the efficacy of
the sacraments *. In such unintelligent and credu-
lous guides as these, we can place little confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choice of con-

dutors with the greatest care, we must not follow
them with implicit faith. An inquiry into the re-
ligious notions of rude nations is involved in

* Venegas, i. 88. 92. Torquemada, ii. 445. Garcia

Origcn. !22. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. 5. lib. iv.
, 7.

peculiar

B O O K peculiar intricacies, and we muff often pause in

IV. order to separate the fads which our informers re-
v"'a late, from the reasonings with which they are ac-

companied, or the theories which they build Upon
them. Several pious writers, more attentive to
the importanceof the subjet than to the condition
of the people whose sentiments they were endea-
vouring to discover, have bestowed much unpro-
fitable labour in researches of this nature *

Confined to THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upon
twoarticles which the whole system of religion, as far as it can

be discovered by the light of nature, is established.
The one respects the being of a, God, the other
the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review
with regard to there important points, is not only
an objeEt of curiosity, but may afford inftruEtion.
To there two articles 1 ihall confine my researches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of

The being local superstitions, to more minute inquiries. Who-
of God. ever has had any opportunity of examining into

the religious opinions of persons in the inferior
ranks of life, even in the most enlightened and
civilized nations, will find that their system of be-
lief is derive4 from inftru&ion, not discovered by
inquiry. That numerous part of the human fpe-
cies whose lot is labour, whose principal and almost
sole occupation is to secure subsistence, views the
arrangement and operations of nature with little
reflection, and has neither leisure nor capacity for
entering into that path of refined and intricate
speculation which conduds to the knowledge of
the principles of natural religion. In the early and
most rude periods of savage life, such disquisitions
are altogether unknown. When the intelletual
powers arejuft beginning to unfold, and their firit
feeble exertions are directed towards a few ob-

* See NOTE LXXXIV.

jcedr

jeEts of primary necessity and use; when the facul-B 0 0 K
ties of the mind are so limited, as not to have IV.
formed abflrat or general ideas; when language '*"
is so barren, as to be destitute of names to diftin-
guifh any thing that is not perceived by some of
the senses; it is prepoflerous to expect that man
should be capable of tracing with accuracy the re-
lation between cause and effect; or to suppose that
he should rife from the contemplation of the one
to the knowledge of the other, and form just con-
ceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Governor
of the universe. The idea of creation is so fami-
liar, wherever the mind is enlarged by science, and
illuminated with revelation, that we seldom reflect
how profound and abstruse this idea is, or confider
what progress man muff have made in observation
and research, before he could arrive at any know-
ledge of this elementary principle in religion. Ac-
cordingly, several tribes have been discovered in
America, which have no idea whatever of a Su-
preme Being, and no rites of religious worflip.
Inattentive to that magnificent fpeEacle of beauty
and order presented to their view, unaccustomed to
reflect either upon what they themselves are, or to
inquire who is the author of their existence, men,
in their savage slate, pass their days, like the ani-
mals around them, without knowledge or venera-
tion of any superior power. They have not in their
languages any name for the Deity, nor have the
most accurate observers been able to discover any
practice or institution which seemed to imply that
they recognized his authority, or were solicitous to
obtain his favour*. It is only among men in the

* Biet, 539. Lery ap De Bry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff. Church.

Coll. ii. 132. Lettr. Edit. z. 177. Id. 12, 13. Venegas, i.
87. Lozano Delcript. dcl Gran Clhco, 59. Fernand. Mif-
sion. de Chiquit. 39 Gunilla, ii. 156. Rochelolt Hilf. des
Antilles. p. 468. Margrave -lil. in Append. de Chillienfi-
bus, 286. Ulloa Notic Aincric. 335, &c. Barrcrc, 218,
219. Harcourt Voy Vto Glianin Pu'rcl. Iilgr. iv. p 1273.
Account of Bralil, by a IPortuguefe. Ibid. p. 1289. Joncs's
Journal, p. 59. See NOTEr LXXXV.

mofl

B O O K moif uncultivated itate of nature, and while their

IV. intellectual faculties are To feeble and limited as

"v'hardly to elevate them above the irrational creation,

that we may discover this total insensibility to the
impressions of any invisible power. But the human
mind, formed for religion, soon opens to the recep-
tion of ideas, which are destined, when corrected
and refined, to be the great source of consolation
amidst the calamities of life. Among rome of the
American tribes, itill in the infancy of improve-
ment, we discern apprehensions of rome invisible
and powerful beings. These apprehensions are
originally indiftint and perplexed, and seem to be
suggested rather by the dread of impending evils,
than to flow from gratitude for bleflings received.
While Nature holds on her course with uniform and
undisturbed regularity, men enjoy the benefits re-
fulting from it, without enquiring concerning its
cause. But every deviation from this regular
course rouzes and astonishes them. When they
behold events to which they are not accuflomed,
they search for the reasons of them with eager cu-
riofity. Their understanding is unable to pene-
trate into there; but imagination, a more forward,
and ardent faculty of the mind, decides without
hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary occur-
rences in nature to the influence of invisible beings,
and fuippofes that the thunder, the hurricane, and
the earthquake, are effects of their interposition.
Some such confured notion of spiritual or invisible
power, superintending over those natural calamities
which frequently desolate the earth, and terrify its
inhabitants, may be traced among many rude na-
tions *. But besides this, the disasters and dangers
of rivage life are so many, and men often find
themselves in situations so formidable, that the
mind, sensible of its own weakness, has no resource
but in the guidance and protecion of wisdom

*Sec NOTE LXXXVI.

and

and power superior to what is human. Dejected B OK
with calamities which oppress him, and exposed to°_,
dangers which he cannot repel, tile savage no
longer relies upon himself; he feels his own impo-
tence, and fees no profpce of being extricated,
but by the interposition of some invisible arm.
Hence, in all unenlightened nations, the first rites
or praftices which bear any reremblance to acts of
religion, have it for their objct to avert evils
which men susser or dread. The Manitous or
Okkis of the North Americans were amulets or
charms, which they imagined to be of such virtue,
as to prelerve the persons who repose confidence in
them from every dilaflerous event, or they were
confidertd as tutelary spirits, whose aid they might
implore in circumstances of diftrels *. The CGmnis
of the islanders were reputed by them the authors
of every calamity that afflicts the human race;
they were reprelented under the most frightful
forms, and religious homage was paid to thenm
with no other view than to appease these furious
deities 't. Even amoiig those tuibes whose religious
system was more enlarged, and \who had fo)rmed
some conception of benevolent beings, dcligh:ed
with conferring benefits, as well as of malicious
powers prone to inflit evil; fupulit-ition fiill ap-
pears as the offspring of fear, and all its efforts
were employed to avert calamities. 'They were
persuaded that their good deities, prompted by
tlhe beneficence of their nature, would beflow eve-
ry blelhng in their power, without solicitation or
acknowledgment; and their only anxiety was to
soothe and d&precate the wrath of the powers
whom they regaided as the encmies of mankind ::.

* Clhalev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &c Creuxii llilt. Canad'

p. 82, &c. 1) Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. i. p. I . P. Mar-
tyr, decad. p. ioz, &c. :1: 'I'rtre, ii. 305. Bori'e,
p. 14. State of 'ilginia. by a Native, book iii. p 32, 33.
Dumont, i. 165. Ianiciofi Nut. l-lilt. of Guiana, 309

SucH

BO OK SUCH were the imperfeEt conceptions of the

Iv. greater part of the Americans with refpeat to the

' interpositions of invisible agents, and such, almost

universally, was the mean and illiberal objet of
their fuperifitions. Were we to trace back the
ideas of other nations to that rude Itate in which
history first presents them to our view, we should
discover a surprising resemblance in their tenets and
practices; and should be convinced, that, in fimi-
lar circumstances, the faculties of the human mind
hold nearly the fame course in their progress, and
arrive at almost the fame conclusions. The irn-
preflions of fear are conspicuous in all the fyfterns
of superstition formed in this situation. And the
noft exalted notions of men rife no higher than to
a perplexed apprehension of certain beings, whose
power, though supernatural, is limited as well as
partial.

Remaikable BUT, among other tribes, which have been
i:erfit'v longer united, or have made greater progress in
ous notions.lmprovement, we discern
r ome feeble pointing to-

wards more just and adequate conceptions of the
power that presides in nature. They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by tome of their expreflions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power as the
maker of the world, and the disposer of all events.
They denominate him the Great Spirit *. But
these ideas are faint and confured, and when they
attempt to explain them, it is manifest, that among
them the word ip;irit has a meaning very different
from that in which we employ it, and that they
have no conception of any deity but what is cor
poreal. They believe their gods to be of the
human form, though of a nature more excel.
lent than man, and retail such wild incoherent

* Charlcv. N. Fr. iii 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays dc
H-uronI1, 226.

fable

fables concerning their funEtions and operations, as B 0 0 K
are altogether unworthy of a place in hiflory. IV.
Even among these tribes, there is no eltablifhed form _-v
of public worship; there are no temples crected in
honour of their deities; and no ministers peculiar-
ly consecrated to their service. They have the
knowledge, however, of several superstitious cere-
monies and practices handed down to them by tra-
dition, and to these they have recourse with a child-
ifh credulity, when rouzed by any emergence fiom
their usual insensibility, and excited to acknowledge
the power, and to implore the protection of fupe-
ior beings *.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of System of

Bogota had advanced beyond the other uncultivated theNatchez.
nations of America in their ideas of religion, as well
as in their political institutions; and it is no less
difficult to explain the cause of this diftindtion than
of that which we have already confidered. ihe
Sun was the chief objet of religious worihip among
the Natchez In their temples which were con-
tructed with some magnificence, and decorated
with various ornaments, according to their mode
of architecture, they preserved a perpetual fire, as
the purest emblem of their divinity. Ministers
were appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame.

The first function of the great chief of the na-

tion, every morning, was an aft of obeyfance to
the fun; and festivals returned at stated seasons
which were celebrated by the whole community
with solemn but unbloody rites . This is the
most refined species of superstition known in

* Charley. N. Fr. iii. 34. Colden, i. 17. t Dumont,
i. 158, &c. Charley. N. Fr. 3. 417, &c.429. Lafitau,
i. 167.

VOL. 1. C c America,

B O K America, and, perhaps, one of the most natural

IV. as well as most seducing. The fun is the apparent
V'y 'source of the joy, fertility, and life, diffused through

nature, and while the human mind, in its early
essays towards inquiry, contemplates and admires
his universal and animating energy, its admiration
is apt to flop short at what is visible, without reach-
ing to the unseen cause; and pays that adoration
to the most glorious and beneficial work of God,
which is due only to him who formed it. As fire
is the purest and most ative of the elements, and
in some of its qualities and effe&ts resembles the
fun, it was, not improperly, chosen to be the em-
blem of his powerful operation. The ancient Per-
sians, a people far superior, in every refpe&t, to
that rude tribe whose rites I am describing, found-
ed their religious system on similar principles, and
established a form of public worship, less gross and
exceptionable than that of any people deftitutei of
guidance from revelation. This surprising co-in-
cidence in sentiment between two nations, in such
different Rates of improvement, is one of the many
singular and unaccountable circumstances which
occur in the history of human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the fun and moon

were likewise, the chief objects of veneration.
Their system of religion was more regular and com-
plete, though less pure than that of the Natchez.
They had temples, altars, priests, sacrifices, and
that long train of ceremonies, which superstition
introduces wherever she. has fully established her
dominion over the minds of men. But the rites of
their worship were cruel and bloody. They offered
human victims to their deities, and many of their
practices nearly resembled the barbarous institutions

oo
*

of the Mexicans, the genius of which we shall haveB 0 0 K
an opportunity of confidering more attentively in IV.
its proper place *.

WITH refpec to the other great doctrine of re-Their ideas

ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, thethm'm,-
sentiments of the Americans were more united :tality f the
the human mind, even when Icaft improved and in-soul,
vigorated by culture, f .-inks from the thoughts of
dissolution, and looks forward with hope and ex-
pectation to a state of future existence. This fen-
timent, resulting from a secret conicioufnefs of its
own dignity, from an inf-inilivc longing after im-
mortality, is universal, and may be deemed natu-
ral. Upon this, are founded the moRs exalted
hopes of man in his highefl Rfate of improvement;
nor has nature withheld from him this soothing
consolation, in the most early and rude period of
his progress. We can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other. In some re-
gions more faint and obscure, in others more per-
fectly developed, but no where unknown. The
mbft uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre-
hend death as the extinction of being. All hope
for a future and more happy fate, where they (hall
be for ever exempt from the calamities which em-
bitter human life in its present condition. This
they figure as a delightful country, blessed with
perpetual fp'ing, whose forests abound with
game, whose rivers fwarml with fish, where famine
is never felt, and uninterrupted plenty flall be en-
joyed without labour or toil. But as men, in form-
ing their first imperltc ideas concerning the invisible
world, filppofe that there they s1hall continue to
feel the fame d(fircs, and to be engaged in the
fame occupations; they natuially alcribe eminence
and dilcinction, in that state, to the amfe qualities

* Piedrahita, Conq. del N. Reyno, p. 17, &c. IHerrcia,
dec. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

C c z and

BOOK and talents which are here the object of their

IV. esteem. The Americans, accordingly, allotted
'-V^'L the highest place, in their country of spirits, to the

ikilful hunter, to the adventurous and successful
warrior, to such as had surprised and slain the
greatest number of enemies, who had tortured ma-
ny of their captives, and devoured their flesh *.

induce tlen, These notions were so prevalent, that they gave rife
touryms to an universal cutom,. which is, at once, the
with the itrongeft evidence that the-Americans believe in a
dead. future state, and the bess illustration of what they

expect there. As they imagine, that the dead be-
gin their career anew in the world whither they are
gone, that they may not enter upon it defenceless
and unprovided, they bury with them their bow,
their arrows, and other weapons used in hunting
or war; they depofite in their tombs the skins or
stuffs of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, domefRic utensils, and whatever
is reckoned among the necefaries in their fimpie
mode of Life t. In some provinces, upon the de-
cease of a cazique or chief, a certain number of his
wives, of his favourites, and of his slaves, were put
to death, and interred together with him, that he
might appear with the fame dignity in his future
station, and be waited upon by the fame attend-
ants:l:. This persuasion is so deep-rooted, that
many of their retainers offer themselves as volunta-
ry victims, and court the privilege of accompanying

* Lcry ap Dc Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 351,

&c. De la Potheric, ii. 45, &c . iii. 5. Clironi-
ca dte Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288. Creux. -lift.
Canad. p. 9i. Rochelort, Hill. des Antilles, 568. Hiet,
39i. De la Potherie, ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf. (Ie
I'ijitu, p. 35. . Dumont, Louifiane, i. z80,
&c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3. Gomara, Hist. Gcn. c. 28.
P. Mart. decad. 304. Chlrlev. N. Fr. iii. 421. -crlcra,
dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. 1'. Melcliior I-lernandcz, Mciiir. I!e
Chiliqui. Coil. Olig. Papers, i. Chron. de Cieca de Lcon,
c, 33.

thcir

their departed mailer, as an high diffindion. It hasB o O K
been found difficult, on some occasions, to ser IV.
bounds to this enthufiafin of affectionate duty, and '
to reduce the train of a favourite leader to such a
number as the tribe could afford to spare *.

AMONG the Americans, as well as other uncivi- Superflition

lized nations, many of the rights and obferv.ancescnineaed
which bear some resemblance to ads of religion, tion.
have no connection with devotion, but proceed from
a fond desire of prying into fiturity. The human
mind is most apt to feel, and to discover this vain
curiosity, when its own powers are most feeble
and uninformed. Aftonifled with occurrences,
of which it is unable to comprehend the cause, it
naturally fancies that there is something mysterious
and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at events,
of which it cannot discern the issue or the confe-
quences, it has recourse to other means of disco-
vering them, than the exercise of its own iagacity.
Wherever superstition is so eflablilhed as to form a
regular system, this desire of penetrating into the
secrets of futurity is conneted with it. Divination
becomes a religious ad. Priests, as the ministers
of Heaven, pretend to deliver its oracles to men.
They are the only soothsayers, augurs, and magi-
cians, who possess the sacred and important art of
disclosing what is hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no venera-Thisdepat.
tion to any superintending power, and who have no"rent be-

longs to then'

eftablilhed rites ,- miniflers of religion, their cu-phfician,.
riofity to discover what is future and unknown
is cherished by a different principle, and derives

* Sec NOTE LXXXVII.

strength

B. O OK strength from another alliance. As the diseases of

Iv. men, in the savage slate, are like those of the ani-
""'~mal creation, few but extremely violent, their im-

patienceunder what they susser, and solicitude for
the recovery of health, soon inspired them with ex-
traordinary reverence for such as pretended to un-
derftand the nature of their maladies, or to pre-
serve them from. their sudd; n and fatal effets.
These ignorant pretenders, however, were Iuch utter
itrangers to the Itru.utre of the huma'n frame, as
to be equally unacquainted with the causes of its dif-
orders and the manner in which they will terminate.
Enthusiasm, mingled frequently with some portion of
craft, ftpplied what they wanted in science. They
imputed the origin of dileafes to supernatural influ-
enrce, and prescribed or performed! a variety of my-
t.erious rites, which they gave out to be of power
fuiffiient to remove them, The credulity and love
of t.he marvellous, natural to uninformedi men, fa-
voured the deception, and: prepared them to be
the dupes of their imposture. Among savages,
their first phyficiansare a kind of conjurers or wiz~
ards, who boast that they know what is past, and
can foretell what is to come. Incantations, sorcery,
and mummeries of diverse kinds, no less strange
than frivolous, are the means which they employ
to expel the imaginary causes of malignity *; and,
relying .upon the efficacy of these, they predict
with confidence what will be the fate of their delud-
ed: patients. Thus superstition in its earliest form
flowedt from. tle solicitude of man to be delivered
from present distress, not from his dread of evils
awaiting him in a future life, and was originally in-
grafted on medicine, not on religion. One of the
firfl, and most intelligent historians of America

' P. Melch. Hernandcz, Memorial de Cheriqui. CollcC.
Orig. Pap. i.

waS

was struck with this alliance between the art of B O O K
divination and that of physic, among the people _;,
of Hispaniola *. But this was not peculiar to
them. The Alexis, the Piayas, the Autmoins, or
whatever was the distinguishing name of their di-
viners and charmers in other parts of America,
were all the physicians of their rc.peceive tribes, in
the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola. As
their fundion led them to apply to the human
mind when enfeebled by sickness, and as they
found it, in that season of dejection, prone to be
alarmed with imaginary fears, or amused with vain
hopes, they easily induced it to rely with implicit
confidence on the virtue of their spells, and the
certainty of their predicions t.

WHENEVCR men acknowledge the reality of radually

supernatural power and discernment in one in-'xtend
fiance, they have a propensity to admit it in
others. The Americans did not long suppose the
efficacy of conjuration to be confined to one subje:t.
They had recourse to it in every situation of dan-
ger or distress. When the events of war were
peculiarly disastrous, when they met with unfore-
seen disappointments in hunting, when inundation
or drought threatened their corps with deflrudtion,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their in-
cantations, in order to discover the causes of those
calamities, or to foretell what would be their issue §,
Their confidence in this delusive art gradually in-
created, and manifested itself in all the occurrences,
of life. When involved in any difficulty, or about

* Oviedo, lib. v. c. i. I1-lerrera. dec i. lib. iii. c.

4. Olborne, Coil. ii. 860. Dumont, i. 169, &c. Charlev.
N. SI. iii. 361. 364, &c. Lawson, N. Carol. 214. Ribas,
Triumph, p. 17. Biet, 386. De la Potherie, ii. 35, &c.

5 Charley N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumont, i. 73. Fernand. Re-
,ac. de los Chiquit. p. 4o. Lozano, 84. largirve, 279.

to

B O O K to enter upon any transaCtion of moment, every in-

IV. dividual regularly consulted the forcerer, depended
"' ' upon his inftrutions to extricate him from the

former, and to direct his conduct in the latter.
Even among the rudest tribes in America, fuperfti-
tion appears in this form, and divination is an art
in high eiteem. Long before man had acquired
such knowledge of a deity as inspires reverence and
leads to adoration, we observe him firetching out
a presumptuous hand to draw aside that veil with
which providence kindly conceals its purposes from
human knowledge; and we find him labouring,
with fruitless anxiety, to penetrate into the myfte-
ries of the divine administration. To discern,
and to worship a superintending power, is an evi-
dence of the enlargement and maturity of the hu-
man understanding; a vain desire of prying into
futurity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof of
its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the

faith of the Americans in creams, their obferva-
tion of omens, their attention to the chirping
of birds and the cries of animals, all which
they flippofe to be indications of future events,
and if any one of there prognostics is deem-
ed unfavourable, they instantly abandon the pur-
suit of those measures on which they are most
eagerly bent *.

Detached VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of
cuRomc. the uncultivated nations of America, we muff not

pass unobserved some singular customs, which,
though universal and charafteriftic, could not be
reduced, with propriety, to any of the articles

*Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262. 353, Stadius, ap de Bry,

iii. 1zo. Crcuxij, Hit. Canad. 84. Techo, Hill. of Parag.
Church. Coll. vi. 37. Dela Potherie, iii. 6.

into

into which I have divided my inquiry concerning B 0 0 K
their manners. 1V.

AMONG savages, in every part of the' globe, Loveof dan.

the love of dancing is a favourite paflion. As a'
great part of their time languishes away in liltlefs
indolence, without any occupation to rouze or in-
terest them, they delight universally in a pastime
which calls forth the aitive powers of their nature
into exercise. The Spaniards, when they first vi-
fited America, were astonished at the fondness of
the natives for dancing, and beheld with wonder a
people, cold and unanimated in most of their other
pursuits, kindle into life, and exert themselves with
ardour, as often as this favourite amusement re-
curred. Among them, indeed, dancing ought
not to be denominated an amusement. It is a fe-
rious and important occupation, which mingles in
every occurrence of public or private life. If any
intercourse be necessary between two American
tribes, the ambassadors of the one approach in a so-
lemn dance, and present the calumet or emblem
of peace; the sachems of the other receive it with
the fame ceremony -. If war is denounced againit
an enemy, it is by a dance, expreliive of the re-
fentment which they feel, and of the vengeance
which they meditate-. If the wrath of their gods is
to be appea fed, or their beneficence to be celebrated;
if they rejoice at the birth of a child, or mourn the
death of a friend X, they have dances appropriated
to each of thele situations, and suited to the differ-
ent sentiments with which they are then animated.

* D la Potherie Hist. ii. 17, &c. Charlcv. N. Fr. ii.'zl i.

;97. La Hontan. .
i oo0. 137. Henncpin. Decou. 149, &c.

tCliarlcv. N. Fr. iii. z98. Lafitau, i. 523.
:]: Joutcl, 343. Gonmara, Hill. Gen. c. 196.

B O 0 K If a person is indisposed, a dance is prescribed as

IV. the most effectual means ofreftoring him to health;
weyY and if he himself cannot endure the fatigue of such

an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs it in
his name, as if the virtue of his a&ivity could be
transferred to his patient ,

ALL their dances are imitations of rome acion;

and though the music by which they are regulated,
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, Come of their dances appear won-
derfully expreflive and animated. The war-dance
is, perhaps, the most iriking, It is the reprefenta-
tion of a complete American campaign. The de-
parture of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
station Come of their party in ambush, the manner
of iurprizing the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the fcalpingofthofe who are slain, the
sei2ing of prisoners, the triumplant return of the
conquerors, and the torture of the viaims, are fuc-
ceffively exhibited. The performers enter with
such enthufiaffic ardour into their several parts,
their gestures, their countenance, their voice are lo
wild and To well adapted to their various situations,
that Europeans can hardly believe it to be a mimic
scene, or view it without emotions of fear and
horror t.

BUT however expreflive rome of the American

dances may be, there is one circumstance in them
remarkable, and conne&ted with the characer of
the race. The songs, the dances, the amuse-
ments of other nations, expreflive of the sentiments

* Denys Hist. Nat. r89. Brickell, 372. De la Potheric,

ii. 36. t De la Potherie, ii. 116, Charlev. N. lFr. iii.
297. Lafitau, i. 523.

wlhich

which animate their hearts, are often adapted to B O O K
display or excite that sensibility which mutually at- IV.
taches the sexes. Among some people, such is the'"""'
ardour of this paflion, that love is almost the sole
object of festivity and joy ; and as rude nations are
itrangers to delicacy, and unaccustomed to disguise
any emotion of their minds, their dances are often
extremely wanton and indecent. Such is the Ca-
lenda, of which the natives of Africa are so pafiion-
ately fond *; and such the feats of the dancing
girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with To much
avidity of desire. But, among the Americans,
more cold and indifferent to their females, from
causes which I have already explained, this paflion
mingles but little with their feflivals and pastimes.
Their songs and dances are mostly solemn and mar-
tial, they are connected with some of the serious
and important affairs of life t, and having no re-
lation to love or gallantry, are seldom common
to. the two sexes, but executed by the men and
women apart §. If, on tome occasions, the wo-
men are permitted to join in the festival, the cha-
raEter of the entertainment is still the fame, and no
movement or gesture is expreflive of attachment,
or encourages familiarity 11.

AN immoderate love of play, especially at games Passion for

of hazard, which seems to be natural to. all people gamins,
unaccustomed to the occupations of regular indus-
try, is likewise universal among the Americans.

* Adanfon, Voy. to Senegal, p. iii. 287. Labat, Voyages,

iv. 463. Sloane Hist. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48. Fermin,
Defcript. de Surin. i. p. 139. 1 Defcript. of N. France.
Olborne, Coll. ii. 883. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 84, § Wa-
ser's Accountof fthlus, &c. 169 Lery ap de Bry, iii. 177.
^ozano, Hil}. de Parag. i. 149, Hcrrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 8.
dec. 4. lib.x. c. 4. Sec NOTE LXXXVIII. |1 Barrere, Fr.
jli.uin. p. 191.

The

B 00 K The fame causes., which so often prompt persons at

IV. their ease in civilized life to have recourse to this
'vLY'paftime, render it the delight of the savage. The

former are independent of labour, the latter do not
feel the neceflity of it, and as both are unemployed,
they run with transport to whatever is of power to
stir and agitate their minds. Hence the Americans,
who at other times are so indifferent, so phlegmatic,
so silent, and so disinterested, as foun as they en-
gage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy,
and almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs,
their domestic utensils, their clothes, their arms,
are flaked at the gaming-table, and when all is loft,
high as their sense of independence is, in a wild
emotion of despair or of hope, they will often risk
their personal liberty, upon a single cafe *. Among
several tribes, such gaming parties frequently recur,
and become their most acceptable entertainment at
every great festival. Superstition, which is apt to
take hold of those pafions which are most vigorous,
frequently lends its aid to confirm and strengthen
this favourite inclination. Their conjurers ire ac-
customed to prescribe a solemn match at play, as
one of the most efficacious methods of appealing
their gods, or of restoring the tick to health 1.

and for FROM causes similar to those which render them
drinking. fond of play, the Americans are extremely addited

to drunkenness. It seems to have been one of the
first exertions of human ingenuity to discover some
composition of an intoxicating quality; and there is
hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute of inven-
tion as not to have succeeded in this fatal rclearch.

* Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c.

Ribes, Triullf. 13, Brickell, 335. ' Charlev. N.
Fr. iii. 262.

The

The most barbarous of the American tribes have B O O K
been so unfortunate as to attain this art; and even IV.
those who are so deficient in knowledge, as to be"-~
unacquainted with the method of giving an inebri-
ating strength to liquors by fermentation, can ac-
complifh the fame end by other means. The peo
pie of the islands of North America, and of Califor-
nia, used, for this purpose, the smoke of tobacco,
drawn up with a certain instrument into the nof-
trils, the fimes of which ascending into thetbrain,
they felt all the transports and frenzy of intoxica-
tion *. In almost every other part of the New
World, the natives possessed the art of extratingan
intoxicating liquid from maize or the manioc root,
the fame substances which they convert into bread.
The operation by which they effet this, nearly re-
fembles the common one of brewing, but with this
difference, that in place of yess, they use a nau-
feous infusion of a certain quantity of maize o
manioc chewed by their women. The saliva ex-
cites a vigorous fermentation, and in a few days
the liquor becomes fit for drinking. It is not dif-
agreeable to the taste, and when swallowed in
large quantities is of an intoxicating quality.
This is the general beverage of the Americans,
which they distinguish by various names, and
for which they feel such a violent and insatiable
desire, as it is not easy either to conceive or de-
scribe. Among polished nations, where a fuccef-
sion of various functions and amusements keep
the mind in continual occupation, the desire for
firong drink is regulated, in a great measure,
by the climate, and increases or diminishes ac-
cording to the variations of its temperature. In

*Oviedo Hi-t. ap. Ranmf. iii. x13. Venegas, i. 68.

Naufrag. de Cabeca dc Vaca, cap. z6. See NOTE
LXXXIX. - Sladius ap de lry, iii, v i. Lcry, ibid. 175.

warm
4.

B1O O Kwarrt regions, the delicate and sensible frame of

Iv- the inhabitants does not require the flimulation of

- J fermented liquors. In colder countries, the confti-

tution of the natives, more robust and more slug.
gish, flands in need of generous liquors to quicken
and animate it. But among savages, the desire of
something that is of power to intoxicate, is in
every situation the fame. All the people of Ame-
rica, whether natives of the torrid zone, or inha-
bitants of its more temperate regions, or placed
by a harder fate in the severe climates towards its
northern or southern extremity, appear to be
equally under the dominion of this appetite *.
Such a similarity of taste, among people in such
different situations, muff be ascribed to the influ-
ence of some moral cause, and cannot be confi-
dered as the effec of any physical or conftituti-
onal want. While engaged in war or in the chafe,
the savage is often in the most interesting fituati-
ons, and all the powers of his nature are rouzed to
the most vigorous exertions. But those animating
scenes are succeeded by long intervals of repose,
during which the warrior meets with nothing that
he deems of sufficient dignity or importance to me-
rit his attention. He languishes and mopes in this
season of indolence. The posture of his body is
an emblem of the state of his mind. In one cli-
mate, cowering over the fire in his cabin; in an-
other, stretched under the shade of some tree: he
dozes away his time in sleep, or in an unthinking
joyless inacivity, not far removed from it. As
strong liquors awake him from this torpid state,
give a briiker motion to his spirits, and enliven him
more thoroughly than either dancing or gam-
ing, his love of them is exceflive. A savage, when
not engaged in action, is a pensive melancholy

* Gumilta, i. 257. Lozano Defcrip. de Gran Chacho,
6. 103. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais. iv. 436.
FernandczMilfion. de las Chiquit. 35. Barrere, p. 203. Blan-
co Convert. dePiritu, 3 1.an

animal ,

animal; but as fopn as he taftes, or has a profpea B 0 O K
of tailing, the intoxicaring draught, he becomes IV.
gay and frolicsome *. Whatever be the occasion,'
or pretext, on which the Americans assemble, the
meeting always terminates in a debauch. Many
of their festivals have no other object, and they
welcome the return of them with transports of
joy. As they are not accustomed to restrain any
appetite, they set no bounds to this. The riot
often continues without intermission several days:
and whatever be the fatal effects of their excess,
they never cease from drinking as long as one drop
of liquor remains. The persons of greatest emi-
nence, the moss diftinguifled warriors, and the
chiefs mofi renowned for their wisdom, have no
more command of themselves than the most ob-
feure member of the community. Their eagerners
for present enjoyment renders them blind to its fa-
tal consequences; and thole very men, who, in
other situations, seem to possess a force of mind
more than human, are in this instance infeiior to
children in foresight, as well as consideration, and
mere slaves of brutal appetite t. When their pas-
sions, naturally fl-rong, are heightened and inflam-
ed by drink, they are guilty of the most enormous
outrages, and the festivity feldorn concludes with-
out deeds of violence, or bloodshed $.

BUT, amidst this wild debauch, there is one

circumstance remarkable; the women, in mofi of
the Amnerican tribes, are not permitted to partake
of it §. Their province is to prepare the liquor,
to serve it about to the guests, and to take care of
their husbands and fiiends, when their reason is

* Mclendez Tcforos Vcrdal. iii. 369. + Ribas, 9g

Ulloa, i. 338. $ Lettr. Lidif. ii. 178. Torquemnada
Mon. Ind. i. 33 5. § Se NOTE XC.

over-

B O O K overpowered. This exclusion of the women from

IV. an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be
-'-v='juftly confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and

as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The
people of North America, when first discovered,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their interest
to supply them with spirituous liquors, drunken-
ness soon became as universal among them as
among their countrymen to the south ; and their
women having acquired this new taste, indulge it
with as little decency and moderation as the
men .

Put todeath IT were endless to enumerate all the detached
%he agedandcutfoms which have excited the wonder of travel-

lers in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly
as singular as any that has been mentioned. When
their parents and other relations become old, or
labour under any distemper which their slender
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove, they
cut snort their days with a violent hand, in order
to be relieved from the burden of supporting and
tending them. This practice prevailed among
the ruder tribes in every part of the continent,
fiom Hudson's Bay to the river De la Plata; and
however flocking it may be to those sentiments of
tenderness ar.d attachment, which, in civilized
life, ve are apt to confider as congenial with our
frame, the condition of man in the savage state
leads a.:d reconciles him to it. The fame hard-
ships and difficulty of procuring subsistence, which
deter savages, in some cafes, from rearing their
children, prompt them to destroy the aged and in-
firm. The declining (late of the one is as helpless

-Hutchinson, Hist. of Maflachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. 125.
Sagard, 146.

as

as the infancy of the other. The former are no less B O O K
unable than the latter to perform the functions that IV.
belong to a warrior or hunter, or to endure those
various dittrefres in which savages are so often in-
volved, by their own want of foresight and industry.
Their relations feel this; and incapable of attend-
ing to the wants or weaknesses of others, their im-
patience under an additional burden prompts them
to extinguish that life which they find it difficult to
fufRain. This is not regarded as a deed of cruelty,
but as an aa of mercy. An American, broken with
years and infirmities, conscious that he can no longer
depend on the aid of those around him, places him-
self contentedly in his grave; and it is by the hands
of his children or nearest relations that the thong is
pulled, or the blow inflicted, which releases him for
ever from the sorrows of life *.

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American cc-crai

tribes in such various lights, after takirg a view of:;,': ,';
their customs and manners from so many different rc.r.
stations, nothing remains but to form a general efli-
mate of their character, compared with that of more
polifled nations. A human being, as he comes
originally from the hand of nature, is every where
the fame. At his firfl appearance in the slate of in-
fancy, whether it be among the rudest lavages, or
in the molf civilized ifciety, we can diciern no qua-
lity which marks any diliftinltion oir fiperiority. The
capacity of improvement ser Cs to be the fistm; and
the talents he may afterwards acquire, as well as
the virtues he may be rendered capable of exercif-
ing, depend entirely upon the laite of toci.ty in
which he is placed. '.Lo this flattc hli mind naturally
accommodates itself, and from it receives its dil-

VtcL. . D d cipiine

* Caflani Hifl. de N. Rcyno de Ciln. p. 300. Piol, p. 6.
Ellis Voy. 191. Gullilla, i. 333.

B 0 0 K cipline and culture. In proportion to the wants

1-. which itaccuftoms a human being to.feel, and the
~-'v-'funtions in which there engage him, his intellec-

tual powers are called forth. According to the
connections which it- establishes between him and
the reft of his species, the affections of his heart are
exerted. It is only by attending to this great prin-
ciple, that we can discover what is the character of
man in every different period of his progress.

Intelle&ual IF we apply it to savage life,, and measure the
powers. attainments of the human mind in that slate by this

flandard, we ,shall find, according to an obferva-
tion which I have already made, that the intellec-
tual powers of man must be extremely limited in
their operations. They are confined within the
narrow sphere of what he deems necessary for sup-
plying his own wants. Whatever has not some re-
lation to these, neither attracts his attention, nor is
the objea of his inquiries. But however narrow the
bounds may be within which the knowledge of a
savage is circumscribed, he possesses thoroughly that
small portion of it which he has attained. It was
not communicated to him by formal inftrution;
he does not attend to, it as matter of mere fpecula-
tion and curiosity; it is the result of his own ob-
servation, the fruit of his own experience, and ac-
commodated to his 'condition and exigencies. While
employed in the active occupations of war or hunt.
ing, he often finds himself in difficult and perilous
situations, from which the efforts of his own saga-
city must extricate him. He is frequently engaged
in measures where every itep depends upon his own
ability to decide, where he muff rely :solely upon his
own penetration to discern the dangers to which he
is exposed, and upon his own wisdom in providing
against them.

As

,As the talents,of individuals are exercised and B O O K
improved by such exertions,. much political wisdom Iv.
is said to be displayed in condueting the affairs of ij"-'
their small communities. The council of old men tiler.s.
in an American tribe, deliberating upon its interests,
and determining with refpeft to peace or war, has
been compared to the senate in more poliflhed re-
publics. The proceedings of the former, we are
told, are often no left formal and sagacious than
those of the latter. Great political wisdom is ex-
hibited in pondering the various measures proposed,
and in balancing their probable advantages, against
the evils of which they may be productive. Much
.address and eloquence are employed by the leaders,
who aspire at acquiring such confidence with their
countrymen, as to have an ascendant in those al:
femblies B. But, among savage tribes, the field
for displaying political talents cannot be extensive.
Where the idea of private property is unknown,
and. no criminal jurisdiction is eflabliiaed, there is
hardly any function of internal government to exer-
cife. Where there is no commerce, and scarcely
any intercourse among separate tribes; where en-
mity. is implacable, and hof0ilities are carried on
almost without intermiflion,; there will be few points
of public concern to adjust with their neighbotus;
and that department of their affitirs which may be
deno'miiated foreign, cannot be lo intricate as to
require any refincd policy in c(.ndulting it. Where
individuals are so thoughtlels and improvident as
seldom to take effetual precautionis folr fclf-pre-
servation, it is in vain to expect that putblic mcai urcs
and deliberations will be regula.ted by the contem-
plation of remote evcnts. It i, the gcnius of flvages
to aFt from the imLpull' of pre( nt paillion. They
have neither forelight nor tcmper to sorn compli-

D d z cated
* Chailcv, N. Fr, iii. 26", &c.

B OOK cated arrangements with refpeet to their future

IV. conduct. The consultations' of the Americans,

indeed, are so frequent, and their negociations are
so many , and so long protracted, as to give their
proceedings an extraordinary afpedt of wisdom.
But this is not owing so much to the depth of their
schemes, as to the coldness and phlegm of their
temper, which renders them flow in determining t.
If we except the celebrated league, that united the
Five Nations in Canada into a federal republic,
which shall be confidered in its proper place, we
can discern few such traces of political wisdom,
among the rude American tribes, as discovers any
great degree of foresight or extent of intelleCtual
abilities. Even among thenm, we shall find public
measures more frequently direEted by the impetuous
ferocity of their youth, than regulated by the ex-
perience and wifdour of their old men.
Degree of As the condition of man in the savage fate is

con unfavourable to the progress of the understanding,

it has a tendency likewise, in some refpeats, to
check the exercise of affection, and to render the
heart contracted. The strongef feeling in the mind
of a savage is a sense of his own independence.
He has sacrificed 1b linall a portion of his natural
liberty by becoming a member of society, that he
remains, in a great degree, the iole matier of his
own ationst. He often takes his resolutions alone,
without consulting, or feeling any connection with
the persons around him. In many of his operations,
he flands as much detached from the reft of his
species, as if he had formed no union with them.
Conscious how little he depends upon other men,
he is apt to view them with a carcllds indifference

Evci

* See NOTLE XCI. ' I Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 271.
1 Fernaandz Million. de los Chiquit. 33.

Even the force of his mind contributes to increase B 0O K
this unconcern, and as he looks not beyond himself iV.
in deliberating with refpedt to the part which he
should aft, his solicitude about the consequences
of it seldom extends farther. He pursues his own
career, and indulges his own fancy, without in-
quiring or regarding whether what he does be
agreeable or offensive to others, whether they may
derive benefit, or receive hurt from it. Hence the
ungovernable caprice of savages, their impatience
under any species of refiraint, their inability to
suppress or moderate any inclination, the scorn or
negle-t with which they receive advice, their high
estimation of themselves, and their contempt of
other men. Among them, the pride of independence
produces almost the fame effecs with intereftednefs
in a more advanced slate of society, it refers every
thing to a man himself, and renders the gratifica-
tion of his own wifies the measure and end of
conduct.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardners Hid,,rni. f

of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all savage h'art.
nations. Their minds, rouzed only by firong
emotions, are little susceptible of gentle, delicate, or
tender affecAions *. 'Iheir union is so incomplete,
that each individual acEs as if he retained all his
natural rights entire and uncliminilhed. If a favour
is conferred upon him, or a lervice pcirforml-d for
his behoof, he receives it with much lhtisfaCiol,
becauie it contributes to his enjoymcl.t; but this
sentiment extends not beyond hinmillf, it excites no
sense of obligntion, he neither Ic:ls ,glatitucle, I,or
th\inks of ima :ai;., a:y rCtiui -|. lvuc', anoi:g pcr-
sons the molt clik!,:1 co,:n:ilc '.d, ilirrc is; littl: cr(r--
rclpondeince: 'r t x!l 1:in ei o tliol-.' )( ',od ,lliccr=r w i.lil

1) d 3 si l. t(. C

* Chlalev, N. F1, iii. Y"g. -1 O;.' ,': l':\ lib, x',. c. ;:.
See MOTIE Cl

B O O K -trengthen attachment, mollify the heart, and sweeten

1V. the intercourse of life. Their high ideas of inde-

~'"
v pendence nourish a fullen reierve, which keeps

them at a diflance from each other. The nearest
relations are mutually asiaid to ilake any demand,
or to solicit any service *, lefl it iflould be confi-
dered by the other as impofi.g a burden, or laying
a restraint upon his will.
Insensibility. I HAVE already remarked the influence of this

hard unfeeling temper upon dometlic life, with
refpe& to the connection between husband and wife,
as well as that between parents and children. Its
effeLts are no less conspicuous, in the performance
of those mutual offices of tenderness which the in-
firmities of our nature frequently exaCt. Among
some tribes, when any of their number are seiz:d
with a distemper, they are generally abandoned by
all around them, who, careless of their recove!y,
fly in the urmoft consternation from the fuppoftd
danger of infection t-. But even where they are net
thus deserted, the cold indifference with which they
are attended can aflbrd them little confulation. No
lock of sympathy, no fo)thing exprei"ons, no oicioiis
services contribute to alleviate or to make them
forget their fTifielrinls : . Their nearest relatiens
wIill ofteni r-fe to

f lit

to the fmiallef inconve-

niency, or to part with tie icaft trifle, howcvcr
much it may tend to thilci naccT-modation or relief' .
So little is the breall of ;a Iavage ifulceptible of thlicl
fintiments which promnpt mlcli to that feeling atten-
tion which mitigtles ditlrcls, that, in some pro-
vinccs of Almeici, lhe Spaniards have found it

neccfTh ry

* Dc I Potilcric, iii. 2a. lt J ettie dlI P. Catanco np Mui-

ratuli l ifLi i:,i, i , :. '1 tc, ii. 4 0. I.r aio, no I
rtr1, clec . l. vi:i c. 5. ..c r. l:h. iv. c. 2. I'., 1.
n lipr. <0 ' I ,, m

l; l

t 1

, ,) . *1 C-itl il,a,
i, :'). 1 " ''1.'), I '

, * .j.i '.t U . '
.., ^ c (*:' l i..i c . ,\. i j. \ \ ,: , ,

necessary to inforce the common duties of humanity B O 0 K
by positive laws, and to oblige husbands and wives,
parents and children, under revere penalties, to
take care of each other during their sickness *.
The fame harshness of temper is fliil more con-
fpic.uous in their treatment of the animal creation.
Prior to their intercourse with the people of Europe,
the North Americans had some tame dogs, which
accompanied them in their hunting excursions, and
served them with all the ardour and fidelity pecu-
liar to their species. But, instead of that fond at-
tachment, which the hunter naturally feels towards
those useful companions of his toils, they requite
their services with negleCt, seldom feed, and never
caress them t. In other provinces, the Americans
have become acquainted with the domeRfic animals
of Europe, and avail themselves of their service;
but it is universally obfeived that they always treat
them harshly t, and never employ any method either
for breaking or managing them, but force and
cruelty. In every part of the deportment of man in
his savage state, whether towards his equals of the
human species, or towards the animals below lin!,
we recognise the fame character, and trace the opc-
rations of a mind, intent on its own gratifications,
and regulated by its own caprice, vithout mnuchl
attention or sensibility to the lentiments and fc-liigs
of the beings around him.

A1FTER explaini:g how unfavourable the raiVaF;eeT.;; ;,;':,.

flatc is to the cultivation of the underfia ding, and
to the improve;m;t of tlhe h;-art, I lliiold not have
thought it necelary to mc;i,;;i \vhlat mnay be deemed
its lcler dcfects, il' tne c ; l ..lr of nations, as v ll

NL d 4 ;;'

'* C',,1, 11d,, II!i '1 : i'2 f '',inll,, p 'o.. *t Ch.ll.v.

N. F ii. i19. 3j; j u
..'Nllu. ;'.,ti. Ainlcrican. 312.

.B OO Kas individuals, were not often more diftindly

IV. marked by circumstances apparently trivial, than

by those of greater moment. A savage, frequently,
placed in situations of danger and distress, depend-
ing on himself alone, and wrapt up in his own
thoughts and schemes, is a serious melancholy
animal. His attention to others is small. The
range of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that
taciturnity which is so disgusting to men accuf-
tomed to the open intercourse of social converfa-
tion. When not engaged in action, the Americans
often fit whole days in one pofiure, without opening
their lips *. When they go forth to war, or to the
chace, they usually march in a line at some distance
from one another, and without exchanging a word.
The fame profound silence is observed when they
row together in a canoe t. It is only when they
are animated by intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by
the jollity of the feitival and dance, that they
become gay and convertible.
Cunning. To the fame causes may be imputed the refined

cunning with which they form and execute their
schemes. Men, who are not habituated to a liberal
communication of their own sentiments and wishes,
are apt to be so distrustful, as to place little confi-
dence in others, and to have recourse to an insidious
craft, in accomplishing their own purposes. In ci-
vilized life, those perions, who, by their situation,
have but a few objects of pursuit on which their
minds incessantly dwell, are moll remarkable for
low artifice in carrying on their little projects.
Among savages, whole views are equally confined,
and their attention no lels perfevcring, those cir-
cumitances mull operate flill more powerfully,
and gradually accuttom them to a disingenuous

fibtllety
*Voyage de ougucr, 102. t- Charlev, ii. 340.

subtlety in all their tranfadtions. The force of BO O K
this is increased by habits which they acquire in lv.
carrying on the two most interesting operations
wherein they are engaged. With them war is a
system of craft, in which they trust for success to ftra-
tagem more than to open force, and have their in-
vention continually on the stretch to circumvent and
surprise their enemies. As hunters, it is their con-
slant object to ensnare, in order that they may de-
fi-roy. Accordingly, art and cunning have been
universally observed as diffinguifhing character-
iftics of all savages. The people of the rude tribes
of America are remarkable for their address and
duplicity. Impenetrably secret in forming their
measures, they pursue them with a patient unde-
viating attention, and there is no refinement of
diflimulation which they cannot employ, in order to
insure their success. The natives of Peru were
engaged above thirty years, in concerting the plan
of their infurrestion, under the vice-royalty of the
marquis de Villa-Garcia, and though communicated
to a great number of all different ranks, no indica-
tion of it ever transpired during that long period;
no man betrayed his trust, or by an unguarded look,
or rash word, gave rife to any suspicion of what
was intended*. The dillimulation and craft of
individuals is no lets remarkable than that of nations,
When set upon deceiving, they wrap themselves up
so artificially, that it is impoflible to penetrate into
their intentions, or to detest their designs-'-.

BUT if there be defects or vices peculiar to the vi;tueh.
savage slate, there are, likewise, virtues which it

inlpires,

* Voyage de Ulloa, ii. 309 1. Guilla, i. 16z.
Charlev. iii, 09.

B O O K inspires, and good qualities, to the exercise of which

IV. it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so loose upon

ndependenthe members of the more rude American tribes,
spirit. that they hardly feel any restraint. Hlence the spirit

of independence, which is the pride of a savage,
and which he confiders as the unalienable preroga-
tive of man. Incapable of controul, and disdaining
to a.cknowlege any superior, his mind, though
limited in its powers, and erring in many of its
pursuits, acquires such elevation by the conscious-
ness of its own freedom, that he ads on some occa-
sions with astonishing force, and perfeverence, and
dignity.
Fortkude. As independence nourishes this high spirit among

savages, the perpetual wars in which they are en-
gaged call it forth into ation. Such long intervals
of tranquillity as are frequent in polifled societies,
are unknown in the savage itate. Their enmities,
as I have observed, are implacable and immortal.
The valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in
inadcion. The hatchet is always in their hand,
either for attack or defence. Even in their hunting
excursions, they must b1 on their guard against
surprise fi-om the hostile tribes, by which they are
ifrrounded. Accustomed to continual alarms, they
grow familiar with danger, and courage becomes
an habitual virtue, refuiliing naturally from thir
situation, and fhrengthened by contf-a'it exertio:s.
The mode of diliflayinig fortitude may not be the
fame in finall and rude com'nu:ities, as in more
powerful and civilized dates. Their fyitcm of war,
and standard of valour may be formed upon dif
ferent principles, but in no situation does the Iihunimn
mind rife more u.pcrior to the (c; fe of danger, ,
the dread of death, tllan in its nioil simple and u:1
cultivated slate.

ANOT 1 1:

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is B 0 0 K

attachmrent to the community of which they are lv-
members. From the nature of their political union, ,-
one might expect this tie to be extremely feeble. Lo their
But there are circumstances which render the in-on'"""""n"y
fluence, even of their looie mode of afibciation,
very powerful. The American tribes are small;
combined against their neighbours, in prosecution
of ancient enmities, or in avcrging recent i1juries,
their interests and operntior!s are neither numerous
nor complex. These are objiecs, which the uncul-
tivated u :dcrf':anldi"g of a fivage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming connections, which
are so little diffused. He afients with warmnth to
public measures, dictated by pafiions, similar to
those which influence his own conduEt. Hence the
ardour with which individuals undertake the most
perilous service, when the community deems it
necessary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted an-
tipathy to the public enemies. Hence their zeal
for the honour of their tribe, and that love of their
country, which prompts them to brave danger
that it may triumph, and to endure the molt exqui-
site torments without a groan, that it may not be
disgraced.

THUS, in every situation where a human being .,i,,;,nn

cal be placed, even the moil- unfavoural;l, :;h:;'ci: tv';:r
are virtues that peculi arly bclong to ii ; t

lc;c.,:'C''', ,

affections which it cal!s forth ; there is a si,- cid; if
happincfs which it yie!cl. Nature, vil rrl;,!l '..n.-
ficent intention, conciliarcs andct I-:,; I :

i ,:L ; ':i:: to

its condition, the ideas ani \\il.; oL ' iil::!l c '".
not beyond that flale of-' iocicty t,) v.'h!Ci il is
habituated. Wliat it pre .Lnis a'i

s; cjt::l:; of
,o:,tcm-

plation or enjoyment, fill and si ai y :.;: i :ii (, a d:1
lhe can hardly couiceive any il,"r lii : !.. ol life. it) e
picalant or even tolerable. The l'.alti, ac.:lllll.d.

t(o

B 0 OK to roam over extensive plains, and to subsist on the

IV. product of his herds, imprecates upon his enemy,

as the greatefl of all curses, that he may be con-
demned to reside in one place, and to be nourished
with the top of a weed, The rude Americans,
fond of their own pursuits, and satisfied with their
own lot, are equally unable to comprehend the in-
tention or utility of the various accommodations,
which, in more polished society, are deemed eflen-
tial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own situation, or viewing that of men in a
more improved Rtate with admiration or envy, they
regard themselves as the tfandard of excellence, as
beings the best entitled, as well as the mos; per-
feetly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Unaccuf-
tomed to any restraint upon their will or their
ations, they behold with amazement the inequality
of rank, and the Subordination which take place in
civilized life, and confider the voluntary fubmiflion
of one man to another, as a renunciation, no less
base than unaccountable, of the first diftintion of
humanity. Void of foresight, as well as free from
care themselves, and delighted with that state of
indolent security, they wonder at the anxious pre-
cautions, the unceasing industry, and complicated
arrangements of Europeans, in guarding againtl
distant evils, or providing for future wants, arn
exclaim againfi their prepolterous folly, in thus
multiplying the troubles, and increasing the labour
of life *. This preference of their own manners is
conspicuous on every occasion. Even the names,
by which the various nations wish to be diflin-
guifhed are airumed from this idea of their ow1n
pre-eminence. The appellation which the Iroq(iii'
give to thenmfelves is, the chief of inc -t. Claib'

til

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii 305. LahontaQ, ii. 97.
. ColIden i. 3.

the original name of the fierce inhabitants of the B 0 0 K
windward islands, signifies the warlike people*. The IV.
Cherokee, from an idea of their own superiority, .' '
call the Europeans Nothings, or the accursed race,
and aflume themselves the name of The beloved
peoplet. The fame principle regulated the notions
of the other Americans concerning the Europeans;
for although, at firif, they were filled with aftonifi-
ment at their arts, and with dread of their power,
they soon came to abate their effimation of men,
whose maxims of life were so different from their
own. Hence they called them the froth of the sea,
men without father or mother. They supposed,
that either they had no country of their own, and
therefore invaded that which belonged to others t;
or, that, being deffitute of the necessaries of life at
home, they were obliged to roam over the ocean,
in order to rob such as were more amply provided.

MEN; thus satisfied with their condition, are far
from any inclination to relinquilh their own habits,
or to adopt those of civilized life. The transition
is too violent to be suddenly made. Even where
endeavours have been used to wean a savage from
his own customs, and to render the accommodations
ofpolifhed society familiar to him; even where he
has been allowed to taste of thole pleasures, and
has been honoured with thous diflinations, which
are the chief oblje(ts of our dtfire, he droops and
languishes under the restraint of laws and forms,
he seizes the firfl opportunity of breaking loose
from them, and returns with tiniirliort to the foref
or the wild, whtre he can enj,)y a carclcis and un-
controuled freccdo §.

T H U s

' Roclicfort Hi-s. ties Aitil 4s, 4iz. ' Adsir, Hia. of

Amer. Inlians, p. 32. 1

, :.zon. Ilill. Novi (Jlbi
lib, iii. c a, i Cltalecv. N. Ir. iii 3j .:.

B 0 OK THus I have finimhed a laborious delineation of

1V. the charadler and manners of the uncivilized tribes
'""¥' scattered over the vast continent of America. In

this, I afpii e not at rivalling the great masters who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in
boldness of ddign, or in the glow and beauty of
their colouring. I am satisfied vwith the more
humble merit of having prfiRied with patient in-
duftry, in viewing my fubje& in many various
lights, and in collecting from the most accurate
oblervers such detached and often minute features,
as might enable me to exhibit a portrait that refem.
bles the original.

.Gccrg,.l BEFORE I close this part of my wori, one obfer.
cutionwith vation more is necessary, in order to justify the
th ,luiry. conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent the

mistakes into which such as examine them may
fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a country
so widely extended as America, great attention
should be paid to the diversity of climates under
which they are placed. The influence of this I
have pointed out with refpet to several important
particulars, which have been the object of relfarch;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it ougIht
not to be overlooked. The provinces of America
are of such different temperament, that this alone
is sufficient to confitute a diftintion between their
inhabitants. In every part of the earth where ilan
cxitls, the power of climate operates, with decili\e
influence, upon his condition and charadter. In
those countries which approach nearer to the
extremes of heat or cold, this influence is si- csln.
fpicuous as to ilrike every eye. Whether we con.
fidcr man merely as an animal, or as a bein:g cn
lowcd with rational powers, which lit him to
activity and ficculation, we (hall find that he Iha

uniibrinl

uniformly attained the greatest perfection of which B O O K
his nature is capable, in the temperate regions of IV.
the globe. There his conffitution is most vigorous,
his organs most acute, and his form most beautiful.
There, too, he possesses a fuperlor extent of capa-
city, greater fertility of imagination, more enter-
prifing courage, and a ienfibility of heart which
gives birth to paflions, not only ardent, but perse-
vering. In this favourite situation he has displayed
the utmost efforts of his genius, in literature, in
policy, in commerce, in war, and in all the arts
which improve or embellish life*.

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt most

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater es-
sets than in societies more highly polished. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted in
rendering their condition more comfortable; and
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great measure, supply the defeds, and guard
against the inconveniencies of any climate. But
tle improvident savage is affctctd by every circum-
Rance peculiar to his fituationl. HI talces no pre-
caution either to mitigate or to imnprove it. Like
a plant or an animal, he is ftrmed by the climate
under which he is placed, a.;d 'Lcls tlle full force
of its in ifluence.

IN, surveying the rude natiotis of America, this

nat ural diIi.inction between l.e ilhalji arts of the
temperate and torrid zones is very rcmarkable.
They may, accordinlgly, be divided into two great
claflts. The o1i comprn.cl.hn.s all tlhe North
Ameritca:;, fiomi the river Si. I;lll;IC 1,M the
(9;li' ol Mecxi>co, t?, ;t:il'l. r \x i li le: p ;'opc o (' Chili,

and

, .Dr. Fcrguiin!'si fia) on tllsG 1lill, eol Civil Society, ',at
'i . ,i

B O O Kand a few small tribes towards the extremity of

IV. the southern continent. To the other belong all

"'^"Y "the inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in

the various provinces which extend from the isthmus
of Darien almost to the southern confines of Brasil,
along the eat fide of the Andes. In the former,
the human species appears manifestly to be more
perfect. The natives are more robust, more
active, more intelligent, and more courageous.
They possess, in the most eminent degreee, that
force of mind, and love of independence, which I
have pointed out as the chief virtues of man in his
savage ifate. They have defended their liberty
with persevering fortitude againfl the Europeans
who subdued the other rude nations of America
with the greatest ease. The natives of the tempe-
rate zone are the only people in the New World
who are indebted for their freedom to their own
valour. TheNorth-Americans, though long encom-
pasTed by three formidable European powers, still
retain part of their original poffeflions, and continue
to exist as independent nations. The people of
Chili, though early invaded, still maintain a gal-
lant contest with the Spaniards, and have set bounds
to their encroachments; whereas, in the warmer
regions, men are more feeble in their frame, le-s
vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of a gentle
but dastardly fpirir, more enslaved by pleasure a:d
funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is in the torrid
zone that the Europeans have most completely
eftabliflhed their dominion over America; the modl
fertile and dtfirable provinces in it are fubjeaed to
their yoke; and if several tribes there still enjoy
independence, it is either because they have never
been attacked by an enemy already satiated ewith
conquest, and poflieed of larger territories thal
he was able to occupy, or because they have beer

,I savei

saved from oppression by their remote and inaccef- B o o K
fible situation. IV.

CONSPICUOUS as this diftintion may appear

between the inhabitants of those different regions,
it is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, affect the dif-
position and character of individuals as well as
nations, still more powerfully than the influence of
climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes, in
various parts of the torrid zone, possessed of courage,
high spirit, and the love of independence, in a
degree hardly inferior to the natives of more tem-
perate climates. We are too little acquainted with
the hitfory of those people, to be able to trace the
several circumstances in their progress and situation,
to which they are indebted for this remarkable pre-
eminence. The fad, nevertheless, is certain. As
early as the first voyage of Columbus, he received
information that several of the islands were inhabited
by the Caribbees, a fierce race of men, nowise re-
fembling their feeble and timid neighbours. In his
second expedition to the New World, he found this
information to be jull, and was himself a witness of
their intrepid valour '. The lame character they
have maintained invariably in all fubflquent conteits
with the people of our continent - ; and, even in our
own times, we have tlen them make a gallant (land
in defence of the last territory lhich the rapacity
of the Europeans had left in their pof-lcllin I.
Some nations in Brasil were no lels eminent for
vigour of mind, and bravery in war §. The people

VOL. I. E e of

* Life of Columbus, c. 47, 4. 'ce NOlT XCCII.
1t Rocllelbrtllifl. dcs; Antilles, 531. 1 Sec NOELY XCIV.
L,cry ap De Bry, iii. 207, &c.

B O O Kos the isthmus of Darien boldly met the Spaniards

IV. in the field, and frequently repelled those formidable
~'""'invaders *. Other instances might be produced,

It is not by attending to any single cause or prin.
ciple, however powerful and extensive its influence
may appear, that we can explain the actions, or
account for the character, of men. Even the law
of climate, more universal, perhaps, in its operation
than any that affedts the human species, cannot be
applied, in judging of their conduct, without many
exceptions.

* Herrera, dec. I. lib x c. 15, &c,; dec. 2. palim,.

NOTE'

NOTE S

AND
ILLUS T RATIONS.

i. )
,,

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ZLLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE 1. p. 7.

TYRE was situated at such a diflance from the Arabian
Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impoflible to convey commo-
dities from thence to that city by land-carriage. This in-
duced the Phenicians to render themselves maflers of
Rbinocrura, or Rbinocolura, the nearest port in the
Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They landed the cargoes
which they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at
Elath, the safest harbour in the Red Sea towards the
north. Thence they were carried by land to Rhinocolura,
the diflance not being very considerable; and being re-
fliipped in that port, were transported to Tyre, and diflri-
buted over the world. Strabon. Geogr. Edit. Cafaub.
lib. xvi. p. 128. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hiltor. Edit.
Weffelingi, lib. i. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 1o.

TH E Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic monu-
ment of the Carthaginian flill in naval afflirs, anl one of
the molt curious fragments tranfminiled to us by antiquity.
The learned and induflrious Mlr. l)Dowcll, in a dillitation
prefixed to the Periplus of i-linno, in the ctl.tion ot the
Minor Geographers publifhled at O)xford, tnilcnavouirs to
prove that this is a fpiuriouis work, the coinpifition of lionl

E. c 3 Creek,
I.~~~~~

Greek, who assumed Hanno's name. But M. de lon-
tefquieu, in his l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de
Bougainville, in a dissertation publifled tom. xxvi. of the
lemoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have efta-
blifhed its authenticity by arguments which to me appear
unanswerable. Ramufio has accompanied his trarflation of
this curious voyage with a dissertation tending to illuAfate
it. Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i. p:' ia. M. de Bougain-
ville has, with great learning and ability, treated the fame
subje&s. It appears that Hanno, according to the mode
of ancient navigation, undertook this voyage in finall
vessels, so conftruEted that he could keep close in with the
coat. He failed from Gades to the island of Cerne in
twelve days. This is probably what is known to the
moderns by the name of the isle of Arguim. It became
the chief itation of the Carthaginians on that coast; and
M. de Bougainville contends, that the cisterns found there
are monuments of the Carthaginian power and ingenuity.
Proceeding from Cerne, and fill following the winding of
the coast, he arrived, in seventeen days, at a promontory
which he called The Weft Horn, probably Cape Palmas.
From this he advanced to another promontory, which he
named The Soutb Horn, and which is manifestly Cape de
Tres Puntas, about five degrees north of the line. All
the circumstances contained in the short abltradt of his
journal, which is handed down to us, concerning the ap-
pearance and state of the countries on the coall of Africa,
are confirmed and illufirated by a comparison with the
accounts of modern navigators. Even those circumltances,
which, from their feerming improbability, have been pro-
duced to invliti:lie the credibility of his relation, tend to
confirm it. lie obfervec, that in the country to the foutl
of Cerne, a profound silence reigned through the day;
but during the night, innumerable fires were kindled alosl;
the banks of the rivers, and the air resounded with the
noise of pipes and drums, and cries of joy. The fame
thing, as Ri.mufio objllrvs, flill takes place. The exce f
five heat ohliges the ncegrocs to take shelter in the woodl
or in their hlufcs, daurine; the dlay. As roon as the lui
lets, thty (y ily out, atId! y tVi- h-lillt enjoy the pleafii
of nnilic a!d '.l ,;ncil;, iin ivlicli they ilcni the night

I{ a mui

Ramus. i. 113, F. In another place, he mentions the sea
as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred to M.
Adanfon, on the fame coast, may explain this. "' As
soon," fays he, ' as the fun dipped beneath the horizon,
and night overlpread the earth with darkness, the sea lent
us its friendly light. While the prow of our vessel
ploughed the foaming surges, it seemed to set them all on
fire. Thus we fiiled in a luminous inclofure, which fur-
rounded us like a large circle of rays, from whence darted
in the wake of the ihip a long itream of light." Voy. to
Senegal, p. 1 76.

NOTE III. p.ii.

LONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the molt intelligent and
best informed historian of antiquity, affirms, that it was
not known, in his time, whether Africa was a continued
continent, firetching to the south, or whether it was en-
compassed by the sea. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny the
naturalist asserts, that there can be no communication
between the southern and northern temperate zones.
Plinii Hilt. Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4t0, lib. ii. c. 68.
If they had given full credit to the accounts of those
voyages, the former could not have entertained such a
doubt, the latter could not have delivered such an opinion.
Strabo mentions the voyage of Eudoxiis, but treats it as a
fabulous tale, lib. ii p. 55; and, according to his
account, no other judgmelnt can be formed with respeCt
to it. Strabo seems not to have known any thing with
certainty concerning the foam and slate of the louthein
parts of Africa. Geogr, lib. xvii. p. io80. Ptolemy,
the most inquisitive and learned of all the ancient geogra-
phers, was equally unacquainted with any part of Africa
situated a few degrees beyond the equiinc(tial line; for he
supposes that this great continent was not fluirounded by
the sea, but that it firetched, without interruption, towards
the south pole: ard he lo far miltlakes its trIie figure,
that he describes the contilt'lnt 1s b,-cuninll bro'lder and
broader as it advancedl tu,. dii- tl.e lti il. Ptlemvi

Geogr lit. iv. c. 9. vBrietii

P.lrlallcl. Gcor. vcteris et
iovX, p. 86.

F (' .1 N () T .

NOTE IV. p. 16.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very firong and
singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients with refpe&
to the situation of the various parts of the earth. When
Alexander marched along the banks of the Hydafpes and
Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into the Indus, he
observed that there were many crocodiles in those rivers,
and that the country produced beans of the fame species
with those which were common in Egypt. From there
circumstances, he concluded that he had discovered the
source of the Nile, and prepared a fleet to fail down the
Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1ozo.
This amazing error did not arise from any ignorance of
geography peculiar to that monarch; for we aic informcd
by Strabo, that Alexander applied with particular attention
in order to acquire the knowledge of this science, and had
accurate maps or descriptions of the countries through
which he marched. Lib. ii. p. 120. But in his age, the
knowledge of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits
of the Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 17.

A S the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great at
the mouth of the river Indus, this would render the phe-
nomenon more formidable to the Greeks. Varen. Geogr.
vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE VI. p. 20.

IT is probhalle that they were seldom induced to advance
Ib far, either by motives of curiosity, or views of com-
mecrcial advantac. In consequence of this, the idea ol
the ancients concerning the position of that great river
was very erroncoll. Ptolemy places that branch of the
CGanges which he diflinluiflhs by the name of the Grc:l
Mouth, in the HIundred and lort- fixtih degree of longitudt
froin his firfl nmerirdia:l in ithe Fortitude illands. Lut ii

tre

true longitude, computed from that meridian, is now
determined by aitronomical observations to be only a
hundred and five degrees. A geographer so eminent mufl
have been betrayed into an error of this magnitude by the
imperfection of the information which he had received
concerning those diflant regions; and this affords a firiking
proof of the intercourse with them being extremely rare.
With refpeQ to the countries of India beyond the Ganges,
his intelligence was still more defecive, and his errors
more enormous. I shall have occasion to observe in
another place, that he has placed the country of the Seres,
or China, no less than sixty degrees farther east than its
true position. M. d'Anville, one of the moil learned and
inquisitive of the modern geographers, has i't this matter
in a clear light, in two dissertations published in Mem. de
l'Academ. des Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii.. . 573 604.

NOTE VII. p. 20.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
were made chiefly by land; those of the moderns are made
chiefly by sea. The progress of conqueff led to the
former, that of commerce to the latter. It is a judicious
observation of Strabo, that the conquests of Alexander
the Great made known the East, those of the Romans
opened the Well, and those of Mithridates king of
Pontus the North. Lib. i. p. 26. When discovery is
carried on by land alone, its progress mufl be flow, and
its operations confined. When it is carried on only by sea,
its sphere may be more extensive, and its advances more
rapid; but it labours under peculiar defecs. Though it
may make known the position of different countries, and
ascertain their boundaries as far as these are determined
by the ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with refped to
their interior state. Above two centuries and a half
have elapsed since the Europeans failed round the southern
promontory of Africa, and have traded in mofd of its
ports; but, in a considerable part of that great continent,
they have done little more lihan survey its coafs, and
mark its capes and harbours. Its interior regions arc in a

great

great measure unknown. The ancients, who had a very
imperfect knowledge of it6 coasts, except where they are
washed by the Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accuitomed
to penetrate into its inland provinces, and, if we may
rely on the teflimony of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus,
had explored many parts of it now altogether unknown.
Unless both modes of discovery be united, the geographical
knowledge of the earth muff remain incomplete and
inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 23,

T HE notion of the ancients concerning such an excef-
five degree of heat in the torrid zone, as rendered it unin-
habitable, and their persisting in this error long after they
began to have some commercial intercourse with several
parts of India lying within the tropics, muff appear so
singular and absurd, that it may not be unacceptable to
fQme of my readers to produce evidence of their holding
this opinion, and to account for the apparent inconsistence
of their theory with their experience. Cicero, who had
bes owed attention upon every part of philosophy known to
the ancients, seems to have believed that the torrid zone was
uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there could be no
intercourse between the northern and southern temperate
zones. He introduces Africanus thus addressing the younger
Scipio: "( You fee this earth encompassed and bound in by
certain girdles, of which, two, at the greatelt diflance
from each other, and fuitaining the opposite poles of
heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle one,
and the largess of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun;
two are habitable, the people in the southern one are
antipodes to us, with whom we have no conneaion."
Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek philosopher,
contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fame docrine, not
in a popular work, but in his Eoayy, rs; capio tpa, a treatise
purely scientific. " When we speak," fays he, " of the
southern temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and con-
cerning those who are called antipodcs, it mufl be always
undertfood, that we have no certain knowledge or informa-
tipn concerning the foutlern temperate zone, whether it

bi

be inhabited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the
tropics, we conclude that there is another zone, situated to
the south, which enjoys the lame degree of temperature
with the northern one which we inhabit." Cap. xiii. p.
3I. ap. Petavii Opus de Doar. Tempor. in quo Uranolo-
gium five Syfiemata var. AuEtortm. Amfl . I75. volii.
The opinion of Pliny the naturalist, with refpecd to both
these points, was the .lame: " There are five divisions of
the earth, which are called zones. All that portion which
lies near to the two opposite poles is oppressed with vehe-
ment cold, and eternal frost. There, unblest with the
afpe& of milder stars, perpetual darkness reigns, or at the
utmost a feeble light refleaed from surrounding snows.
The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun,
is scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery vapour.
Between these torrid and frozen districts lie two other por-
tions of the earth, which ale temperate; but, on account
of the burning region interposed, there can be no commu-
nication between them. Thus Heaven has deprived us of
three parts of the earth." Lib, ii. c. 68. Stiabo delivers
his opinion to the fame effect, in terms no less explicit;
" The portion of the earth which lies near the equator, in
the torrid zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib.
ii .

p. 5.r. To these I might add the authority of many
other refpeEtable philosophers and hiflorians of antiquity.

IN order to explain the sense in which this docrine was

generally received, we may ohferve, that Parmenides, as
we are informed by Strabo, was the sirs[ who divided the
earth into five zones, and he extended the limits of the
zone, which he supposed to be uninhabitable on account of
heat, beyond the tropics. Aliflotl, as we learn likewise
from Strabo, fixed the boundaries of the different zones in
the fame manner as they are defined by modern geographers.
But the progress of discovery having gr:diaiilly vi lilonl) lnt-
ed that several regions of the earth l Ihich lay wiliin llc
tropics were not only habitable, but rlllnlouns anil leriile,
this induced later geographers to cir(c inlril it lil liits of
the torrid zone. It is not cafy to :if t:i'';l:nih \ li pnrc:tion
the boundaries which they alllI;l tI, t . in a ti le.t

in

in Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of
antiquity from whom we receive any hint concerning this
subjec, I should conjeture, that those who calculated ac-
cording to the measurement of the earth by Eratofihenes,
supposed the torrid zone to comprehend near sixteen degrees,
about eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such as
followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted about
twenty-four degrees, or somewhat more than twelve de-
grees on each fide of the equator to the torrid zone.
Strabo, lib. ii. p. 151. According to the former opinion,
about two-thirds of that portion of the earth which lies
between the tropics was confidered as habitable; according
to the latter, about one-half of it. With this reftrision,
the dotrine of the ancients concerning the torrid zone ap-
pears less absurd; and we can conceive the reason of their
asserting this zone to be uninhabitables even after they had
opened a communication with several places within the
tropics. When men of science spoke of the torrid zone,
they confidered it as it was limited by the definition of
geographers to sixteen, or at the utmost to twenty-four
degrees; and as they knew almost nothing of the countries
nearer to the equator, they might flill suppose them to be
uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse, the name
of the torrid zone continued to be given to all that portion
of the earth which lies within the tropics. Cicero seems to
have been unacquainted with the ideas of later geographers,
and according to the division of Parmenides, describes the
torrid zone as the largest of the five. Some of the ancients
rejetaed the notion concerning the intolerable heat of the
torrid zone as a popular error. This, we are told by Plu-
tarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn from
Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopted the
fame opinion, lib. ii. 154. Ptolemy seems to have paid no
regard to the ancient doEltine and opinions concerning the
torrid zone.

NOTE

NOTE IX. p. 42.

THE court of inquisition, which effectually checks a
spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improvement,
wherever it is established, was first introduced into Portugal
by John III. who began his reign, A. D. 1521.

NOTE X. p. 49.

A.N inflance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon the
authority of the Portuguese hiltorian Garcia de Refende.
Some English merchants having resolved to open a trade
with the coast of Guinea, John II. of Portugal dispatched
ambafladors to Edward IV. in order to lay before him the
right which he had acquired by the Pope's bull to the
dominion of that country, and to request of him to prohibit
his fubjesls to prosecute their intended voyage. Edward
was so much satisfied with the exclusive title of the Por-
tuguefe, that he issued his orders in the terms which they
desired. Hackluyt, Navigations, Voyages, and Trafficks
of the English, vol. ii. part ii. p. 2.

NO T E XI. p. 59.

TH E time of Columbus's birth may be nearly ascertained
by the following circumstances. It appears from the fiag-
ment of a letter, addressed by him to Ferdinand and Ilabella,
A. D. 15or, that he had, at that lime, been engaged forty
years in a sea-faring life. In another letter, he informs
them, that he went to sea at the age of fourteen; from
those fads it follows, that he was born A. D. 1447. Life
of Christ. Columbus, by his ion Don Ferdinand. Churchill's
ColleCion of Voyages, vol. ii . . 84, .185.

lNOT'.

NOTE XII. p. 65.

T HE spherical figure of the earth was known to the
ancient geographers. They invented the method, fill in
use, of computing the longitude and latitude of different
places. According to their doctrine, the equator or ima-
ginary line which encompafes the earth contained three
hundred and sixty degrees; these they divided into twenty-
four parts, or hours, each equal to fifteen degrees. The
country of the Seres or Since being the farthest part of
India known to the ancients, was supposed, by Marinus
Tyrius, the molt eminent of the ancient geographers before
Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and twenty-
five degrees to the east of the firll meridian, passing thro'
the Fortunate Islands. Ptolemei Geogr. lib. i. c. i l. If
this supposition was well-founded, the country of the
Seres, or China, was only nine hours, or one hundred and
thirty-five degrees weft from the Fortunate, or Canary
Islands; and the navigation, in that direcion, was much
shorter than by the course which the Portugueze were pur-
suing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had described countries,
particularly the Island of Cipango or Zipangri, supposed
to be Japan, considerably to the eafl of any part of Asia,
known to the ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region. Ori-
ental. lib. ii. c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this country,
as it extended further to the east, was dtill nearer to the
Canary lflands. The conclusions of Columbus, though
drawn from inaccurate observations, were juit. If the
suppositions of Marinus had been well founded, and if the
countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been situated to
the eafl of those whole longitude Marinus had afccrtaine'
the proper and nearest courle to the East Indies muff h.
been to iccer direQly weft. Herrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. 2.
A more cxtenfive knowledge of the globe has nowdif-
covered the great error of Marinus, in supposing China to
be fifteen hours, oi two hundred and twenty-five degrees
cast from the Canary Islands, and that even Ptolemy was
mifiaken, when he reduced the longitude of China to
twelve hours, or one httndrcd andl eighty degrees. The

longitude

longitude of the western frontier of that vast empire is seven
hours, or one hundred and fifteen degrees from the me-
ridian of the Canary Islands. But Columbus followed the
light which his age afforded, and relied upon the authority
of writers, who were, at that time, regarded as the
inftrudcors and guides of mankind in the science of
geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 86.

As the Portugueze, in making their discoveries, did not
depart far from the coast of Africa, they concluded that
birds, whose flight they observed with great attention, did
not venture to any considerable difiance from land. In the
infancy of navigation, it was not known, that birds often
firetch their flight at an immense diflance from any land.
In failing towards the Weft-Indian Islands, birds are often
seen at the diflance of two hundred leagues from any land.
Sloane's Nat. Hist. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Catefby
saw an owl at sea, when the ship was fix hundred leagues
distant from land. Nat. Hill. of Carolina, pref. p. 7.
His. Naturelle de M. de Buffon, tom. xvi. p. 32. From
which it appears, that this indication of land, on which
Columbus seems to have relied with tome confidence, was
extremely uncertain.

NOT E XIV. p. 96.

IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Isabella,
he describes one of the harbours in Cuba with all the
enthufi:flic admiration cf a discoverer. - I discovered
,,iver which a galley might cafily enter; the beauty of it
i.:.'mccd me to found, and I found from five to eight fathoms
of water. Iaving proceeded a considerable way up the
river, every thing invited me to fettle there. The beauty
of the river, the clearnets of the water, through which I
could fee the sandy bottom, the mullitilde of palm.trees of
different kinds, the tallell an'd fine!} I had seen, and an
infinite number of other large and flourishing trees, the
birds, and the verdure of the plains, are Ib wonderfully

bcautiful,

beautiful, that this country excels all others as far as the
day furpaifes the night in brightness and splendour, so that
I often said, that it would be in vain for me to attempt to
give your highnesses a full account of it, for neither my
tongue nor my pen could come up to the truth, and indeed
I am so much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that I
know not how to defribe it." Life of Columbus, c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. Ioo.

TH E account which Columbus gives of the humanity
and orderly behaviour of the natives on this occasion is very
ffriking. "( The king (fays he, in a letter to Ferdinand
and Isabella) having been informed of our misfortune, ex-
pressed great grief for our loss, and immediately sent
aboard all the people in the place in many large canoes;
we soon unloaded the ship of every thing that was upon
deck,.as the king gave us great afliftance, he himself, with
his brothers and relations, took all possible care that every
thing should be properly done both aboard and on shore.
And, from time to time, he sent some of his relations
weeping, to beg of me not to be dejeced, for he would
give me all that he had. I can assure your highnesses,
that there would not have been so much care taken in
securing our effects in any part of Spain, as all our pro-
perty was put together in one place near his palace, until
the houses which he wanted to prepare for the cuflody of
it were emptied. He immediately placed a guard of armed
men, who watched during the whole night,. and tlioie on
shore lamented as if they had been much interefled in our
loss. The peopl are so affecionate, so tractable, ard so
peaceable, that I swear to your higlinefies, that there is
not a better race of men, nor a better country in lle
world. They love their neighbour as themselves; their
conversation is the fweetefl and mildefi in the wolid,
chcerlul, and always accompanied with a smile. And
although it is true that they go naked, yet your high-
neclTs may be aflured that they have many very cim-
mendable cufloms; the king is served with great nate,

and
d

and his behaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant to fee him,
as it is lik wife to observe the wonderful memory which
there people have, and their desire of knowing every thing,
which leads them to inquire into its causes and effects."
Life of Columbus, c.32. It is probable that the Spaniards
were indebted for this officious attention to the opinion
which the Indians entertained of them as a superior order
of beings.

NOT E XVI. p. o6.

]EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus is
valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and
Isabella, describing what passed on this occasion, exhibits
a most triking piaure of his intrepidity, his humanity,
his prudence, his public spirit, and courtly addrels.
" Iwould have been less concerned for this misfortune,
had I alone been in danger, both because my life is a debt
that I owe to the Supreme Creator, and because I have at
other times been exposed to the noof' imminent hazard.
But what gave me infinite grief and vexation was, that
after it had pleased our Lord to give me faith to undertake
this enterprize, in which I had now been so successful,
that my opponent would have been convinced, and the
glory of your highnesses, and the extent of your territory
increased by me; it fhoald please the Divine Mlajftly to
flop all by my death. All this would have been more to-
lerable, had it not been attended with the Iofs of those men
wl,om I had carried with me, upon promire of the greatefl
prosperity, who feeing themselves in such diltrefs, cursed
not only their coming along with me, but that fear and
awe for me, which prevented them from returning as they
often had resolved to have done. But besides all this, my
sorrow was greatly increased, by rec(lle&ing that I had
left my two sons at school at Cordova, deflitute of friends,
in a foreign country, when it could not in all probability he
known that I had done such services as might induce your
highnesses to remember them. And though I comforted
myself with the faith that our LTord would not permit that

VoL.. . F f which

which tended so much to the glory of his church, and
which I had brought about with so much trouble, to
remain imperfet, yet I confidered that, on account of my
fins, it was his will to deprive me of that glory which I
might have attained in this world. While in this confused
fate, I thought on the good fortune which accompanies
your highnesses, and imagined, that although I should
perilh, and the vessel be loft, it was possible that you might
somehow come to the knowledge of my voyage, and the
success with which it was attended. For that reason I
wrote upon parchment with the brevity which the situation
required, that I had discovered the lands which I promised,
in how many days I had done it, and what course I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country, the
character of the inhabitants, and that your highnesses sub-
jeEs were left in possession of all that I had discovered,
Having fealed this writing; I addressed it to your highnesses,
and promised a thousand ducats to any person who should
deliver it fealed, so that if any foreigners found it, the
promised reward might prevail on them not to give the
information to another. I then caused a great calk to be
brought to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an oiled
cloth, and afterwards in a cake of wax, I put it into the
calk, and having flopt it well, I cast it into the sea. All
the men believed that it was some ad of devotion. Imagining
that this might never chance to be taken up, as the ships
approached nearer to Spain, I made another packet like
the firfl, and placed it at the top of the poop, so that if
the ship funk, the cafle remaining above water might be
committed to the guidance of fortune."

N O T E XVII. p. io.

SOME Spanifll authors, with the meanness of national
jealousy, have endeavoured to detrac from the glory of
Columbus, by insinuating that he was led to the discovery
of the New World, not by his own ir.vent;ve, or enter-
prizinpg genius, but by information which he had received.
According to their account, a vcffel having been driven

froml

from its course by eaflerly winds was carried before them
far to the weft, and landed on the coalt of an unknown
country, from which it returned with difficulty; the pilot,
and three tailors, being the only persons of the crew that
survived the difrefles which they suffered, from want of
provisions, and fatigue in this long voyage. In a few days
after their arrival, all the four died; but the pilot havi-ng
been received into the house of Columbus, his intimate
fiiend, disclosed to him, before his death, the fecrct of the
discovery which he had accidentally made, and left him his
papers containing a journal of the voyage, which served as
a guide to Columbus in his undertaking. Gomara, as far
as I know, is the first author who published this flory,
Hist. c. i3. Every circumstance is destitute of evidence
to support it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its defli-
nation is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of
the sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to
the Canaries, or to Madeira; others, that it was a Bis-
cayner in its way to England; others, a Portugueze flip
trading on the coast of Guinea. The name of the pilot is
alike unknown, as well as that of the port in which he
landed on his return. According to some, it was in Por-
tugal; according to others, in Madeira, or the Azores.
The year in which this voyage was made is no less un-
certain. Monfon's Nav. Tracs. Churchill, iii. 371.
No mention is made of this pilot, or his discoveries, I1w
And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries ;ol
Columbus. Herrera, with his ufuai judgment, paifcs ox cr
it in silence. Oviedo takes notice of this report, hbt coln-
fiders it ts a tale fit only to amuse the vulgar. I-Iit. lib.
ii. c. 2. As Columbus held his course directly well from
the Canaries, and never varied it, some later authors have
fiippofed, that this i niformity is a proof of his being guided
by some previous information. LBut they do not recolleFt
the principles on which lie founded all his hopes of fticcefs,
that by holding a welerly course, he mulf certainly arrive
at thtle regions of the cast described by the antienis. -lis
firm belief of his own fyflem lcd him to take that courft,
and to pursue it without deviation.

I' f 2 OTrII;

OTHER nations, besides the Spaniards, have called in

quetlion Columbus's claim to the honour of having disco-
vered America. Some German authors ascribe it to
Martin Behaim, whom they suppose to be their country-
man. But they mention neither the year in which he
made the discovery, nor the place from which he failed,
nor one circumstance of the voyage. Jo. Frid. Stuvenius,
in a Dissertation de vero Novi Orbis Inventore, published
at Francfort in the year 1714, warmly asserts the title of
Behaim, but without producing in confirmation of it, any
thing that has even the shadow of evidence. There was
indeed a Martin de Boemia, a noted cosmographer in the
fifteenth century, whom Herrera mentions as a friend to
Columbus, dec. I. lib. i. c. 2. but he assures us that he
was born a Portugueze, and born in the island of Fayal,
one of the Azorcs. Ibid. and dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. Gomara
informs us, that Magellan was polrefled of a terrefirial
globe, made by this Martin de Boemia, on which he de-
monftrated the course he purposed to hold, in searching
for that frait which he afterwards discovered. Hifl. c. 19.
It seems probable, then, that the Germans have been
induced, merely by the name of this artist, to suppose him
a native of Bohemia, and on that supposition, have raised
t4ieir imaginary pretensions.

THOSE of the Welsh seem not to reft on a foundation

much more solid. In the twelfth century, according to
Powell, a dispute having arisen among the sons of Owen
Guynoth, king of North-Wales, concerning the fuccef-
sion to his crown, Madoc, one of their number, weary of
this contention, betook himself to sea in quest of a more
quiet lettlement. He fleered due weft, leaving Ireland to
the north, and arrived in an unknown country, which ap-
peared to him so desirable, that he returned to Wales, and
carried thither several of his adherents and companions.
This is said to have happened about the year 1170, and
after that, he and his colony were heard of no more.
But it is to be oblerved, that Powell, on whose testimony
the authenticity of this flory refls, publifled his hiflory
above four centuries frcm the date of the event which he
relates. Amolg a people Co rude and so illiterate as

tte

the Welsh, at that period, the memory of a tranfaaion so
remote mull have been very imperfectly preserved, and
would require to be confirmed by tome author of greater
credit, and nearer to the era of Madoc's voyage than
Powell. Later antiquaries have indeed appealed to the
testimony of Meredith ap Rhees, a Welsh bard, who died
A. D. 1477. But he too lived at such a distance of time
from the event, that he cannot be confidered as a witness
of much more credit than Powell. Besides, his verses
published by Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. I. convey no informa-
tion, but that Madoc, difTatisfied with his domeflic situ-
ation, employed himself in searching the ocean for new
possessions. But even if we admit the authenticity of
Povell's flory, it does not follow that the unknown coun-
try which Madoc discovered by fleering weft, in such a
course as to leave Ireland to the north, was any part of
America. The skill of the Welsh in the twelfth century
was hardly equal to such a voyage. If he made any disco-
very at all, it more probably might be Madeira, or fpme
other of the wefiern isles. The affinity of the Welsh
language with some diale&s spoken in America, has been
mentioned as a circumstance which confirms the truth of
Madoc's voyage. But that has been observed in so few
infiances, and in some of there the affinity is so obscure, or
so fanciful, that no conclusion can be drawn from the
casual resemblance of a small number of words. There is
a bird, which as far as is yet known, is found only on the
coafis of South America, from Port Desire to the Straits
of Magellan. It is difltinguifhed by the name of Penguin.
This word in the Welsh language signifies 14hbite-bead.
All the'authors who favour the pretensions of the Welsh
to the discovery of America, mention this as an irrefragable
proof of the affinity of the Welfn language with that spoken
in that region of America. But Mr. Pennant, who has
given a scientific description of the Penguin, observes, that
all the birds of that genus have black heads, " so that we
must resign every hope (adds he) founded on this hypothesis
of retrieving the Canmbian race in the New World."
Philof. TranfalI. vol. Iviii. p. qi, &c. Retide this, if the
Welfl, towards the close of the twelfth century, had
fettled in any part of America, some remains of the

F f 3 Chriflian

Christian docrine and rites mufl have been found among
their descendants, when they were discovered about three
hundred years posterior to their migration, a period so
short, that, in the course of it, we cannot well suppose
that all European ideas and arts would be totally forgotten.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery of

America, seem to be better founded than those of the Ger-
mans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scandinavia were
remarkable in the middle ages for the boldness and extent
of their maritime excursions. In 874, the Norwegians
discovered and planted a colony in Iceland. In 983, they
discovered Greenland, and eflablifhed settlements there.
From that, some of their navigators proceeded towards the
weft, and discovered a country more inviting than those
horrid regions with which they are acquainted. According
to their reprcfcntation, this country was sandy on the coasts,
but in the interior parts level and covered with wood, on
which account they gave it the name of Helle-land, and
Mark.land, and having afterwards found some plants of
the vine which bore grapes, they called it Win-land.
The credit of this flory refts, as far as I know, on the
authority of the Jaga, or chronicle of king Olaus, corn-
posed bv Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturlufons, published by
Perinfkiold at Stockho!i A. D. 1697. As Snorro was
born in the year T 79, his chronicle might be compiled
about two centuries after the event which he relates. His
account of the navigation and discoveries of Biorn, and his
companion Lief, is a very rude consuled tale, p. 104. 10o.
326. It is impoflible to diicover from him, what part of
America it was in which the Norwegians landed. Accord-
ing to his account of the length of the days and nights,
it mufl have been as far north as the fifty-eighth degree oi
latitude, on fbme part of the coast of Labradore, ap-
proaching near to the entry of Hudfor's Straits. Grapes,
certainly, are not the prodution of that country. Torfeun
litppofes hat there is an error in the text, by recifying o
which. the place where the Norwegians landed may bi
supposcd to be situated in latitude 490. Buit that is no
s!ic rcgion of the vine in America. From perutfin

S~le1' 1O

Snorro's tale, I should think that the situation of New-
foundland corresponds best with that of the country dif-
covered by the Norwegians. But grapes are not the pro-
duEtion of that barren island. Other conje&ures are
mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd. a 1'Hist. de Dannem,
175, &c. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the lite-
rature of the north, to examine them. It seems manifeil,
that if the Norwegians did discover any part of America at
that period, their attempts to plant colonies proved un-
successful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. r.

PETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentle-
man, who resided at that time in the court of Spain,
whose letters contain an account of the transactions of that
period, in the order wherein they occurred, describes the
sentiments with which he himself and his learned cor-
respondents were affected, in very firiking terms. " Prme
a1titiaprofiluiffe te, vixque a lachrymis prae gaudio tem-
peraffe, quando literas adfpexifti meas quibus, de anti-
podum orbe latenti hacaenus, te certiorem feci, mi
fuaviffime Pomponi, infinuafli. Ex tuis ipfe fiteris colligo,
quid fenferis. Senfifli autem, tantique rem fecifii, quanti
virum summa docrina infignitum decuit. Quis namque
cibus fublimibus pr2eftari protest ingeniis, iflo fuavior?
quod condimentum gratius? A me facio conjeCturam.
Beati fentio spiritus meos, quando accitos alloquor pru-
dentes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt provincia. Impli-
cent animos pecuniarum cumulis augendis mifcri avari,
libidinibus obfcceni; noftras nos mentes, pofiquam Dco
pleni aliquando fuerimus, contemplando, hujufcemodi rerum
notitia demulciamus." Epift. 152. Pomponio Lacto.

NOT E XIX. p. 12.

S firmly were men offcience, in that age, pcrfuandcd tliat
the countries which Columbus had dilCovered were cc(n-
ncQ.cd witl the Eaf-Indies, that Bernaldtls, the curate of

F f 4 Los

Los Palacios, who seems to have been no inconsiderable
proficient in the knowledge of cosmography, contends that
Cuba was not an island, but a part of the continent, and
united to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he deliver-
ed as his opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest for
fame time on his return from his second voyage; and he
supports it by several arguments, motly founded on the au-
thorityof Sir John Mandeville,MS. pens me. Antonio Gallo,
who was secretary to the magifiracy of Genoa towards the
close of the fifteenth century, published a short account of
the navigations and discoveries of his countryman Colum-
bus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica de rebus populi
Genuenfis; in which he inlorms us, from letters of Co-
lumbus which he himself had seen, that it was his opinion,
founded upon nautical observations, that one of the islands
le had discovered was distant only two hours or thirty
degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts of the
geographers of that age, was laid down, upon the autho-
rity of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. 3. as the roft easterly place in
Asia. From this he concluded, that if some unknown
continent did not obfiru't the navigation, there mull be a
short and easy access, by holding a westerly course, to this
extreme region of the East. Muratori Scriptores Rer.
Italicarum, vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. 17.

BF1RINAILDES, the curate de los Palacios, a contem-
porary writer, fays, that five hundred of these captives
were sent to Spain, and fold publicly in Seville as slaves;
but that, by the change of climate, and their inability to
bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in a flhort time,
MS. penes me.

NO TE XXI. p. 139.

COLUMBUS seems to have formed some very fingnlar
opinions concerning the countries which he hlnl now difctver-
ed. The violent fwcll and agitation of the waters on the coast

.

of Trinidad led him to conclude, that this was the highest
part of the terraqueous globe, and he imagined that various
circumfrances concurred in proving that the sea was here
visibly elevated. Having adopted this erroneous principle,
the apparent beauty of the country induced him to fall in
with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that the ter-
reltrial paradise was the highert land in the earth; and he
believed that he had been so fortunate as to discover this
happy abode. Nor ought we to think it firange that a
person of so much sagacity should be influenced by the
opinion or reports of such a fabulous author as Mandeville.
Columbus and the other discoverers were obliged to follow
such guides as they could find; and it appears from several
paflages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend
of Columbus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was
given to the'teflimony of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes
frequently quotes him, and always with refpet.

N O T E XXII. p. I50.

IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara or Oviedo, the
mnoft ancient Spanish historians of America, nor Herrera,
confider Hojeda, or his companion Vespucci, as the firfl
discoverers of the continent of America. They uniformly
ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some have supposed
that national resentment against Vespucci, for deserting the
service of Spain, and entering into that of Portugal, may
have prompted there writers to conceal the aEions which
he performed. But Martyr ard Benzoni, both Italians,
could not be warped by the fame prejudice. Martyr was
a contemporary author; he resided in the court of Spain,
and had the befi opportunity to be exa&ly informed with
refpea to all public tranfa&ions; and yet, neither in his
Decads, the first general hiflory published of the Newv
World, nor in his Epifiles, which contain an account of
all the remarkable events of his time, does he ascribe to
Vespucci the honour of having first discovered the conti-
nent. Benzoni went as an adventurer to America in the
year 1541, and resided there a considerable time. He
appears to have been animated with a warm zeal for the

honour

honour of Italy, his native country, and yet does not
mention the exploits and discoveries of Vespucci. Herrera,
who compiled his general history of America from the
toft authentic records, not only follows those early
Writers, but accules Vespucci of falsifying the dates of
both the voyages which he made to the New World, and
of confounding the one with the other, in order that he
might arrogate to himself the glory of having discovered
the continent. Her. dec. I. lib. iv. c. 2. He asserts, that
in a judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal fiscal,
it was proved by the testimony of Hojeda himself, that he
touched at Hispaniola when returning to Spain from his
first voyage; whereas Vespucci gave out that they returned
dire&ly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria, and touched at
Hispaniola only in their second voyage; and that he had
finifhied the voyage in five months; whereas, according
to Vespucci's account, he had employed seventeen months
in performing it. Viaggio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36.
Viag. fecundo, p. 45. Herrera gives a more full account
of this inquest in another part of his book, and to the fame
effe&. Her. dec. i. lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in
Iifpaniola when Hojeda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed
Hojeda's attempt to excite a new infurrecion, and, of
consequence, his voyage must have been posterior to that
of the admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84. According to
Vespucci's account, he set out on his firfi voyage May
loth, 1497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At that time Columbus
was in the court of Spain preparing for his voyage, and
seems to have enjoyed a considerable degree of favour.
The affairs of the New World were at this juncture under
the direcion of Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbus.
It is not probable, that at that period a commiflion would
be granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral,
by undertaking a voyage which he himself intended to
perform. Fonseca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted
the licence for his voyage, was not recalled to court, andt
reinftlated in the direcion of Indian affairs, until the deatl
of prince John, which happened September 1497, '
Martyr, Ep. 18z. fcveral months pofierior to the tim'

a

at which Vespucci pretends to have set out upon his
voyage. A life of Vespucci was pullifhed at Florence by
the Abate Bandini, A. D. 1745, 4to. It is a work of no
merit, written with little judgment, and less candour. He
contends for his countryman's title to the discovery of the
continent with all the blind zeal of national partiality, but
produces no new evidence to support it. We learn from
him, that Vespucci's account of his voyage was published
as early as the year 15So, and probably sooner. Vitadi
Am. Vefp. p. 52. At what time the name of AMERICA
came to be firfl given to the New World, is not certain.

NOTE XXIII. p. 192.

T H E form employed on this occasion served as a model
to the Spaniards in all their subsequent conquets in
America. It is so extraordinary in its nature, and gives
us such an idea of the proceedings of the Spaniards, and
the principles upon which they founded their right to the
extensive dominions which they acquired in the New
World, that it well merits the attention of the reader.
" I Alonfo de Hojeda, servant of the most high and
powerful kings of Caflile and Leon, the conquerors of
barbarous nations, their messenger and captain, notify to
you and declare, in as ample form as I am capable, that
God our Lord, who is one and eternal, created the
heaven and the earth, and one man and one woman, of
whom you and we, and all the men who have been or
shall be in the world, are descended. But as it has come
to pass, through the number of generations during more
than five thousand years, that they have been dispersed
into different parts of the world, and are divided into
various kingdoms and provinces, because one country was
not able to contain them, nor could they have found in
one the means of fibfiftence and preservation; therefore
God our Lord gave the charge of all those people to one
man, named St. Peter, whom he conltituted the lord and
head of all the human race, that all men, in whatever
place they are born, or in whatever faith or place they
arc educated, might yield obedience unto him. He hath

fubje.ed

fubje6ed the whole world to his juridiftion, and com-
manded him to establish his residence in Rome, as the mooi
proper place for the government of the world. He like-
,wife promised and gave him power to establish his autho-
rity in every other part of the world, and to judge and
govern all Christians, Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all
other people, of whatever fe& or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope, which signifies admirable,
great father and guardian, because he is the father and
governor of all men. Those who lived in the time of
this holy father obeyed and acknowledged him as their
lord and king, and the superior of the universe. The
fame has been observed with refpee to them who, since
his time, have been chosen to the pontificate. Thus it
now continues, and will continue to the end of the world.

"c ONE of there pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath

made a grant of there islands, and of the Terra Firma of
the ocean tea, to the Catholic kings of Castile, Don
Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, of glorious memory, and
their successors, our sovereigns, with all they contain, as
is more fully expressed in certain deeds passed upon that
occasion, which you may fee if you desire it. Thus his
majelty is king and lord of these islands, and of the Terra
Firma, in virtue of this donation; and, as king and lord
aforesaid, mod of the islands to which his title hath been
notified, have recognized his majesty, and now yield
obedience and fuhjeEtion to him as their lord, voluntarily
and without resistance; and inflantly, as soon as they
received information, they obeyed the religious men sent
by the king to preach to them, and to inflrua them in
our holy faith; and all there, of their own free-will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Christians,
and continue to be to; and his majetly having received
them graciously under his protection, has commanded
that they liould be treated in the fame manner as his other
subje.s and vassals. You are hound and obliged to aE in
the fame manner. Therefore I now entreat and require
you to confider attentively what I have declared to you;
and that you may more perfecly comprehend it, that you

tlke

take such time as is reasonable, in order that you may
acknowledge the Church as the superior and guide of the
universe, and likewise the holy father called the Pope, in
his own right, and his majeily by his appointment, as
king and sovereign lord of there islands, and of the Terra
Firma; and that you consent that the aforesaid holy
fathers shall declare and preach to .you the dotrines above
mentioned. If you do this, you ac well, and perform
that to which you are bound and obliged; and his majesty,
and I in his name, will receive you with love and kindness,
and will leave you, your wives and children, free and
exempt from servitude, and in the enjoyment of all you
possess, in the fame manner as the inhabitants of the
islands. Besides this, his majefly will bestow upon you
many privileges, exemptions, and rewards. But if you
will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey my injunc-
tion, then, with the help of God, I will enter your
country by force, I will carry on war againfl you with the
utmoit violence, I will subjed you to the yoke of obedience
to the church and the king, I will take your wives and
children, and will make them slaves, and tell or dispose of
hem according to his majesty's pleasure; I will s'ize your
goods, and do you all the mischief in my power, as
rebellious fubjets, who will not acknowledge or submit to
their lawful sovereign. And I protest, that ail the bicod-
ihed and calamities which shall follow are to be imputed to
you, and not to his majesty, or to me, cr the gentlemen
who serve under me; and as I have now made this decla-
ration and requisition unto you, I require the notary here
present to grant me a certificate ol this, fub!cribed in
proper form." lc-riera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 14.

N O T XXIV . p o5.

BALBOA, in his letler to the king, ohferves, that of
the hundred and ninety men whom he itok with him,
there were never above eighty fit cr fc-rvice at ore time.
So much did they fitffier f'll hurni f

' , fatigue, and sickies:.
llcrrera, dec. i, lib. x. c. 1. 1'. \ lirt. decad. p. 226.

NOTE

NOTE XXV. p.217.

SONSEC A, bishop of Palencia, the principal director
of American affairs, had eight hundred Indians in pro-
perty; the commendator Lope de Conchillos, his chief
associate in that department, eleven hundred; and other
favourites had different numbers. They sent overseers to
the islands, and hired out those slaves to the planters
Herr. dec. i, lib. ix, c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 239.

T'LHOUGH America is more plentifully supplied with
water than the other regions of the globe, there is no
river or fiream of water in Yucatan. This peninsula pro-
jects from the continent a hundred leagues, but, where
broadefr, does not extend above twenty-five leagues. It
is a flat plain, without mountains. The inhabitants are
supplied with water from pits, and wherever they dig
them, find it in abundance. It is probable, from all those
circumstances, that this country was formerly covered
by the sea. Herrerse Defcriptio Indise Occidentalis, p. 14.
Hifloire Naturelle, par M. de Buffon, tom. I. p. 593.

N O T E XXVII. p. 249.

T HE height of the moR elevated point in the Pyrenees
is, according to M. Caflini, fix thousand fix hundred and
forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi, in
the canton of Berne, is ten thousand one hundred and ten
feet. The height of the Pike of Teneriffe, according to
the measurement of P. Feuilld, is thirteen thousand one
hundred and feventy-eight feet. The height of Chim.
borazo, the moll elevated point of the Andes, is twenty
thousand two hundred and eighty feet. Voyage de D
Juan Ulloa, Observations Aaroo. ct Phyfiq. torn. ii
p. 114. The height of that part of Chimborazo whici

is covered perpetually with snow, is two thousand four
hundred feet. Prevot. Hist. Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii.
p.636.

N O T E XXVIII. p. 249.

A s a particular description makes a fironger impression
than general assertions, I shall give one of Rio de la Plata
by an eye-witness. P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe jesuit, landed
at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus repr.esents what he felt
when such new objecs were firfl presented to his view.
c While I resided in Europe, and read in books of hiflory
or geography that the mouth of the river De la Plata was
an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I confidered it as
an exaggeration, because in this hemisphere we have no
example of such vast rivers. When I approached its
mouth, I had the most vehement desire to ascertain the
truth with my own eyes, and I have found the matter to
be exaaly as it was represented. This I deduce particu-
larly from one circumstance: When we took our depar-
ture from Monte-Video, a fort situated more than a
hundred miles from the mouth of the river, and where its
breadth is considerably diminished, we failed a complete
day before we discovered the land on the opposite bank of
the river; and when we were in the middle of the channel,
we could not discern land on either fide, and saw nothing
but the fly and water, as if we had been in some great
ocean. Indeed, we (hould have taken it to be Tea, if the
frefl water of the river, which was turbid like the Po,
had not satisfied us that it was a river. Moreover, at
Buenos Ayres, another hundred miles up the river, and
where it is till much narrower, one cannot discern the
opposite coast, which is indeed very low and flat; but one
cannot perceive the houses or the tops of the fleeples in
the Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other fide of
the river." Lettera prima, publiihed by Muratori, Il
Chriflianefimo Felicc, &c. i. p. 25 7.

NOTE

N O T E XXIX. p. 252.

N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and
Canada, are the countries which lie in the fame parallel of
latitude with the kingdom of France; and in all of them
the water of the rivers is frozen during winter to the
thickness of several feet; the earth is covered with snow as
deep; almost all the birds fly, during that season, from a
climate where they could not live. The country of the
Elkimaux, part of Labrador, and the countries on the
south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fame parallel with
Great Britain; and yet in all these the cold is so intense,
that even the industry of Europeans has not attempted
cultivation.

NO T E XXX. p. Z54.

ACOSTA is the firfl philosopher, as far as I know,
who endeavoured to account for the different degrees of
heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of the
winds which blow in each. Hill. Moral. &c. lib. ii. & iii.
M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not only im-
proved it by new observations, but has employed his
amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing
and placing it in the modt friking light. Some remarks
may be added, which tend to illustrate more fully a
doctrine of much importance in every inquiry concerning
the temperature of various climates.

WVHiN a cold wind blows over land it muil in its

paflage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it continue
to blow in the fame direcion, it will come, by degrees,
to pass over a surface already cooled, and will susser no
longer any abatement of its own keenness. Thus, as it
advances over a large traC of land, it brings on all the
severity of intense frofl.

LE.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

sea; the superficial water mult be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warmed.
But the superficial and colder water becoming specifically
heavier than the warmer water below it, descends;
what is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes
to be cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which
passes over it, or to diminish its cold. This change of
the superficial water, and fuccefiive ascent of that which
is warmer, and consequent fuccefiive abatement of cold-
ness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the sea
by the mechanical ation of the wind, and also by the
motion of the tides. This will go on, and the rigour
of the wind will continue todiminifi until the whole wa-
ter is so far cooled, that the water on the surface is no
longer removed from the action of the wind, fait enough
to hinder it from being arrested by frotl. Whenever the
surface freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the wa-
ter from below, and it goes on with undiminithed cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity

of winter frosts in extensive continents; their mildness
in small islands; and the superior rigour of winter in
those parts of North America with which we are belt
acquainted. In the north-west parts of Europe, the ie-
verity of winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which
ufilally blow in the months of November, December,
and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which muff therefore cease to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat

of the wind or air pafling over it, proceeds i'omn the tol-
lowing circumfiance, that on account of the tranfpl:ircncy of
the sea, its fiurf.ce cannot be heated to a great degree by
the fun's rays; whereas the tgl ound, fllbjecild to thlir in-

VOL. I. G g fluCnce,

fluence, very soon acquires great heat. When therefore,
the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon raised,
to a heat almost intolerable; but during its pa{lage over
an extensive ocean, it is gradually cooled; so that on its
arrival at the farthest shore, it is again fit for respiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats

of large continents, in the torrid zone; for the mild
climate of islands in the fame latitude; and for the fu-
perior warmth in summer which large continents, situ-
ated in temperate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy,
when compared with that of islands. The heat of a
climate depends not only upon the immediate effet of
the fun's rays, but on their continued operation, on the
effect which they have formerly produced, and which
remains for tome time in the ground. This is the rea-
son why the day is warmest about two in the afternoon,
the summer warmest about the middle of July, and the
winter coldest about the middle of January.

TH E forests which cover America, and hinder the fun-

beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the
temperate climate of the equatorial parts. The ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the ground, have
not a mars of matter sufficient to absorb heat enough for
this purpose. Besides, it is a known fa&, that the ve-
getative power of a plant occasions a perspiration from the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are ex-
posed; and, from the nature of evaporation, this per-
fpiration produces a cold in the leaf proportional to the
perspiration. Thus the effect of the leaf in hating the
air in contact with it, is prodigiously diminiflied. For
those observations, which throw much additicnal light
on this curious subjea, I am indebted to my ingenious
friend, Mr. Robifon, rrofefor of natural philo(ophy in
the univcrfity of Edinburgh.

NOTF

NOTE XXXI. p. 255.

THE climate of Brasil has been described by two
eminent naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who observed
it with a philosophical accuracy, which, we desiderate
in the accounts of many other provinces in America.
Both represent it as temperate and mild, when compared
with the climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly
to the refreshing wind which blows continually from
the sea. The air is not only cool, but chilly through
the night, in so much that the natives kindle fires every
evening in their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafilienfi,
lib. i. p. i, &c. Margravius Hiflor. Rerum Natural
Brafilie, lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who re-
fided long in Brasil, confirms their description. Churchill's
Colle&ion, vol. ii. p. 26. Gumilla, who resided many
years in the country, upon the river Orinoco, gives a
similar description of the temperature of the climate
there. Hist. de l'Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna
felt a very considerable degree of cold in the countries
on the banks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p.
56. M. Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayen-
ne, gives a similar account of the temperature of that
climate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage de
la France, Equinox, p. 330. Nothing can be more
different from there descriptions than that of the burn-
ing heat of the African coast given by M. Adanfon.
Voyage to Senegal, paflim.

THE moil obvious and probable cause of this fil-

perior degree of cold, towards the foutercn extremity
of America, fcmees to be the form of the continent
there. Its breadth gradually decreases as it firetches
from St. Antonio southwards, and from the hay of St.
Julian to the Str;iits of MTagellan its dimrniions are
much contraclted. On the cafi and wvetl fides, it is
waflhcd by the Atlantic anrd Pacific Oceans. Flrom its
fouthcrn point it is probable that an open fac:t ritlchcs to
the Antartic pole. In whichever of thlcle (irtelions the
wind blows, it is cooled before it approaches the Ma-
gcllanic rcgions, by palling over a vail: body of water,

G g 2 or

nor ic the land there of such extent that it can recover
any considerable degree of heat in its progress over it.
These circumfiances concur in rendering the tempera-
ture of the air in this district of America, more fimi-
lar to that .of an insular, than to that of a con-
tinental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the fame
degree of summer heat, with places in Europe and Asia,
in a corresponding northern latitude. The north wind
is the only one that reaches this part of America, after
blowing over a great continent. But from an attentive
survey of its position, this will be found to have a ten-
dency, rather to diminish than augment the degree of
heat. The southern extremity of America is properly
the termination of the immense ridge of the Andes,
which stretches nearly in a direa line from north to
south, through the whole extent of the continent.
The mofi sultry regions in South-America, Guiana,
Brasil, Paraguay, and Tucuman, lie many degrees to
the east of the Magellanic regions. The level country
of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situated
considerably to the weft of them. The north wind
then, though it blows over land, does not bring to the
southern extremity of America, an increase of heat
colleced in its passage over torrid regions, but before it
arrives there, it must have swept along the summits of
the Andes, and come impregnated with the cold of
that frozen region.

NOTE XXXII. p. 256.

TW O French frigates were sent upon a voyage of
discovery in the year 1 79. In latitudc 440 south,
they began to feel a confidcrable degree of cold. In
latitude 480, they met with iOlands of floating ice.
Hifloirc des Navigations aux Terres Atilrales, ton. ii.
256, &c. Dr, Hlalley fell in with ice in latitude 59".
Id. tom. i. p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the
coast of Patagonia, latittde 5('° 33' south, on the
fifteenth of December, which is midfiummcr in that
part of the globe, the twcnty-fillt of D)ccember being
the longest day there, compares the climate to that or
England in the middle of winter. Voyages by llawkcf-

worthl,

worth, i. 25. Mr. Banks having landed at Terradel
Fuego in the Bay of Good Success, latitude 55°, on
the sixteenth of January, which corresponds to the
month of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants
died in one night of extreme cold, and all the party
were in the most imminent danger of perifiling. Id. ii.
51, 52. By the fourteenth of Mlarch, corrcfponding
to September in our hemisphere, winter was set in with
rigour, and the mountains were covered with snow-.
Ibid. 72.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 258.

M . CONDAMIN E is one of the latest and moll
accurate observers of the interior slate of South-America.
" After descending from the Andes (fays he) one be-
holds a vast and uniform profpet of water and ver-
dure, and nothing more. One treads upon the earth,
but does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with
luxuriant plants, weeds, and flirubs, that it would re-
quire a considerable degree of labour to clear it, for
the space of a foot. Relation abreg6 d'un Voyage,
&c. p. 48. One of the singularities in the forefis is a
fort of osiers, or withs, called bejucos by the Spaniards,
and lianes by the French, and nibbees by the Indians,
which are usually employed as ropes in America. Thlis
plant twists about the trees which it meets with, and
rising above their highelt branches, its tendiils defeends
perpendicularly, itrike into the ground, take root, life
up around another tree, and thus mount and (ldclend
alternately. Other tendrils are carried obliquely by the
wind, or some accident, and lorm a confusion of inter-
woven cordage, which resembles the rigging of a lhip.
Barcroft, Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 99. Thc' v'iths
are often as thick as the arm ol a man. b. p. 5.
M. Bouguer's account of the forcfis in Peru pcrfcClly
resembles this d(clription. 'oy)agc au Peiru, p. 16.
Oviedo gives a similar dclfciption of the forcfls in oihler
parts of America. 1-ift. lib. ix. p. 14. . 1. he
country of the Moxos is sI mtuc overflo\wed, that they
arc obliged to refidc on the ftiumiit of foamic rfiring 1ground

dtl uing'

during some part of the year, and have no communi-
cation with their countrymen at any distance. Lettres
Edifiantes, tom. x. p. 187. Garcia gives a full and
just description of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marshes
in those countries of America which lie between the
tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. §. 4, 5.
The incredible hardships to which Gonzalez Pizarro
was exposed in attempting to march into the country to
the east of the Andes, gives a very firiking idea of that
part of America in its original uncultivated t(ate. Gar-
cil. de la Vega, Royal. Comment. of Peru, part ii,
book iii. c. 2-5.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 26o.

TH E animals of America seem not always to have
been of a size inferior to those in other quarters of the
globe. Near the banks of the Ohio, a considerable
number of bones of an immense magnitude have been
found. The place where this discovery has been made
lies about one hundred and ninety miles below the junc-
tion of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about
four miles distant from the banks of the latter, on the
fide of the marfl called the Great Salt Lick. The bones
lie on vast quantities about five or fix feet under ground,
and the stratum is visible in the bank on the edge of the
Lick. Yournal of Colonel George Croglan, MS. penes
me. This spot seems to be accurately laid down by
Evans in his map. These bones must have belonged to
animals of enormous bulk, and naturalifis being acquaint-
ed with no living creature of such size, were at firtf
inclined to think that they were mineral fubftanccs.
Upon receiving a greater number of specimens from
various parts of the earth, and after inspecting them
more narrowly, they arc now allowed to be the bones
of in anilmal. As the elephant is the largest known
quad'llrup, und lthe tulks which were found nearly re-
iembled, both in form and quality, the tusks of an ele-
phant, it was concluded that the carcases deposited on
the Ohio were of that fpccics. But Dr. -Iunter, one of

tle

the persons of our age belt qualified to decide with re-
fpeEt to this point, having accurately examined several
parcels of tusks, and grinders, and jaw-bones, sent from
the Ohio to London, gives it as his opinion, that they
did not belong to an elephant, but to some huge carni-
vorous animal of an unknown species. Phil. Tranfad.
vol. Iviii. p. 34. Bones of the fame kind, and as re-
markable for their size, have been found near the mouths
of the great rivers, Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena, in Siberia.
Stralhrenberg, Defcript. of north and ealj Parts of
Europe and Ifia, p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to
be confined in his range to the torrid zone, and never
multiplies beyond it. In such cold regions as thore
bordering on the frozen sea, he could not live. The
exiflence of such large animals in America might open
a wide field for conjecure. The more we contemplate
the face of nature, and confider the variety of her pro-
ducions, the more we must be satisfied that aflonifh-
ing changes have been made in the terraqueous globe by
convulsions and revolutions, of which no account is
preserved in hitfory.

NOTE XXXV. p. 261.

THI S degeneracy of the domefsic European animals
in America ought to be imputed partly to each of there
causes. In the Spanilh fettlcments, which are situated
either within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering
upon it, the incrcafe of heat, and diversity of food,
prevent sleep and horned cattle from attaining the faime
size as in Europe. They seldom become so fat, and
their flesh is not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour.
In North-America, where the climate is more flvoura-
ble, and similar to that of EIurope, the quality of the
graffes which spring up naturally in their palnurc-grounds
is not good. Mitchell, p. 51t. Agriculture is still so
much in its inlfncy, that aitificial food for cattle is not
railed in any (ltinltity. During a winter, long in many
provinces, and rigorous in all, no proper care is taken
of their cattle. The general treatment of their horl's
and horned cattle is iniidiciouts ad harih in all the

En$lilh

Englifli colonies. These circumstances contribute more,
perhaps, than any thing peculiar in the quality of the
climate, to the degeneracy of breed in the horses, cows,
and sheep, in most of its provinces.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 261.

IN the year 518, the island of Hispaniola was affliced
with a dreadful visitation of those deftruaive infects, the
particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions
a singular inrtance of the fuperflition of the Spanish
planters. After trying various methods of extermiating
the ants, they resolved to implore protection of the
faints, but as the calamity was new, they were at a
loss to find out the faint who could give them the molf
effeaual aid. They cast lots in order to discover the
patron whom they should invoke. The lots decided in
favour of St. Saturninus. They celebrated his feflival
with great solemnity, and immediately, adds the hifto-
rian, the calamity began to abate. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib. iii, c. 5. p. 107,

NOT , XXXVII. p. 263.

T1-1 E author of Rechcrches Philofophiques fur les
Americains supposes this difference in heat to be equal
to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from
the equator in the old continent, is as warm as one situ-
ted eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i. p. i i.
Dr. Mitchell, after observations carried on during thirty
years, contends that the difference is equal to fourteen
or fiiteen degrees of latitude. Prefcnt State, &c. p. 257.

N O T E XXXVIII. p. 263.

JANU A R Y 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head
ol St. John's river in East Florida, obfcrvcd a frost so in-
tenfc, that in one night, the ground was frno.cn an
inch thick upon the banks of the river. The limes, ci-
trons, and banana trees, at St. Augufline were deltroycd.

Bcrtranm's

Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other inflances of the ex-
traordinary operations of cold in the southern provinces
of North-America are colle.ced by Dr. Mitchell. Pre-
sent State, p. 206, &c. February 7th, I 71 7, thefroff
at Charleftown was so intense, that a person having
carried two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the
morning they were split to pieces, and the water solid
lumps of ice. In a kitchen where there was a fire, the
water in a jar, in which there was a large live eel, was
frozen to the bottom. Almost all the orange and olive
trees were destroyed. Description of South-Carolina,
8vo. Lond. 1761.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 264.

A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch
Guiana, a country every where level, and so low, that
during the rainy seasons it is usually covered with water
near two feet in height. This renders the foil so rich,
that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a
itratum of perfet manure, and as such has been tranf-
ported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo,
thirty crops of ratoon canes have been raised fucceflive-
ly, whereas in Weit-Indian islands more than two is
never expeced. The expedients by which the planters
endeavour to diminifl this excefiive tertility of foil are
various. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. to, &c.

NOT E XL. p. 274,

M U L LE R seems to have believed, without fuffi-
cicnt evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom.
i. pl i, &c. and the Imperial Academy of St. Peters-
burgh give some countenance to it, by the manner in
which Tc/huktkoifjoi-nofs is laid down in their charts.
But I am allured, from undoubted authority, that no
Ruflian vessel has ever failed round that cape, and as
the country of 7jbhutiki is not filbject to the Rufflian
empire, it is very imperfectly known.

NOTE

NOTE XLI. p. 276.

WE R E this the place for entering into a long and
intricate geographical disquisition, many curious obfer-
vations might arise from comparing the accounts of the
two Ruffian voyages, and the charts of their refpe&ive
navigations. One remark is applicable to both. We
cannot rely with absolute certainty on the position which
they assign to several of the places which they visited.
The weather was so extremely foggy, that they feldoln
saw the fun or flars, and the position of the islands and
supposed continents was commonly determined by reck-
oning, not by observation. Beering and Tfchirikow
proceeded much farther towards the east than Krenitzin.
The land dicovered by Beering, which he imagined to
be part of the American continent, is in the 236th de-
gree of longitude from the first meridian in the isle of
Ferro, and in 58° 28" of latitude. Tfchirikow came
upon the fame coast in longit. 241°, lat. 56°. Muller,
i. 248, 249. The former mult have advanced 60 de-
grees from the port of Petropawlowika, from which he
took his departure, and the latter 65 degrees. But
from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it appears that
he did not fail farther towards the east than the 2Soth
degree, and only 32 degrces from I'ctropavlowfka. In
I741, Beering and Tfchirikow, both in going and re-
turning, held a course which was mofily to the south of
that chain of islands which they discovered, and observing
the mountainous and rugged alpca of the head-lands
which they dercried towards the norlth, they supposed
them to be promontories belonging to Ibme part of the
American continent, which, as they fancied, tlretchcd
as far south as the latitude 56. In this manner they are
laid down in the chart publifled by Muller, and likewise
in a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of Beering's fiip,
communicated to me by Mr. Profcffor Robifon. But
in 1769, Krcnit.in, after winterina in tlhe iflandAlaxi,
flood so far towards the north in his return, that his
course lay through the middle of wlhat tlt.y h ad fnpplrotd
to be a continent, which le fotund to be an open

fcd,,

sea, and that they had miflaken rocky isles for the head-
lands of a continent. It is probable, that the countries
discovered in 1741, towards the east, do not belong to
the American continent, but are only a continuation of
the chain of islands. From the extreme fummcr cold of
all those isles, one is led to conje,&ure that no large con-
tinent lies very near to them. The number of volcanos
in this region of the globe is remarkable. There are fe-
veral in Kamfcliatka, and not one of the islands, great
or fimall, as far as the Rufflan navigation extends, is
without them. Many are atually burning, and the
mountains in all bear marks of having been once in a
state of eruption. Were 1 disposed to admit fuich con-
jeCtures as have found place in other inquiries concern-
ing the peopling of America, I might suppose that his
part of the earth, having suffered violent convuliions
from earthquakes and volcanos, an isthmus, which may
have formerly united Asia to America, has been broken,
and formed into a clutter of islands by the shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian na-

vigators were attempting to make discoveries in the
north-west of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting
the fame design from another quarter. In I769, two
miall vessels failed from Loretto in California to explore
the coafhs of the country to the north of that peninsula.
They advanced no farther than the port of Montc-Rcy
in latitude 36. But, in several fucceflive expeditions
fitted out from the port of St. Bias in New Galicia, the
Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58. Ga-
zeta de MIadrid, March 19, and May 14, 1 776. But
as the journals of those voyages have not vet been pub-
liflied, I cannot compare their progress with that of the
Ruffians, or flcw how near the navigators of the two
nations have approached to each other. It is to be hoped,
that the enlightened minifler, who has now the (lircetii
of American affairs in Spain, will not withhold this in--
firmation froro the public.

NOTE

NO T E XLII. p. 290.

FE W travellers have had such opportunity of obferv-
ing the natives of America, in its various difiriats, as
Don Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately published by him,
he thus describes the characteriftical features of the race:
"a very small forehead, covered with hair towards its
extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; lit-
tle eyes; a thin nose, small and bending towards the
upper lip; the countenance broad; the ears large; the
hair very black, lank, and coarse; the limbs well turn-
ed, the feet small, the body of just proportion; and al-
together smooth and free from hair, until old age, when
they acquire some beard, but never on the cheeks."
Noticias Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier
Pinto, who resided several years in a part of America
which Ulloa never visited, gives a sketch of the general
afpe6 of the Indians there. " They are all of a cop-
per colour, with some diversity of shade, not in propor-
tion to their distance from the equator, but according
to the degree of elevation of the territory which they in-
habit. Those who live in a high country are fairer than
those in the marshy low, lands on the coat. Their face
is round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any
people from an oval shape, Their forehead is small, the
extremity of their ears far from the face, their lips thick,
their note flat, their eyes black, or of a chefiut colour,
small, but capable of discerning objets at a great dif-
tance. Their hair is always thick and fleck, and with-
out any tendency to curl. They have no hair on any
part of their body but the head. At the first aspet, a
southern American appears to be mild and innocent, but
on a more attentive view one discovers in his countenance
something wild, diltruftful, and fullen." MS. penes le.
The two portraits, drawn by hands very different fiom
those of common travellers, have a near rcfemblancc.

N OTE

NOTE XLIII. p. 290.

A M A Z IN G accounts are given of the perfever-
ing speed of the Americans. Adair relates the adven-
tures of a Chikkafah warrior, who run through woods
and over mountains, three hundred computed miles in a
day and a half and two nights. Hist. of Amer. Ind. 396.

NOTE XLIV. p. 294.

I. GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years
among the Indians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years
in the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a
conflant intercourse with the Galibis, and other tribes on
the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of constitution
among the Americans is exatly in proportion to their
habits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such
as those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of
Amazons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be compared
for flrength with those in cold countries; and yet, fays
he, boats daily set out from Para, a Portuguese fettle-
ment on the river Amazons, to ascend that river againfl
the rapidity of the fiream, and with the fame crew they
proceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues
distant. No crew of white people, or even of negroes,
would be found equal to a talk of such persevering fa-
tigue, as the Portuguese have experienced, and yet the
Indians being accultomed to this labour from their in-
fancy, pcrform it. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLV. p. 300.

D ON ANTONIO 1I. i. oA, who visitcd a great part
of Peru and Cliili, the ]-i' idima of New Granada, and
fcvcral of the provinc s Io,4ki riii on he Mxican G lph,
while emplloy)( l in lic 1l.ii lIlrvicc with the French
mathematicians dluring the Ijrcc ot ten years, and who

afterwards

afterwards had an opportunity of viewing the North.
Americans, aflerts, " that if we have seen one Ameri-
can, we may be said to have seen them all, their colour
and make are so nearly the fame." Notic. Americanas,
p. 308. A more early observer, Pedro de Ciera de
Leon, one of the conquerors of Peru, who had like-
wife traversed many provinces of America, affirms, that
the. people, men and women, although there is such a
multitude of tribes or nations as to be almnoft innumer-
able, and such diversity of climates, appear nevertheless
like the children of one father and mother. Chronica
del' Peru, parte i. c. 19. There is, no doubt, a certain
combination of features, and peculiarity of aspet, which
forms what may be called a European or Asiatic coun.
tenance. There mudt likewise be one that may be de-
nominated American, common to the whole race. This
may be supposed to firike the traveller at firfl fight,
while the various shades which distinguish people, of
different regions, escape his observation. But when
persons who had resided so long among the Americans
concur in bearing testimony to the similarity of their ap-
pearance in every climate, we may conclude that it is
more remarkable than that of any other race. See like-
wife Garcia Origen de los Indies, p. 54. 242. Torque-
mada Monarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

NOTE XLVI. p. 301.

M * LE CHEVALIER DS. PINTO observes, that in
the interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that
some persons refcmbling the white people of Darien have
been found; but that the breed did not continue, and
their children became like other Americans. 'his
race, however, is but very impcrfeely known. MIS.
penes mne.

NO TE XLVII p. 304.

T I E1 teltimonies of diffcrent travellers, concern-
ing the Pat.igonians, have been collcted and llaied
with a coniilcral)lc degree of accuracy by the authtor
of Recherchcs 'hilofophiqucs, &c. tom. i. 28 , &c.

iii.

iii. 181, &c. Since the publication of his work, feve-
ral navigators have visited the Magellanic regions, and,
like their predecessors, differ very widely in their ac-
counts of its inhabitants. By Commodore Byron and
his crew, who failed through the Straits in 1 764, the
common size of the Patagonians was estimated to be eight
feet, and many of them much taller. Phil. TranfaFt.
vol. Ivii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and Carteret, who
a&ually measured them in 1 766, they were found to be
from fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height.
Phil. Tranf. vol. Ix. p. 22. These seem to have been
the very people whose size had been so much over-rated
in the year 1764; for several of them had beads and red
baize of the fame kind with what had been put aboard
Captain Wallis's ship, and he naturally concluded that
they had got these from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In
1767 they were again measured by M. Bougainville,
whose account agrees nearly with that of Captain Wal-
lis. Voy. 129. To these I shall add a teflimony of
great wyeight. In the year i 762, Don Bernardo Ibagne.
de Echavarri accompanied the Marquis de Valdelirios to
Buenos Ayres, and resided there several years. He ii
a very intelligent author, and his reputation for veracity
unimpeached among his countrymen. In speaking of
the country towards the southern extremity of America,
" By what Indians," fays he, " is it possessed ? Not
certainly by the fabulous Patagonians, who are supposed.
to occupy this diftric. I have from many eye-witnefles,
who have lived among those Indians, and traded much
with them, a true and accurate description of their per-
sons. They are of the fame stature with Spaniards. I
never saw one who rose in height two varas and two or
three inches," i. e. about 80 or 81. 332 inches Englifli,
if Echavarri makes his computation according to the vara
of Mladrid. This agrees nearly with the meafulement
of Captain Wallis. Reyno Jeluitico, 238. Mr. Falk-
ner, who resided as a miflionary forty years in the sou.th-
crn parts of America, fitys, that " the Patagonians, or
Puclchcs, are a large-bodied people; but I never heard
of that gigantic race which others have mentioned,
though I have een persons of all the diflfercnt tribes of
fouthcrn Indians." Introd. p. 26.

NOT' E

NOTE XLVIII. p. 308.

A NTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and in-
genious physician, published a dissertation in the year
1765, in which he endeavours to prove, that this dif-
ease was not introduced from America, but took its rife
in Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical and
malignant disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a difqui-
fition on this subjeCt, which I should not have men-
tioned, if it had not been intimately connected with
this part of my inquiries, it would not be difficult to
point out some mistakes with refpea to the fads upon
which he founds, as well as some errors in the confe-
quences which he draws from them. The rapid com-
munication of this disease from Spain over Europe, seems
to resemble the progress of an epidemic, rather than that
of a disease transmitted by infeEtion. The first mention
of it is in the year 1493, and before the year 1497 it had
made its appearance in most countries of Europe, with
such alarming symptoms as rendered it necessary for the
civil magiffrate to interpose, in order to check its career.

NOTE XLIX. p. 311.

T HE people of Otaheite have no denomination for
any number above two hundred, which is sufficient for
their tranfa&ions, Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 228.

NOTE L. p. 317.

As the view which I have given of rude nations
is extremely different from that exhibited by very ;c-
fpeEtable authors, it may be proper to produce folne
of the many authorities on which I found my defcrip-
tion. The manners of the savage tribes in America
have never been viewed by pcrfons more capail)e
of observing them with discernment, than the pli.
lofophers employed by France and Spain, in the

«~~* ~ ~~year

year 735, to determine the figure of the earth.
M. Bouguer d'Antonio Ulloa, and D. George Juan,
resided long among the natives of the least civilized
provinces in Peru. M. de la Condamine had not only
this opportunity for observation, but, in his voyage down
the Maragnon, he had access to infpeEt the state of the
various nations feated on its banks, in its vafl course
across the continent of South America There is a

oniderful resemblance in their reprelentation of the
character of the Americans. " They are all extrcmi-cl
indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they are frupid, they
pass whole days fitting in the fame place, without
moving, or speaking a fingie word. It is not easy to
describe the degree of their indifference for wealth, and
all its advantages. One does not well know what mo-
tive to propose to them, when one would persuade them
to perform any service. It is vain to offer them money;
they anfwcr, that they are not hungry." Vovage at_
Perou, p. 102. If one confiders them as men, the nar-
rownefs of their understanding seems to be inconmpatible
with the excellence of the foul. Their imbecility is lo
visible, that one can hardly form an idea of them diffe-
rent from what one has of the brutes. Nothing diflurbs
the tranquillity of their fouls, equally insensible to dif-
afters and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they are
as contented as a monarch in his molt fplend;d array.
Riches do not attrac them in the fmallct dlgree, and
the authority or dignities to which they may aspire, are
so little the objects of their ambition, that an Indian
will receive with the fame indifference the otfice of a
judge (Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of
the former and appointed to the latter. Nothing can
move or change them. Interest has no power over
them, and they often refuse to perform a fiRall service,
though certain of a great recompence. Fear inmkcs no
impression upon them, and refrpelt as little. Their
disposition is so singular, that there is no method of
influencing them, no means of rout.ing them from that
indifference, which is proof againit all the endeavours
of the wisest persons ; no expedient that can induce
them to abandon that gross ignorance, or lay aside that
careless negligence, which ditconcclt !he prudence and
disappoint the care of fucll as are attentive to their wtll-

VOL. I. H Ih tare.

fare. Voyage de Uiloa, tom. i. 335, 356. Of those
singular qualities he produces many extraordinary in-
fiances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility," fays M. de la
Condamine, " is the basis of the American character.
I leave others to determine, whether this lhould be
dignified with the name of apathy, or disgraced with
that of stupidity. It arises, without doubt, from the
Irnall number of their ideas, which do not extend beyond
their wants. Gluttons even to voracity, when they have
wherewithal to satisfy their appetite. Temperate, when
necessity obliges them, to such a degree that they can
endure want without seeming to desire any thing. Pufil-
lanimous and cowardly to excess, unless when they are
rendered desperate by drunkenness. Averse to labour,
indifferent to every motive of glory, honour, or grati-
tude; occupied entirely by theobjet that is present, and
always determined by it alone, without any solicitude
about futurity; incapable of foresight or of reflecion;
abandoning themselves, when under no restraint, to a
puerile joy, which they express by frisking about, and
immoderate fits of laughter; without object or design,
they pass their life without thinking, and grow old
without advancing beyond childhood, of which they
retain all the defeats. If this description were applica-
ble only to the Indians in some provinces of Peru, who
are slaves in every refpea but the name, one might be-
lieve, that this degree of degeneracy was occasioned by
the servile dependence to which they are reduced; the
example of the modern Greeks being proof how far
Servitude may degrade the human species. But the
Indians in the missions of the Jefusits, and the savages
who rill enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited in
their faculties, not to fay as stupid as the other, one can-
not observe, without humiliation, that man, when aban-
doned to simple nature, and deprived of the advantages
resulting from education and society, differs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de
Amaz. 52, 53. M. de Chanvalon, an intelligent and
philosophical observer, who visited Martinico in 1751,
and resided there fix years, gives the following defcrip-
tion of the Caraibs. " It is not the red colour ot
their complexion, it is not the singularity of their sea-
tures, which conltitutes the chief difference between

them

them and us. It is their excessive simplicity; it is the
limited degree of their faculties. Their reason is not
more enlightened or more provident than the instinct
of brutes. The reason of the most gross peasants, that
of the negroes brought up in the parts of Africa most
remote from intercourse with Europeans, is such that
we discover appearances of intelligence, which, though
unfolded, is capable of increase. But of this the un-
derflanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly susceptible.
If found philosophy and religion did not afford us their
light, if we were to decide according to the first impref-
sion which the view of that people makes upon the
mind, we should be disposed to believe that they do not
belong to the fame species with us. Their stupid eyes
are the true mirrour of their fouls; it appears to be
without funaions. Their indolence is extreme; they
have never the leai solicitude about the moment which
is to succeed that which is present." Voyage a la Mar-
tinique, p. 44, 45, 51. M. de la Borde, Tertre, and
Rochefort, confirm this description. " The charaaer-
iftics of the Californians," fays P. Venegas, " as well
as of all the other Indians, are stupidity and inrenfibi-
lity; want of knowledge and reflection; inconstancy,
impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; and excessive
sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fatigue; an ex-
ceffive love of pleasure and amusement of every kind,
however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity; an, in fine,
a most wretched want of every thing which constitutes
the real man, and renders him rational, inventive,
tracable, and useful to himself and society. It is not
easy for Europeans, who never were out of their own
country, to conceive an adequate idea of those people;
for, even in the least frequented corners of the globe,
there is not a nation so flupid, of such contracted ideas,
and so weak both in body and mind, as the unhappy
Californians. Their understanding comprehends little
more than what they fee; abltrad ideas, and much less
a chain of reasoning, being far beyond their power;
so that they scarce ever improve their first ideas, and
these are in general false, or at least inadequate. It is
in vain to represent to them any future advantages
which will result to them from doing or abitaining from

i h 2 this

this or that particular immediately present; the relation
means and ends being beyond the tlretch of their faculties.
Nor have they the least notion of pursuing such inten-
tions as will procure themselves some future good, or
guard them againfl future evils. Their will is propor-
tionai to their faculties, and all their passions move in a
very narrow sphere. Ambition they have none, and are
more desirous of being accounted strong than valiant.
The obje&s of ambition with us, honour, fame, repu-
tation, titles, polls, and diftin&ions of superiority, are
unknown among them; so that this powerful spring of
aftion, the cause of so much seeming good and real evil
in the world,has no power here. This disposition of mind,
as it gives them up to an amazing languor and lassitude,
their lives fleeting away in a perpetual inacivity and
detefiation of labour, so it likewise induces them to be
attracted by the first objea which their own fancy, or
the persuasion of another, places before them; and at the
fame time renders them as prone to alter their refoluti-
ons with the fame facility. They look with indifference
upon any kindness done them; nor is even the bare re-
membrance of it to be expeced from them. In a word,
the unhappy mortals may be compared to children, in
whom the developement of reason is not completed.
They may indeed be called a nation who never arrive
at manhood." Hilt. of Californ. Engl. Tranfl. i. 64,
67. Mr. Ellis gives a similar account of the want of
foresight and inconsiderate disposition of the people ad-
jacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage, p. 194, 195.

T}IE incapacity of the Americans' is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa
are obfcrve(l to be more capable of improving by in-
flruaion. They acquire the knowledge of fcvcral par-
ticulars which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence
the negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a fupc-
rior order of beings, and look down upon the Americans
with contempt, as void of capacity and of rational dif-
cernmcnt. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTr F

NOTE LI. p. 322.

I HAVE observed, p. 297. that, for the fame reason,
they never attempt to rear children who are feeble,
distorted, or defective in their make. So deeply were
both these ideas imprinted in the minds of the Ameri-
cans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when com-
pared with the barbarous tribes whose manners I am
describing, retained them; and even their intercourse
with the Spaniards has not been able to root them out.
When twins are born in any family, it is still confidered
as an ominous event, and the parents have recourse to
rigorous ads of mortification, in order to avert the
calamities with which they are threatened. When a
child is born with any deformity, they will not, if they
can possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptized, and it is
with difficulty they can be brought to rear it. Ar-
riaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE LII. p. 325.

T H HE number of the fish in the rivers of South
America is so extraordinary, as to merit particular no-
tice. " In the Maragnon," fays P. Acngna, " fish are
so plentiful, that, without any art, they may take them
with their hands." p. 138. " In the Orinoco," fays
P. Gumilla, " besides an infinite variety of other fish,
tortoises or turtle abound in such numbers, that I can-
not find words to express it. I doubt not but that such
as read my account will accuse me of exaggeration:
but I can affirm, that it is as difficult to count them, as
to count the sands on the banks of that river. One may
judge of their number by the amazing consumption of
them; for all the nations contiguous to the river, and
even many who are at a distance, flock thither at the
season of breeding, and not only find uflifenance during
that time, but carry off vast quantities both of the
turtles and of their eggs, &c." Hist. do l'Orcnoquie, ii.
c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Condaminc confirms their ac-
counts, p. 159.

N 0 T E

N O T E LIII. p. 326.

P I S 0 describes two of these plants, the Cururuape,
and the Guajana-iimnbo. It is remarkable, that though
they have this fatal effe& upon fishes, they are so far
from being noxious to the human species, they are used
in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft
mentions another, the Hiarree, a small quantity of
which is sufficient to inebriate all the fish to a confider-
able distance, so that in a few minutes they float moti-
onlefs on the surface of the water, and are taken with
ease. Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. xo6.

NOTE LIV. p. 328.

R EMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities
which rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez
Cabeca de Vaca, one of the moil gallant and virtuous
of the Spanish adventurers, resided almost nine years
among the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted
with every species of agriculture. Their fubfifltence was
poor and precarious. 1" They live chiefly," fays he,
I' upon roots of different plants, which they procure
with great difficulty, wandering from place to place in
search of them. Sometimes they kill some game, some-
times they catch fish, but in such small quantities, that
their hunger is so extreme as compels them to eat spiders,
the eggs of ants, worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of
unsluous earth, and I am persuaded, that if in this
country there were any stones, they would swallow these.
They preserve the bones of fishes and serpents, which
they grind into' powder, and eat. The only season when
they do not fuflcr much from famine, is when a certain
fruit, which he calls Tunas, is ripe. They are some-
times obliged to travel far from their usual place of re-
fidcnce, in order to find them." Naufragias, c. xviii.
p. .o, 2i, 2,. In another place, he obfcrves that they
are, frequently reduced to pass two or three days without
food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

N 0 T E LV. p. 330.

M . FIRMIN hais given an accurate description cf
the ti\ p species of manioc, witli an-account of its culture,

to

to which he has added some experiments, in order to
ascertain the poisonous qualities of the juice extracted
from that species which he calls the bitter cassava. A-
mong the Spaniards it is known by the name of ruca
brava. Defcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE LVI. p. 330.

T H E plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as
in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an indi-
genous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the island of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by fa-
ther Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary islands, whither the original flips had
been brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii.
c. i. But the opinion of Acotla and other naturaliits,
who reckon it an American plant, seems to be better
founded. Acofta Hist. Nat. lib. iv. 21. It was culti-
vated by rude tribes in America, who had little inter-
course with the Spaniards, and who were destitute of
that ingenuity which disposes men to borrow what is
useful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 186. Wafer's
Voyage, p. 87.

N O T E LVII. p. 331.

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the rnoft ac-
curate and bell informed writers concerning the Wetl
Indies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the
continent, was not known in the islands, the inhabitants
of which had none but caffada bread. Hilt. Nat. lib. iv.
c. 16. But P. Martyr, in the firfl book of his firlt
Decad, which was written in the year 1493, upon the
return of Columbus from his first voyage, expressly
mentions maize as a plant which the islanders cultivated,
and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise
aflcrts, that they were acquainted with the culture of
maize. Hiftor. Gencr. cap. 28. Oviedo describes maiz.e
without any intimation of its being a plant that was not
natural to IIirpaniola. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE

N O T E LVIII. p. 337.

NE W HOLLAND, a country which formerly was
little known, has lately been visited by intelligent ob-
servers. It lies in a region of the globe where it must
enjoy a very favourable climate, as it firetches from the
lolh to the 38th degree of north-ern latitude. It is of
great extent, and from its square form must be much
more thain equal to all Europe. The people who in-
habit the various parts of it appear to be of one race.
They are evidently ruder than most of the Americans,
and have made flill leis progress in improvement and the
arts of life. There is not the leafi appearance of culti-
vation in any part of this vast region. The inhabitants
are extremely few, so that the country appears almnot
desolate. Their tribes are still more incoliderab!e than
those of America. They depend for fubfifl.ence, almofs
enti ely, on fihling. They do not fettle in one place,
but roan about in qnefl of food. Both sexes go fiark-
naked. Their ha,)ititions, utensils, &c. are i ore lim-
p!c and riude t'-an tl;oe of the Americans. Voyages,
by Hav-'kefwvorth, iii 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the
counury -\hera man has been discovered in the earliest
flage of his prcgrefs, and it exhibits a miserable fpeci-
men of his condition and powers in that uncultivated
slate. If this coufitry fhal! be more fully explored by
future navigators, the comparison of the manners of its
inhabitants with those of the Americans will prove an
intlruaive article in the hiltory of the human species.

NOTE LIX. p. 337.

P * GAIIr.IEr. MAREST, who travelled from his fla-
tion amo-ng the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus dcfcribes
the face ol the country : " \We have marched twelve
days without nmctiiin a single human creature. Some-
times w.e foind ourlclves in vast meadows, of which
we could not fee tlhe bolndanries, through which there
flowed many brooks and rivers, but \ ilhout any path
to condud us. Someltimes we were obliged to open a
palilige acrois tlick ftreft, through buflics, and under-

wood

wood filled with briars and thorns. Sometijres we had to
pass through deep marshes, in which we funk up to the
middle. After being fatigued through the day, we had
the earth for our bed, or a few leaves, exposed to the
wind, the rain, and all the injuries of the air. Iettr.
Edifiantes, ii. 360. Dr. Brickeil, in an excursion from
North Carolina towards the mountains, A. D. 1730,
travelled fifteen days without meeting with a human
creature. Nat. Hist. of North Carolina, 389. Diego
de Ordas, in attempting to make a settlement in South
America, A.D. 1532, marched fifty days through a
country without meeting one inhabitant. Herrera, dec.
5.lib. i. c. I.

NOTE LX. p. 338.

I STRONGLY fufpeEt that a community of goods, and
an undivided store, are known only among the rudest
tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of
agriculture or regular indulfry is known, the idea of an
exltifive right of property to the fruits of them is intro-
duced. I am confirm.-d in this opinion by accounts
which I have received concerning the state of Property
among the Indians in very different regions of America.
" The idea of the natives of Brasil concerning property
is, that if any person cultivate a field, he alone ought
to enjoy the produce of it, and no other has a title to
pretend to it. If an individual or a family go a-hunting
or fiffing, what is caught belongs to the individual or
to the family, and they communicate no part of it to
any but to their cazique, or to such of their kindred as
happen to be indisposed. If any person in the village
come to their hut, he may fit down freely, and eat
without asking liberty. But this is the consequence of
their general principle of hofpitlality; for I never ob-
served any partition of the increase of their ficlds, or the
produce of the chace, which I could confider as the rc-
fult of any idea concerning a community oi goods. On
the contrary, they are so much attached to what they
deem to be their property, that it would be extremely
dangerous to encroach npon it. As far a; I have seen,
,or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians in South

America,

America, among whom that community of goods which
has been so highly extolled is known. The circumflance
in the government of the Jesuits, most irksome to the
Indians of Paraguay, was the community of goods which
they introduced. This was repugnant to their original
ideas. They were acquainted with the rights of private
exclusive property, and they submitted with impatience
to regulations which destroyed them." M. le Cheval.
de Pinto, MS. penes me. Aaual poffeilion (fays a mif-
fionary who resided several years among the Indians of
the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but when-
ever a pofreffor fees fit to quit it, another has as good
right to take it as he who left it. This law, or custom,
refpeas not only the particular spot on which he erets
his house, but also his planting ground. If a man has
prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he de-
signs in future to build or plant, no man has a right to
incommode him, much less to the fruit of his labours,
until it appears that he voluntary gives up his views.
But I never heard of any formal conveyance from one
Indian to another in their natural slate. The limits of
every canton is circumscribed ; that is, they are allowed
to hunt as far as such a river on this hand, and such a
mountain on the other. This area is occupied and im-
proved by individuals and their families. Individuals,
not the community, have the use and profit of their own
labours, or success in hunting. MS. of Mr. Gideon
Hawley, penes me.

N'O T E LXI. p. 339.

T H I S difference of temper between the Americans
and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial fay-
ing in the French islands, " Regarder. un fauvagc de
travers, c'elt le battre; le battre, c'efi le tucr; battrc
un negre, c'cft le nourrir." 'Tertrc ii. 490o.

N 0 T E LXII. p. 340.

T II F dcfcription of the political ilate of the people
of Cinalon, perfc:tly refmrbles that of the inhabi-
lants ctf North America, " They have neither laws
nor kings (fays a missionary who rcfided long

n atnmone

among them) to punish any crime. Nor is there among
them, any species of authority, or political government,
to refirain them in any part of their conduc. It is true,
that they acknowledge certain Caziques, who are heads
of their families or villages, but their authority appears
chiefly in war, and the expeditions againlt their enemies.
This authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary
right, but by their valour in war, or by the power and
number of their families and relations. Sometimes they
owe their pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying
their ov.n exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las Triumph.
&c. p. 1 I. The itate of the Chiquitos in South Ame-
rica is nearly the fame. " They have no regular form
of government, or civil life, but in matters of public
concern they liften to the advice of their old men, and
usually follow it. The dignity of Cazique is not here-
ditary, but conferred according to merit, as the reward
of valour in war. The union among them is imper-
sec. Their society resembles a republic without any
head, in which every man is master ofhimfelf, and, up-
on the least disgust, separates from those with whom he
seemed to be connected. Relacion Historical de las
Mifliones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernan-
dez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under very different climates,
when nations are in a similar state of society, their infti-
tutions and civil government assume the fame form.

NOTE LXIII. p. 352.

" HAVE known the Indians (fays a person well ac-
quainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand miles
for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over hills
and mountains, through huge cane swamps, exposed to
the extremities of heat and cold, the vicissitude of sea-
sons, to hunger and thirit. Such is their over-boiling
revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all those
things as imaginary trifles, if they are so happy as to get
the Scalp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the crav-
ing ghosts of their deccafed relations." Adair's Hill. of
Amer. Indians, p. 50.

NO TE

N O T E LXIV. p. 353.

I N the account of the great war between the Algon-
quins and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pifkaret, a fa-
mous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by
himself alone, or with one or two companions, make a
capital figure. De la Potheri, i. 297, &c. Colden's
Hilt. of Five Nations, 125, &c.

N OT E LXV. p. 355.

TIi E life of an unfortunate leader is often in dan-
ger, and he is always degraded from the rank which he
had acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

N O T E LXVI. p. 355.

A S the ideas of the North Americans with respect to
the mode of carrying on war, are generally known; I
have founded my observations chiefly upon the teftimo-
ny of the authors who describe them. But the fame
ma3xims took place among other nations. A judicious
miiTionary has given a view of the military operations of
the people in Gran Chaco, in South America, perfeEtly
similar to thole of the Iroquois. " They are much ad-
dicted to war (fays he) which they carry on frequently
among themfelvcs, but perpetually againtf the Spaniards.
But they may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for
they never make helild against the Spaniards, unless when
they can assault then by flealh, or have guarded againfl
any mischance by spies, who may be called indefatiga-
ble ; they will watch the fcttlements of the Spaniards
for one, two, or three years, obfcrving hy night every
thing that pail'es with the utmofl folicitudc, whether
they may exped rcfitancc or not, and until they are
perfctly fccure of the cvcnt, they will not venture upon
an attack; To that when they do give the afflult, they
are certain of success, and free from all danger. Thcle

spies,

spies, in order that they may not be observed, will creep
on all-fours like cats in the night ; but if they are disco-
vered, make their escape with much dexterity. But,
although they never chufe to face the Spaniards, if they
be surrounded in any place, whence they cannot escape,
they will fight with desperate valour, and fell their lives
very dear." Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE LXVII p. 356.

L ER Y, who was an eye-witness of the proceedings
of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against
a powerful nation of their enemies, describes their cou-
rage and ferocity in very firiking terms. Ego cum Gal-
lo altero, paulo curiofius, magno noflro periculo (si
enim ab hoftibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi
fuiffemus devoti) barbaros nofiros in militiam euntes
comitari volui. Hi, numero 4000 capita, cum holfibus
ad littus decertarunt, tanta ferocitate, ut vel rabidos &
furiosos quofque fuperarent. Cum primum hostes con-
fpexere, in magnos atque editos ululatus perrupcrunt.
Haec gens adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum
virium vel tantillum reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamqule
nunquam capeffant. Quod a natura illis inditium effe
reor. Teltor interea me, qui non femel, turn pedilum
turn equitum copias ingentes, in aciem inrtruCas hic
confpexi, tanta numnquam voluptate videndis peditum
legionibus armis fulgentibus, quanta turn pugnantibus
iftis percuffum suisse. Lery Hid. Navigat. in Brasil. ap.
de Bry, iii. 207, 208, 209.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 357.

THE Americans, like otherficrce nations, original-
ly cut off the hcads of the enemies whom they flew in
war, and carried them away as trophies. But, as they
found these cumbersome in their retreat, which they al-
ways make very rapidly, and often through a vast ex-

ti'ii

tent of country, they became satisfied with tearing off
their scalps. This custom, though most prevalent in
North America, was not unknown among the southern
tribes. Lazano, p. 79.

N O T E LXIX. p. 361.

T H E terms of the war-fong seem to be diaated by
the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to re-
venge the death of my brothers; I shall kill; I shall
exterminate; I shall burn my enemies; I shall bring
away slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their flesh,
drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps, and
make cups of their skulls." Boffu's Travels through
Louisiana, vol. i. p. 102. I am informed, by persons
on whose testimony I can rely, that as the number of
people in the Indian tribes has decreased so much, almost
none of their prisoners are put to death. It is confider-
ed as better policy to spare and to adopt them. Those
dreadful scenes which I have described occur now so rare-
ly, that miflionaries and traders who have resided long
among the Indians, never were witnesses to them.

N O T E LXX. p. 361.

ALL the travellers who have visited the mos unci-
vilized of the American tribes, agree in this. It is con-
firmed by two remarkable circumfiances, which occurred
in the conquest of different provinces. In the expediti-
on of Narvaez into Florida in the year 1528, the Spa-
niards were reduced to such extreme dilfrefs by famine,
that in order to preserve their own lives, they cat such
of their companions as happened to die. This appear-
ed so Ihocking to the natives, who were accustomed to
devour their prisoners, that it filled them with horror
and indignation againlt the Spaniards. Torquemada
Monarch. Ind. ii.p. 584. Naufragios de Alv. Nugncz
Cabcca de Vaca, c. xiv. p. 15. During the siege of

Mexico,

Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured with greediness
the Spaniards and Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners,
the utmost rigour of the famine which they suffered
could not induce them to touch the dead bodies of their
own countrymen. Bern. Diaz del Caltillo Conquiit.
de laN. Efpagna, p. 156.

N O T E LXXI. p. 363.

M A N Y singular circumfances concerning the treat-
ment of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are con-
tained in the narrative of Stadius, a German Officer,
in the service of the Portuguese, published in the year
1556. He was taken prisoner by the Toupinambos, and
remained in captivity nine years. He was often present
at those horrid festivals which he describes, and was de-
liined himself to the fame cruel fate with other prifo-
ners. But he saved his life by extraordinary effects of
courage and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De
Lery, who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his ex-
pedition to Brasil, in the year 1556, and who resided a
good time in that country, agrees with Stadius in every
circumstance of importance. He was frequently an eye-
witness of the manner in which the Brafilians treated
their prisoners. De Bry, iii. 21o. Several striking par-
ticulars omitted by them, arc mentioned by a Portuguese
author. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

N O T E LXXII. p. 366.

T HOUGH I have followed that opinion concern-
ing the apathy of the Americans, which appeared to
me most rational, and supported by the authority of the
most respeCtable authors, other theories have been form-
ed with regard to it, by writers of great eminence. D.
Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture
of the skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that
they are less sensible of pain than the reft of mankind.
He produces several proofs of this, from the manner in
which they endure the moll cruel chirurgical operations,

&c.

&c. Noticias Ariericanas, p. 3i3', 314. The fame
obfervafion has been made by firgeons in Brasil. An
Indian, they fays never complain under pain, and will
bear she amputation of a leg 6 doi r without uttering a
single groan. MS. penes me.

NO TE LXXIII. p. 367.

TH I S is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among
the Romans, in the early periods of their comnion-
wealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn decef-
fiffe videtur cum captus eft." Digeit. lib. xlix. tit. 15.
c. 8. and afterwards when the progress of refinement
rendered them more indulgent with refpec to this arti-
cle, they were obliged to employ two fi&ions of law to
secure the property, and permit the return of a captive,
the one by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by the Jus
Poftliminii, Heinec. Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii.
p. 294. Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail.
No ransom was ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon as
one is taken in war, he is reputed to be dead; and he is
so in effec to his country and his family. Voy. du
Cheval. des Marchais, i. p. 369.

N O T E LXXIV. p. 368.

T HE people of Chili, the most gallant and high-
spirited of all the Americans, are the only exception to
this observation. They attack their enemies in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regular order; their
battalions advance to the charge not only with courage,
bat with discipline. The North Americans, thougl
many of them have fubtlituted the European fire-arms ir
place of their own bows and arrows, still adhere to theit
ancient maxims of war, and carry it on according to thein
own peculiar fyftcm. But the Chilcfe nearly refembl
the warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their militar)
operations. Ovalle'sRelation of Chili. Church's Coll
iii. p. 71. Lo.ano's Hist. Parag. i. 144, 145.

N 0 T I

NOTE LXXV. p. 371.

H ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
Yucutan, the men are so felicitous about their dress,
that they carry about with them mirrors, probably made
of sone, like those of the Mexicans. Dec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. in which they delight to view themselves,
but the women never use these. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3.
He takes notice, that among the fierce tribe of the
Panches, in the new kingdom of Granada, none but
distinguished warriors were permitted either to pierce
their lips, and to wear green stones in them, or to adorn
their heads with plumes of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix.
c. 4. In some provinces of Peru, though that empire
had made considerable progress in civilization, the t(ate
of women was little improved. All the toil of cultiva-
tion and domestic work was devolved upon them, and
they were not permitted to wear bracelets, or other
ornaments, with which the men were fond of decking
themselves. Zarate Hist. de Peru, i. p. 15, i6.

N O T E LXXVI. p. 371.

I Have ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the dress of the Americans. · This
is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never stir
abroad if they are not completely anointed; they excuse
themselves when in this situation, by faying, that they
cannot appear because they are naked. Gumilla Hist.
del'Orenoque, i. 191.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 372.

SOME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf
of California, seem to be among the rudest people of
America united in the social itatc. They neither culti-
vate nor sow; they have no houses in which they
reside. Those in the inland country subsist by hunting;
those on the fea-coa(t chiefly by sithing. Both depend
upon the spontaneous p:odluations of the earth, fruits,
plants, and roots of various kinds. In the rainy season,
as they have no habitations to afford them {helter, they

VOL. I. I i gather

gather bundles of reeds, or strong grass, and binding
them together at oie end, they open them at the other,
and fitting them to their heads, they are covered as
with a large cap, which like a pent-house throws off
the rain, and will keep them dry for several hours.
During the warm season, they form a shed with the
branches of trees, which proteas them from the sultry
rays of the fun. When exposed to cold they make
large fires, round which they sleep in the open air.
Hifloria de los triumfos de nueftra fanta fee entre gentes
las mas barbaras, &c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas,
p. 7, &c.

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 373.

T HESE houses resemble barns. We have measured
some which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and
twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons reside in
some of them. Wilson's Account of Guiana. Purch.
Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291. The Indian houses,
fays M. Barrere, have a most wretched appearance,
and are a striking image of the rudeness of early times.
Their huts are commonly built on some rising ground,
or on the banks of a river, huddled sometimes together,
sometimes firaggling, and always without any order.
Their aspet is melancholy and disagreeable. One fees
nothing but what is hideous and savage. The unculti-
vated fields have no gaiety. The silence which reigns
there, unless when interrupted by the disagreeable notes
of birds, or cries of wild beafis, is extremely dismal.
Relat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 375.

SO ME tribes in South America can fend their arrows
to a great distance, and with considerable force, without
the aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called
a Sarbacane. In it they lodge a small arrow, with some
unfpun cotton wound about its great end ; this confines
the air, so that they can blow it with altonifhing rapi.

dity,

dity, and a sure aim, to the distance of above a hun-
dred paces. These small arrows are always poisoned.
Fermin. Defer. de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hilf. of
Guiana, p. 281, &c. The Sarbacane is much used by
the East Indians.

N O T E LXXX. p. 375.

I Might produce many instances of this, but fiall fa-
tisfy myself with one, taken from the Eflimaux.
" Their greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is lhewn in
the flructure of their bows, made commonly of three
pieces of wood, each making part of the fame arch,
very nicely and exacly joined together. They are
commonly of fir or larch; and as this wants strength
and elasticity, they supply both by bracing the back of
the bow, with a kind of thread, or line, made of the
sinews of their deer, and the bow-firing of the fame
materials. To make them draw more fliffly, they dip
them into water, which causes both the back of the
bow and the firing to contract, and consequently gives
it the greater force; and as they praaife from their
youth, they shoot with very great dexterity." Voyage
to Hudson's Bay, p. I38.

N O T E LXXXI. p. 376.

NICESSITY is the great prompter and guide of
mankind in their inventions. There is, however, fulch
inequality in tome )parts of their progress, and fonie na-
tions get so far the start of others in circumstances nearly
similar, that we muff ascribe this to rome events in
their, flory, or to some peculiarity in their fitlutiOn
with which wc are unacquainted. The people in the
island of Otaheite, lately dilcovered in the Souti Sea,
far excel molt of the Americans in the knowledge and
pra&ice of the arts of ingenuity, and yet they lihad
not invented any method of boiling water, and having
no vessel tlat would bear the lire, they had no more
idea that water could be made hot, th:an that it could
he made solid. Voyages by l-iwkcfworth, i. 46(r;. .;81.

1 i z No ' TE

NO TE LXXXII. p. 376.

O N E of these boats, which could carry nine men,
weighed only sixty pounds. Gofnol Relat. des Voy.
a la Virgin Rec. de Voy. au Nord. tom. v. p. 403.

N O T E LXXXIII. p. 378.

A Remarkable proof of this is produced by Ulloa.
In weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse
cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufacture,
their industry has discovered no more expeditious me-
thod, than to take up thread after thread, and after
counting and forting them each time, to pass the woof
between them, so that in finishing a small piece of these
fluffs, they frequently spend more than two years.
Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame description of
the Indians of 'Guiana, p. 255. According to Adair,
the ingenuity and dispatch of the North American
Indians are not greater, p. 422. From one of the
engravings of the Mexican paintings in Purchas, vol. iii.
p. o6. I think it probable that the people of Mex-
ico were unacquainted with any better or more expedi-
tious mode of weaving. A loom was an invention be-
yond the ingenuity of the mot} improved Americans.
In all their works they advance so slowly, that one of
their artifis is two months at a tobacco-pipe with his
knife, before he finishes it. Ibid. p. 423.

N O T E LXXXIV. p. 380.

T H E article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeurs des
Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 381,

I Have referred the reader to several of the authors
who describe the mort uncivilized nations in America.
Their teflimony is uniform.. That of P. Ribas con-
cerning the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the reft.
0' I was extremely attentive (fays he), during the years
I residcd among them, to ascertain whether they were

to

to be confidered as idolators; and it may be affirmed
with the most perfet exaanefs, that though among
some of them there may be traces of idolatry, yet
others have not the least knowledge of God, or even of
any false deity, nor pay any formal adoration to the
Supreme Being, who exercises dominion over the
world; nor have they any conception of the providence
of a creator or governor, from whom they expec in the
next life the reward of their good, or the punishment of
their evil deeds. Neither do they publicly join in any
at of divine worship." Ribas Triumphos, &c. p. 16.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382.

T H E people of Brasil were so much affrightened by
thunder, which is frequent and dreadful in their country,
as well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it was
not only the objec of religious reverence; but the molt
expressive name in their language for the Deity, was
Toupan, the fame by which they diifinguifhed thunder.
Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church-Coll. ii.
p. 132.

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 389.

.BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness
gives of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez,
it appears, that the feelings of the persons who suffered
on that occasion were very different. Some solicited
the honour with eagerness; others laboured to avoid
their doom, and several saved their lives by flying to the
woods. As the Indian Bramins give an intoxicating
draught to the women, who are to be burnt together
with the bodies of their husbands, which render them
insensible of their approaching fate, the Natchcz obliged
their victims to swallow several large pills of tobacco,
which produce a similar effct. Mem. deLouf.,i. 227.

NO T r LXXXVIII. . . 395.

ON some occasions, particularly in dances instituted
for the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they
are extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie

Hitt.

·His. &c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. p. 319.
But the nature of their dances is commonly such as I
have described.

NO T E LXXXIX. p. 397.

TH E Othomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the
Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
which they call Yupa. It is formed of the feeds of an
unknown plant, reduced to powder, and- certain liells
burnt and pulverized. .The effeas of this when drawn
up into the nostrils are so violent, that they resemble
madness rather than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE XC. p. 399.

H O U G H this observation holds true among the

greater part of the southern tribes, there are some in
which the intemperance of the women is as excessive
as that of men. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. 275.

NOTE XCI. p. 404.

EVEN in the molt intelligent writers concerning
the manners of the Americans, one meets with inconfift-
ent and inexplicable circumstances. P. Charlevoix,
who, in consequence of the controversy between his
order and that of the Franciscans, with refpe& to the
talents and abilities of the North Americans,.is disposed
to represent both their intelletual and moral qualities in
the molt favourable light, asserts, that they are engaged
in continual negociations with their neighbours, and
condu& these with the most refined address. At the
fame time, he adds, " that it becomes their envoys or
plenipotentiaries to exert their abilities and eloquence,
for if the terms which they offer are not accepted of,
they Ijad need to fland on their guard. It frequently
happens, that a blow with a hatchet is the only return
given to their propositions. He is not out of danger
even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the ftrokc,
he may expcEt to be pursued, and if taken, to be
burnt." Hlil. N. Fr. iii. 251. Men capable of ilch

ads

acs of violence, seem to be unacquainted with the firl a
principles upon which the intercourse between nations is
founded; and instead of the perpetual negociations which
Charlevoix mentions, it seems impossible that there
flould be any correspondence whatever among them.

N O T E XCII. p. 405.

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans',
"( Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac-
ceptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a good
opportunity of observing the principle which leads sava-
ges neither to express gratitude for favours which they
had received, nor to expect any return for such as they
betfowed; thus explains their ideas: " If, fay they, you
give me this, it is because you have no need of it your-
self; and as for me, I never part with that which I think
necessary to me." Memoir fur les Galibis; Hist. des
plantes de la Guiane Francoise par M. Aublet, tom. ii.
p. Io.

NOTE XCIII. p. 417.

AND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend
of Columbus, hath preserved tome circumstances con-
cerning the bravery of the Carribbees, which are not
mentioned by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other
historians of that period, whose works have been pub-
lifhed. A Carribbean canoe, with four men, two wo-
men, and a boy, fell in unexpectedly with the fleet of
Columbus in his second voyage, as it was fleering
through their islands. At first, they were firuck almost
stupid with aftoniflment at such a itrange Ipeaacle, and
hardly moved from the spot for above an hour. A Spa-
nifl bark, with twenty-five men, advanced towards
them, and the fleet gradually surrounded them, so as to
cut off their communication with the fiore. " When
they saw that it was impoflible to escape (fays the hiflo-
rian), they seized their arms with undauntcd resolution,
and began the attack. I use the exprellion, with ntldatint-
'd resol/ution, for they were few, and beheld a vast num-
ber ready to assault them. They wounded fevcral of1 the

Spaniards,

Spaniards, although they had targets, as well as other
defensive armour; and even after their canoe was over-
set, it was with no little difficulty and danger, that part
of them were taken, as they continued to defend them-
selves, and to use their bows with great dexterity while
swimming in the sea." Hilt. de D. Fern. y D. Yfab.
MSS. c. 19.

NOTE XCIV. p. 417.

A Probable conjecure may be formed with refpee to the
cause of the diftinaion in character between the Carib-
bees and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The for-
mer appear manifestly to be a separate race. Their lan-
guage is totally different from that of their neighbours in
the large islands. They themselves have a tradition,
that their anceflors came originally from some part of
the continent, and having conquered and exterminated
the antient inhabitants, took possession of their lands,
and of their women. Rochefort 384. Tertre, 360.
Hence they call themselves Banaree, which signifies a
man come from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 131. Accord-
ingly, the.Caribbees still use two diftin& languages, one
peculiar to the men, and the other to the women. Ter-
tre, 361. The language of the men has nothing com-
mon with that spoken in the large islands. The dialed
of the women considerably resembles it. Labat. 29.
This strongly confirms the tradition which I have men-
tioned. The Caribbees themselves imagine, that they
were a colony from the Galibis, a powerful nation of
Guiana, in South America. Tertre, 361. Rochefort,
348. But as their fierce manners approach nearer to
those of the people in the northern continent, than to
those of the natives of South America; and as their
language has likewise some affinity to that spoken in
Florida, their origin ihould be deduced rather from the
former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c. Her-
rera, Dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they fill ob-
serve their ancient pracice of deitroying all the males,
and preserving the women either for servitude or for
breeding.

END OF TIIE FIRST VOLUME.
